CHRISTIAN OFFICES CRYSTAL GLASS. In three Books. FIRST WRITTEN IN LATIN,
BY THAT FAMOVS and renowned Father, Saint AMBROSE Bishop of Millane. Whereunto
is added HIS CONVICTION OF SYMMACHVS the Gentile. A work tending to the
advancement of Virtue, and of Holiness: and to show how much the morality of
the Gentiles, is exceeded by the doctrine of Christianity. Translated into
English by RICHARD HVMFREY Minister of old Windsore.

2 PET. 1.5. Add to your faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge.

Printed at London for John Dawson, and are to be sold at the sign of the
White-Lyon in Paules-Church-yard. 1637.

REVERENDISSIMO in Christo Patri, Guilielmo, Providentia divina Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, Regiae Majestatis a
sacratioribus Concilijs: and Academiae Oxoniensis Cancellario dignissimo.
HONORATISSIMO ETIAM DOmino, Thomae Domino Coventrie Baroni de Alesborough,
magni sigilli Angliae Custodi; Serenissimo Regi a Concilijs, etc. NEC NON
MVLTIS NOMINIBVS Honorando, Domino Francisco Windebanck Equiti Aurate; Caroli
Regis Consiliario, and Secretario Principali.
COmpetency (most Reverend Father in God, Maxim saecerdoti hoc convenit,
ornare Dei templum decore corgruo, ut etiam hoc cultu aula Domini resplendeat:
Ne restrictiorem erga clericos, aut indulgentiorem se prabeat. Alteru^ enim
inhumanum, alterum prodigum, si aut sumptus desit necessitati eorum, quos a
sordidis negotiationis aucupijs retrahere debeas, aut voluptati superstuat,
Ambros. Offic. l. 2. c. 21
and Right Honorable) for the sufficient maintenance of the Clergy, to whom
the Cure of Souls is committed; is neither the last nor the least, of your
Graces godly cares and endeavors. For which pious intention of your Graces, my
self amongst many others of my Brethren, stand in no small degree obliged and
engaged: To your Grace, I say, and to the Right Honorable my ever honored good
Lord, the Lord Keeper; and the Right Honorable Sir Francis Windebanck,
Principal Secretary of estate unto his Majesty. All your Honors great
favors, pains, and pieties: I were most unthankefull not to acknowledge, as
bestowed upon my self; in your endeavors (upon my petition) to induce some
Improprietaries whom I lately had to do withal, to an enlargement of my poor
maintenance. Which, though for want of devotion, perhaps, in some of them, it
took not the effect desired: yet is my self and family, and in me, all of my
Rank and profession; nevertheless beholding unto your Honors, for your noble
encouragement to our studies. Seeing therefore that thankfulness is ever more
testified by Tokens then by words: I advised with my self how to make the best
expression of it. But finding my greatest Riches, to be my Pains: I here make
bold most humbly to present it to your Honors; And that in a better man's
performance then mine own: even of the most holy and admired St. Ambrose. This
has been the prime motive to me ( most Reverend, and Right Honorable) to
present this my Translation; first to your Honors; and by you, to the rest of
Gods people. And your Grace, verily, in this your most prudent Government,
joined with undaunted courage for Gods cause: is (me thinks) the nearest
resemblance of this most renowned Bishop. And whereas he also was a Lieutenant
of the City of Millane, a Consul, and principal Officer of the Emperors in
his time; I hope he shall find the fairer entertainment: and if you please,
imitation too, with your Honors. The matter is of Christian Offices and
morality: of Justice, Magnanimity, Prudence and temperance joined with piety:
great studies and practices of your Grace and Honors. Now most humbly desiring
my poor performance in the Translation, may both be excused and accepted: I
in all humility and thankfulness, make tender of it to your noble hands:
desiring leave that under the patronage of your much honored and beloved names,
it may be recommended unto the people. For which Second Favor, I shall ever
remain, the daily Orator for

Your Graces and Honors happiness and salvation, RICHARD HVMFREY.

The sum of what is prefixed before the Work.
1. A Frontispice comprehending the agreements, and differences between the
Ethnic, and Christian Philosophy. 2. Sundry Testimonies concerning this our
Authors worthiness. 3. An Introduction to the whole work taken out of this
our Fathers book of Paradise, and third Chapter. 4. An illustration of the
Method of our Author, set out under the similitude of a Tree, and shadowing the
same in a plain Table.
The Contents of the Chapters of the three books of Offices.
The first Book.
THe proper office belonging to a Bishop, is to teach the people, Chapter 1.
Page 1 By silence we fly danger, and learn to speak well, C. 2. p. 3.
Taciturnity ought to be moderated, and silence to be used in the time of anger,
chap. 3. page 5. Let not affection but reason draw us to speak. For we
following the sway of our affections, the invisible enemy waits at the place
of passage, and without special circumspection secretly, and subtly windeth
himself in, Chap. 4. page 8. Against carnal enemies instigated by Satan
patience prevails. Hereof David provoked by Shimei is inferred as an example,
Chapter 5. Page 9 The example of David's patience, Chap. 6. p. 11. That Psalm
39. is admirable, not only for the commendation of silence, but also for the
contempt of humane things, Chapter 7. page 12 That the name of Office is not
only in frequent use with the Philosophers, but also with Divines, Chap. 8. p.
14 Yhe division of Office, and what in the account of Christians is reputed
honest, and profitable, Chap. 9. 15 Of Comeliness, and that the first Office
of the tongue is moderation, Chap. 10. 16 Every Office to be of the middle
rank, or in perfection, Chapt. 11. 18 Felicity is not estimated by external,
but by internal, and eternal blessings, Chap. 12. 21 God even then, when he
is not thought so to do, governs all things that he has created, Chap. 13.
24 God to pass by nothing, is proved by the testimony of the Scriptures, and
by the example of the Sun, which albeit it be a creature, yet either by its
light or heat does penetrate all things, Chap. 14. 26 Such as are offended
that it goes evil with the good, and well with the evil, the examples of
Lazarus and Paul ought to satisfy, Chap. 15. 29 Making mention of the
beatitudes out of the Gospel, and setting down the example of champions, and
spectators, he confirms labor, and that alone to receive a reward in heaven,
Chap. 16. 30 The Offices, and duties of young men, and examples proposed, and
set before the eyes of them of this age, Chap. 17. 33 Of the virtue of
Verecundie or modesty, that it chiefly shined in the holy Mother of God, and
that the gesture of the outward, very often shows the quality of the inward
man, Chapter 18. 35 The fellowship of the intemperate, the society of women to
be avoided, Chap. 19. 42 Of repressing anger in thy self, and mitigating it in
others, Chapter 20. Page 44 Of the cogitations, and the appetite and
comeliness of speech in talking, and arguing, chap. 21. 48 Jests which
Philosophers place among Offices, are wholly to be moved from the Church,
chapt. 22. 50 Of three things which are necessary to be observed in a
practical life, and that it is convenient for the appetite to give place to
reason, chap. 23. 51 That the four Cardinal virtues were eminent in no mean,
but in an high degree toward perfection in our fathers, chap. 24. 55 What is to
be observed in searching out the truth, C. 25. 59 That the four Cardinal
virtues are so perplexed, and linked together in one chain, that they cannot
be divided, nor broken asunder the one from the other, chap. 24. 61 That which
the Philosophers call the first Office of justice, and that which they call the
second Office to be excluded by us, but the third to be borrowed from us,
chap. 27. 63 Justice and fidelity to be showed to enemies, chap. 28. 66 Of
beneficence, chap, 29. 68 Of recompencing a benefit, chap. 30. 76 Benevolence
to be better then liberality, chap. 31. 78 That benevolence is more permanent,
and of longest, and surest continuance in the Church, and in men adorned with
the same virtues with them living in Christian assemblies, chapt. 32. 81 The
praise of Benevolence, chap. 38. 83 That fortitude which is without justice, to
be no virtue, is showed by sundry arguments, chap. 34. 84 Fortitude to consist
principally in the mind, and contempt of the things that perish, chap. 35. 86
Evils of adversity to be endured with a contented and patient mind, and
sometimes also to be declined, and avoided, chap. 36. 90 That providence is a
great pillar of fortitude, chap. 37. 91 Fortitude ought to be at war with
all vices, principally with avarice, or covetousness, chap. 38. 93 Warlike
virtue not to be unusual in those of our profession, chap. 39. 95 Fortitude is
not seen only in subduing, but much more in suffering, chap. 40. 98 Powers not
to be provoked, nor the ears to be opened to flatterers, chap. 41. 103 Of
Temperance, and parts thereof, chap, 42. ibid. Every one ought to study, and
addict himself to that in the matter of office, and duty which may be most
congruent, and best accrue to himself, chap. 43. 105 Of that which is comely,
and that which is honest, chapter 44. 106 That those things which are good, and
honest, are according to nature, but those that are beastly and vicious are
against nature, chap. 44. 108 By restraint of what passions, comeliness may
be acquired, chap. 46. 110 Of three kinds of men receiving injuries, chap.
47. 113 Of treading vanity under foot, chap. 48. 116 Which duty does most of
all become the Ministers of the Gospel for their office sake, and this is
confirmed from the example of the Leviticall, comprehending withal the
Priestly order, chap. 49. 119 In all our actions we must do courageously,
neither is any thing to be attempted effeminately, chap. 50.
The sum of what is affixed to the first Book by way of addition.
1. Sundry supplements, viz. to the 1. Chapter teaching what manner of person
ought to be chosen Bishop, and with what indowment of graces he ought to be
furnished. Page 127 2. To the 6 chapter, where the matter of David's patience
with the subject of taciturnity is enlarged, page 134. 3. To the 20 chapter,
wherein remain forcible persuasions against intemperancy, together with a
secondary enlargement thereupon, and likewise a third, page 136. 4. To chapter
41. answering to the history of the 7. children put to death by Antiochus: all
which are taken out of our Authors other works, Page 141.
The Contents of the Chapters of the second book of Offices.
BY honesty a blessed life to be acquired, Chapter 1. page 1 The Philosophers
to have been of manifold, and great variety of judgment concerning beatitude,
but the same according to Christian Philosophy to consist only in the
knowledge of God, and of good works, chap. 2. page 3 All the arguments of the
Philosophers through the heavenly light of the Gospel professed among us to
vanish away, as being lighter then vanity it self, in comparison of the
incomprehensible weight, excellency, and brightness of the same: namely, of
such as have placed beatitude in the sole knowledge of things, or in pleasure,
or in the commodity of the body, and what is external, chap. 3. page 6
Blessedness to be obtained by the undergoing of sorrows, and necessities.
For the confirmation whereof the examples of the Fathers are produced, chap. 4.
page 7 What things are thought good, to be for the most part an hindrance to a
blessed, and eternal life, what are thought evil, to be certain matter, and
means of virtue, and everlasting felicity, chap. 5. page 10 Of profit, not
that which is raked together by unjust lucre, but of that which is just and
honest, chapter 6, 13 Vtility chiefly to be measured by faith, love, and equity.
The examples of Moses, and David, which were therefore greatly beloved of the
people, because for their sakes they did oftentimes willingly cast themselves
into dangers, brought in for confirmation, chap. 7. 16 The counsel of many to
prevail to the procurement, and drawing on of others to our party in what we
desire: which clearly appeared in Solomon, chap. 8. 23 It is imitated by the
Philosophers, but much more by our Divines all the virtues to be individual,
and unseparable: and howbeit in the opinion of the vulgar to be severed, and
divided each from other, yet their approbation not to be given to such parties
for virtuous persons, where they stand separated and conspire not, chap. 9. 26
A mystical interpretation of that of Solomon, and the Queen of Saba, chap.
10. 27 That we ought to seek counsel at the hands of just, and righteous men.
The example of the Fathers produced for the proof thereof, chap. 11. 29 That
wicked men though they seem wise, ought to be avoided in matter of counsel,
chap. 12. 31 That prudence ought not to vendicate to it self vicious men, as
being such, as has no fellowship with vices, chap. 13. 33 That Prudence is an
associate, and companion of all virtues, and a principal assistant of theirs
in the suppressing of cupidity, and lustful desire, chapter 14. 34 Of
liberality, which does consist not only in the distribution, and well bestowing
of goods, but in the due care of benevolency toward the poor, and in the
imparting of counsel and good advise for the benefit of all men, chap. 15. 35
Of sobriety, which is likewise styled temperancy to be observed in liberality.
Ratified by the example of Joseph, and his most wise counsel occasioned by the
interpretation of a dream, chap. 16. 39 Of what desert he ought to be, of
whom counsel is required. Paul, and Joseph are introduced as patterns for
imitation in making our choice, chapter 17. 43 That evil counselors are the
ruin of them that follow them. Rehoboam being deceived by the counsel of
green heads is solely proposed as a sufficient proof thereof, cha. 18. 47 By
justice, benevolence, and affability solid, and without flattery very many to
be reconciled, and settled in friendship, chap. 19. 48 To make greatly for the
commendation of men, if they adhere to such as are approved fer their wisdom
and godliness. Those unequal in age to be delighted in the society of such
as are in similitude of manners like them. The example of Peter, and John, is
brought for a proof hereof, chap. 20. page 49. Of the praise of pity, and
hospitality, and of the evil of prodigality, with the vanity of popular grace
depending thereupon: and this is principally taxed in the Ministry, wherein
all things ought to be done decently, and in order, chap. 21. 52 Of keeping
moderation between remissness, and severity: and that colored remissness, and
pretended looseness makes a way sometimes to more weighty projects: which is
laid out by the example of Absalom, chap. 22. 56. That those which by
redemption of money, or by assentation, or obsecration are brought to obedience
do not long keep their faith: because whom thou shall once redeem, and
invite, he expects the same always from thee as a duty, and therefore
fears not still to break out into disobedience, thinking to have thee ever
under his girdle, and at command for succor, and relief, chap. 23. 58 Climing
up to honor, must be by good means only, especially among Ecclesiastical
persons, neither must the inferior orders under the pretext of greater gifts
derogate from the Bishop, neither must the Bishop bear hatred to the rest of
the Clergy, but carry himself just toward all, chiefly in the seat of
judgment, chap 24. 59 Favors, and benefits ought to be bestowed more upon
the poor, then upon the rich: because for that peradventure for which the rich
disdaineth, the poor gives thee great thanks, neither are those such, as are
performed in money only, but in mercy otherwise exhibited, chap. 25. page 62 Of
the evil of covetousness, and of the contagiousnesse thereof in Balaam,
Achan, and Dalilah, chap. 26. 64 Of benignity, or a gentle and ingenuous
disposition: and that an Excommunication is not suddenly, and before serious
deliberation to be denounced, chap. 27. 66 Of the good of compassion, and that
in the time of necessity, we ought not to spare the holy treasures of the
Churches. St. Laurence and Ambrose himself are introduced for examples, chap.
28. 67 The Deposites of the widows, yea of all the faithful committed to the
custody of the Church of God to be conserved, and kept inviolable even to her
own peril. The example of Onias, and Heliodorus, of himself, and of the
Bishop of Ticinum accommodated to prove the same, chapter 29. page 71 Who are
to be avoided, and who zealously for their godliness, and piety to be
followed, chapter 30. page 73
The Contents of the third Book.
THat the Saints, and holy servants of God work the greatest, and strangest
things in silence, and quietness: which is made manifest in Moses, and Elias,
chap. 1. page 1 Honesty, and profit among us Christians to be one: and such as
follow not after temporal, but eternal commodity, chap. 2. page 8 Of
repressing calumny, and exhibiting beneficence. A passing proof of the latter
to be extended to all, is the harmony of the members, and their mutual
obsequiousness, cha. 3. p. 8. Our commodities not to be sought by other men's
discommodities, chapter 4. 12 Nothing is to be desired of a wise man but
honesty: our welfare to be less esteemed then it. David's high commendation is
put for instruction, chap. 5. page 14 In the time of famine there ought to be
provision made for food, no holding fast, but liberal imparting with goods
greedily scraped together, prizes of grain, or other victuals not to be
inhaunced. The presidents of Joseph, and the covetous rich man in the Gospel
laid out diametrically for illustration, chap. 6. 18 Strangers in the time of
famine not to be driven from the City: which by certain examples produced is
confirmed not only to be dishonest but discommodious, chap. 7. 22 Honesty to
be preferred before welfare, is a thing established by God. The examples of
Joshua and Caleb, with the rest of the spies extracted out of the Scripture,
are brought to ratify it, chap. 8. page 27 Fraud, and filthy lucre in the
Clergy to be a foul stain to their decency: the comeliness of David's, and
Naboths honesty to be a fair ornament, justly exemplarie, and far above
that of worldly Demases, chap. 9. 29 Where is virtuous life, there the
remembrance of vice ought to be blotted out, and faith to be kept with the
perfidious, and fraudulent: which by the president of Joshua toward the
Gibeonites is made evident, chap. 10. 33 The avaricious, and fraudulent
sometimes to be defrauded of their desires, but always to be conscious of
Malevolence. The story of a certain Syracusan, the concealment of Ananias,
the paradigme, and treacherous pranke of Doeg the Edomite used to prove the
same, chap. 11. 36 Of the evil of the rash oaths of Herod and Iephthes: that
the Daughter of the latter returning after she had bewailed her virginity at
a day appointed, excelled the fidelity of those Pythagoreans Damon and Pythias,
which gave themselves hostages one for the other, chap. 12. 39 Into how great
danger did Judith run, under the contemplation of the worthiness of
honesty, chapter 13. 42 That utilitie evermore follows honesty: Which
albeit it may seem to fall out otherwise oftentimes with men, yet is it proved
by many examples to be so constantly, and without intermission with the
Almighty, chap. 14. 44 The praise of honesty is commended by the magnanimity
of Hester, the fidelity of Jonathan and Ahimelech, chap. 15. 55 Of the
moderation to be kept in the conservation of friendship with which the volume
is shut up, chapter 16. page 66

A Frontispice to the Work, not unnecessarily pointing at some certain
agreements and differences, between the Ethnicke, the Pontificiall, and the
truly ancient Christian, and orthodox Philosophy: together with an estimate of
the excellency hereof in a several comparison above the Ethnicke, and may
justly be prefixed thereunto as a fit Preface.
THe ocean of this argument is boundless: and therefore shall I confine my
self within the limits of some instances. It is therefore opposite, because it
sorts with our godly fathers (...).
purpose in these books of worth, because weighty in it self, not without
delight, because drawn out in much variety. Wherefore to comprehend a world of
matter, in comparison of the exceeding copiousnesse of it; in a word, I begin
with their agreement, and affinity in a triplicity. No virtue to be ingrafted
in man by nature is Ethnicke Arist. Eth. l. 2. C. 1. (...).
Philosophy, the Pontificiall likewise is that we have not pure naturals, for
so holds (...). In which words St. Chrysostom taking away preventing grace,
falls into that heresy Verba habentur in aliqua Homil. in Epist. ad Hebr.
the Pelagian, that we have them pure, but that in our first conversion our
will being assisted, and sanctified by grace, is enabled thereby afterward of
it self to well doing: which with this exception not by our own strength, and
by addition of continual supporting divine power to that theirs of assisting
at the first we may produce virtuous actions in some good measure, is the
orthodox. One end of moral Philosopie Ethnic, being a part of politic, is
Admit that Aristotle teaches to distinguish inter bonum civem, and bonum virum:
and admit that he together with Theophrast, Plutarch, Seneca, Galen, etc. have
endeavored to make good men, yet have they effected no more, then to make them
civilly good, morrally virtuous: but where notwithstanding is inward sanctity.
The Aransican Council celebrated A.D. 440. abound with strong proofs for this
of sole infusion of sanctifying spirit.
to make citizens good by obeying the Laws. This is proved by two of the
chief lawgivers, Minos of Crete, and Lycurgus of Lacedaemon, who writ laws
not only to their own, but for other people, to stir them up to the study of
virtue, that thereby they might become good citizens: and I suppose no man can
deny this to be one end of the orthodox, and a primarie end of the now Roman
Church, namely to bring to outward obedience to Ecclesiastical discipline. The
renewment of the heart is proper to the spirit, and is only peculiar to
Christian philosophy, comprised in the two sacred volumes of the old and new
Testament. But doubtless they all agree in this, the whole praise of virtue to
Omnis laus virtutis in action consistit Cic. l. 1. Offic. Tit. 2.12.
consist in practice.

The knowledge of precepts concerning honest actions to be inherent in nature,
and that necessarily for the conservation of civil society, which the Apostle
calls the work of the law written in Romans 2.15.
the heart; others jus natural, (...) the law not written, lumen mentis
nobiscum natum the light of the mind borne with us; though this be Ethnic, yet
there is no divine, but confesses with S. Paul that ingrafted in nature,
because this being styled morality, humane was not lost in the fall. Ethick
doctrine divine teaching God to be the chief good, the knowledge of God the
true beatitude, and all humane arts to be referred to him as their sole
fountain who cannot but acknowledge? And likewise, as by Honestum etiamsi a
nullo laudetur, tamen sua natura est laudandum, Cic. l. 1o. Offic. Non solum
jus, and injuriae sed omnia honesta, and turpia a natura dijudicantur, Idem l.
1o. de Leg.
natural instinct man to be able to discern between what is honest, and
dishonest: so not to be corrupted and depraved in his essence, but in his
qualities who is there but sees? For, God saw all things that he had made,
and they were exceeding Genesis 1.31.
good, and so to remain still to all posterities in regard of their essence.
They all convene in this, that a young man in manners, because transported by
his evil affections, which he is not able of himself to resist, is an unfit
hearer both of moral, and divine philosophy, and that no less he, then one
of ancient years being able to moderate his lusts, and desirous to order his
life aright, is a profitable hearer. They all attain to the knowledge of
Arist. lib. de mundoe Vnus Deus cum sit, pluribus nominibus appellatus est. Eum
(...) a suis ijs effectibus omnibus quorum specimen edere ipse solet
denominarunt, Seneca l 4 de Benefic. C. 7 Quoties voles tibi licet aliter (suam
Deum) hunc authorem rerum nostrarum compellare and Iovem, etc. Acts 17.23.
one God, and so the Turk; but the dissenting is about the mediatorship. The
Turk makes Mahumet his intercessor the Ethnic stocks, stones, the altar,
the 1 Cor. 10.20.
devil in their oracles, the Papist the mother of Christ with the Saints, the
cross, idols, relics of Martyrs; the Protestant, and orthodox Christ Jesus
only. Again, what is in the manner of worship ceremonial, corporeal,
external is that which is frequented jointly of all the three former (which
surely is a very proper combination) internal worship, and spiritual, with
hearts elevation to the true God, is that of the true Church only. The Ethnic
acknowledges that God is the (...). Agamemnon to Achilles, in Hom. l. 1o Iliad.
author of virtue; the Papist howsoever in his heat of superstition may seem
to be of another mind, in his judgment accords, the orthodox Christian
attributes the whole praise thereof in Christ by the holy Ghost to him the
father of all grace solely, and will have all the light, and life thereof
absolutely to proceed from the bright beams of his Ierem. 9.23, 24.
glory. What if Plutarch extolls the Worthies of Rome and Greece? What if
Dennis Carthusian his of all sorts, and some that were no Saints, but sotts
without due respect to the God of glory? What if some orthodox divine should
not well consider from what wel-spring they received the waters of life, whom
he commends above measure without this regard, yet God forbid that this
should be passed over without just censure? The fathers of our religion
registered for eternal memory in sacred record, are of far more desert then
all their successors: yet ought it to beheld for a truth, even in them, gratiam
invenere, non meriti mercedem, and not only this of most special note, but
that of our authors of singular soliditie, fulget Hexam: l. 4 C. 8. Our Father
is excused for his high praises of the servants of God, found in the Scripture
more in these books, then in some other of his works, and that with some
neglect of what may be conceived to be justly due to the Master himself.
ecclesia non suo, sed Christi lumine. Rapt with zeal was he, because of the
great opposition of the Gentiles in his time, as is evident in his apology
against Symmachus affixed to this work, which manifested his true Christian
disposition: carried with admiration was he in himself in lieu, and love of
the rare, and divinely inspired virtues of such commended in Scripture, with a
wonderful fervency of spirit, with a desire as hot as fire, for their most
worthy imitation above all others, next unto the son of God, from whose light
as members of his body they drew their light of holy life: and lastly
transported with an incredible piety toward them, with such indefatigable care
for the advancement of the honorable cause of religion in them that, as there
in his hexameron, so here in these his offices he might not exactly remember
that maine mark. And so I come to the differences themselves. Who may accord
the great, and unreconciliable opposition between S. Ambrose and Symmachus?
Who that of the popish and orthodox Church in the like In the matter of
Adoration.
point, when therein Rome is made the habitation of Revel. 18.2.
Devils? Where was then the supreme power of the Bishop of Rome, that S.
Ambrose being but Bishop of Millan must step forth to suppress Symmachus a
temporal Magistrate, intruding himself into the The Popes supremacy shaken.
cause of divine worship? What was not there authority given him, being the
successor of S. Peter, to whom our Savior committed the kingdom of heaven, to
pull down such an evil member? Liberius and Damasus, how sat they in their
cathedra? how proceeded they in their sentence? does not this their defect
weaken their supremacy? Did the letters written to Liberius bear any bigger
style then Socrates Schol. l. 4. C. 11. and his again to them our welbeloved
brethren, and fellow B.
To our brother and fellow-minister? Not only S. Ambrose, but S. Hierom, S.
Augustine, and Athanasius, were about that time men of much more esteem, more
learned, such whose judgments in causes of controversy were better accepted,
and more generally received of the Church of God. But it being enough for me,
tanquam canis ad Nilum, thus to touch, I will rake no deeper into this kennell,
whereby I might move a worse sent, but will turn me away to Philosophies
original. That part therefore which is moral, was not the invention of
Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, or of any other of the learned among the Gentiles,
but is of as great antiquity, as the world it self, and began with man in
Paradise at his creation. It was indeed defaced in the fall, but not utterly
Romans 2.15. This discourse is pertinent showing what virtue is, and to what end
it is to be acquired.
abolished. For certain sparks of that goodly light lay still raked up in the
cinders, by which man might be able to discern between right and wrong,
things honest and dishonest, and perform the common offices of his maine life.
Faith it self the Mistres of manners, and Mother of good works cannot
possibly so subsist as 2 Pet 1.5.10.11.
barren of all virtues. It is a fair and fruitful speech of his, who
affirms Aug. in Epist. ad Macedon.
no other virtue to be found in this life, then to love what is to be loved,
which to love is wisdom, from which by no troubles to be averted is
fortitude; by no allurements, temperance, by no insolency, justice. Virtue
pertains to the second table, neither is that principal, supernatural,
divinely infused theological habit, such as are faith, hope, and love, but
that less principal coming under the most complete division of the Tit 2.12.
Observandum quam miro compendio vitam, and mores Christianos complexus sit
Paulus. Heming.
Apostle. That, according to his heavenly instruction, we study, and strive to
live righteously toward men, soberly in respect of our selves, and of the
all-seeing God, godly, or in godly 1 Pet. 1.15.
conversation, which is ever accompanied with truth and reverence, assiduity
Luke 1.5.7.
constancy in Gods service. Wherein there is no question to be made, but that
he comprehends all the four It is warrantable from this place Tit. 2.12.
and that of Saint James C. 1.17 that these Cardinals proceed from the H: Sp:
coming into the Ethnic, namely through the spirit of illumination, and
restraint unto the true believer through the spirit of sanctification.
Cardinals, with whatsoever their branches, together with the three
Theological.

That which is inferred here of Virtue, either generally, or particularly of
any of its parts, as of a good work, is that it is necessarily to be
exercised, and that by the obligation of divine mandate for obedience sake to
God, not as meritorious. Who knows not, that the obedience of a son to his
parents is a thing necessary, for it is part of the honor he owes to them,
is it therefore a matter of desert and merit? Virtuous works make a way Bona
opera sunt via regni, non causa regnandi, Bern.
to our salvation, that is conditionally, Vt conditio sine qua non est aeterna
vita, non ut causa propter quam.
because without them there can be no true Gal. 5.6.
faith, nor life Romans 8.3.
eternal: but not as the Romans 6.23.
cause for which we obtain the same, for that is a gratuitall, and Deus
initiorum fidei, and incrementi largitor est, Amb. de vocat. Gent. l. 2. C. 1.
free gift in Jesus Christ our Lord; Which in the purpose of the Apostle
implies by his sole grace, and his only efficacy of merit. Abraham's
justification by works was seen in the fruits, and effects of his faith, as
in showing his Iam. 2.21.
obedience in offering up his son Isaac upon the altar. Thus proceeds S.
James his disputation, that it admits not faith to be solitary: but S. Paul
strikes at the root, admitting no other foundation of our justification, but
Romans 4.3.
faith only. Both agree in this, that where it is not a dead, but a lively
faith, there it is evermore accompanied with no colorable, and counterfeit
shows and shadows, but with most Romans 8.1.
savoury, and sweet and 5.1.
consequences in substance and truth. Faith it self as a Work does not
justify, but as an instrument John 6.29. Tribuitur opus salutis fidei salutem
miseris magis concilianti, quam operanti Muss. and again, Fides and Dei, and
nostri opus est, Dei sicut scriptura paedagogi, nostrum, sicut pueri, cujus
manus a poedagogo ducitur. When salvation is ascribed to faith, Mar. 5.34.
Math. 9.29. as our Work, the Scripture teaches, that this is the Work of God
in us, imparting to every one his portion, Romans 12.3 Ephesians. 2 8. Ye are saved
through Faith by grace, it is not of your selves: it is the gift of God, not of
Works, lest any man should boast. Hereunto accords the exposition of two of
the chief of the Fathers, fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo, and in terra, hoc
est, sicut in eis qui jam crediderunt, and tanquam coelum sunt, and in eis, qui
non credunt, and ob hoc adhuc terra sunt, Cyprian. Wherein he shows that it
proceeds from the will of God, that any believe: Augustine accords with him,
Trahi a patre ad Christum nihil aliud est, quam donum accipere a patre, quo
credat in Christum, August: l. 1. de Praedest. C, 8o.
applying to the believing soul the merits of Christ. The Ethnic has no
acquaintance, and the Papist very little with this save only by way of
contradiction: as Bellarmine affirming contrary to the Rom 10.10.
Apostle the brain, Following Aristot. Eth. lib. 1. C. 13.
and understanding only to be the subject, and that carbonarie of Hosius the
Cardinal, teaching a confused assent to the Churches voice, which what it may
be in special, need not to be sought.

Howbeit this may seem to cross their tenet, ex opere operato for this, and
other holy Works, and disable them from meriting much more, then if they would
yield them a seat in the heart. For this is a great weakening of the cause to
say, that the renewment of the heart and affections, does nothing conduce
thereunto. But though it be not for merit sake, that we commend well doing:
yet surely manifold is the utilitie that comes from the practice of a
virtuous life. For God is thereby 1 Pet. 2.12. Math. 5.16.
glorified, our selves assured of our 2 Pet. 1.10.
election, and confirmed in our Hebr. 6.10 19.
hope, 2 Timothy 1.6.
piety stirred up, others moved by our example to an holy conversation, the
needy refreshed by our compassion. Well pleasing therefore is it to men, and
approved of God. Approved of God, because the fruit of his spirit, and flowing
from the truth of faith, which he evermore much respects. Hence arises its
so ample Math. 5.12.42. and 10.25.34.
remuneration in the life to come and in this life Deuteronomy. 5.32. and 11.9.
length of days, food in the time of Psalm. 14.7.
famine, want of no and 119.165. and 112
good thing, Es. 37.36.
protection from enemies, preservation in Psalm. 119. and 121.7.
dangers, deliverance from the Number. 14.13.
insultation of adversaries, the comfort of Gods Josh. 3.10.
presence. The practice of virtue in the Gentile, whose person the Lord
accepts not, because he remaining in infidelity, and unconverted, aims not
at the honor of God, nor whatsoever performance of his truth, seeks not an
heart freed from the guilt of sin, nor a conscience sprinkled with the blood
of Christ, and undefiled, is such as is undoubtedly Ephesians. 2.12. and 4.18.
estranged from the life of God, without expectation of a better life,
destitute of all promise of a Savior to bring him to it. The want of faith
only cuts them off for any true reputation thereby, for any acceptance at the
hands of God. For without it, it is Heb. 11.5.
impossible to please him. Did they come unto him without that armor, though
otherwise they might seem well furnished, they should be in no good course to
reap any reward: and not seeking after him at all, but after their vanities of
idols, seeing nothing dexterously into his ways, what relief may they look
to receive from him? The Jesuits approving implicit faith, and denying the
appropriating of it, denying the (...), full persuasion, and sure conscience of
reward as necessary to salvation, against the truth of the Romans 8.31. Ephesians.
3.12. Col. 2.2.
Scriptures must needs ruinate their building. For their groundwork thus
fails, that is to say, as built upon the sandy foundation, especially being
under supposall and conjecture, and no more of whatsoever their good Works,
which they challenge of right to be regarded, and by due debt and desert to
be rewarded at the hands of God. This end of virtuous actions to purchase
heaven as their own, and of the heathens to gain immortal fame by them, are
both in opposition to the ends thereof proposed in the book of God. Where our
Saviors doctrine is, when we have done all that we can we have done but our
duty, and that we are notwithstanding Luke 17.10.
unprofitable servants, who is to be followed therein as an infallible guide,
as does Basil upon Psalm 114 (...), etc.
Basil the great showing what in her prime was the judgment of the Greek
Church, everlasting rest proposed to them, that shall lead their lives
according to the law of God, not as if a debt were due unto them from the (...).
virtue of their works, but bestowed upon them that believe in the (...).
favor of God the great giver. The Heathens in their apprehension go thus
far that men are borne partly for their country, partly for their parents
and friends, and some have added this also, that partly for the service of God:
and therefore fot the benefit of these, chiefly for their country and friends,
they have adventured their lives thereby to attain immortal fame: but
christian philosophy binds to this, that all be done for the honor of God,
making his praise the only mark at the which we must, that profess the same,
aim at in all our affairs, and what is to be done for man or nation is to
be performed subordinatly, and so that it may not diminish his glory, and so
that it must be solely for his names sake. That which is intellectual
residing in contemplation, as prudence, says the Arist. Ethico. l. 2. c. 1.
Ethnic, is procured by learning, that which rests in manners, and practice
by exercise and custom; which is untrue. For shall we say, that he makes no
perfect enumeration of efficient causes or may we better maintain, that he
fails in the true cause? For is not God, howsoever Cicero and Seneca imagine
it to be derived from our selves, the fountain of James. 1.5. (...).
wisdom, it is not therefore styled the wisdom of the 1 Cor. 12.8. Romans 8.6.
(...).
spirit; did not 1 Kings 3.9. 2 Chrp 1.10. Charmah of Chacam sapere.
Solomon ask it of God? Is not courage, and Psalm. 48.29. and 147.7 1 Samuel 11.6.
fortitude from him? Does not the Apostle number Gal. 5 23 (...)
temperancy among the fruits of the holy Ghost? Does not Psalm. 72.1. Dan. 9.7.
Ier. 9.24.
justice proceed from him? Is he not the author, and finisher of every good
work according to Ephesians. 2.9. Phil. 2.13. and 1.
Saint Paul throughout his Epistles? Is it not our Saviors John 15.5.
doctrine that without him we can do nothing? Tit. 2.14. Heb. 13.21.
Which clearly convinces the Pelagian affirming that by our pure Naturals we
may fulfill the law of God, and the Semipelagian, that in our conversion, our
free will parts stakes with Gods grace, the Schoolmen likewise works of
congruity to deserve grace, free will to cooperate, with it contrary to the
Scripure, his mercy shall Psalm. 59 10.
prevent me, and his mercy shall Psalm. 23.8.
follow me; Nolentem Aug. Enchir. ad Laur. C. 32.
praevenit ut velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit: he prevents the
unwilling to make him willing, he follows the willing lest he should be
willing in vain.

And a little before expounding that of the Romans 9.16.
Apostle, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy. Why so? but that the Nisi ut totum Deo detur, qui hominis
voluntatem bonam and praeparat ad iuvandam, and adiuvat praeparatam.
whole may be given to God, who both prepares the will of man to be helped,
and helps being prepared. We aver with the same Aug. l. de Gratia and Lib.
Arb. C. 2.
author, the will in our first conversion extrinsecally to be mere passive,
intrinsecally only to follow the Spirit of God drawing it. And this accords
with that old, and public form of Histor. Conc. Trid. l. 2. page 228 accord.
to the Transl. of D. Brent.
prayer used in the Church; Ad te nostras rebels compelle propitius Preces.
voluntates. This cuts the throat of that misconceived opinion misleading too
many, of universal grace standing upon it, that they are able to make it good
that God opens the eyes of all to see, and the ears of all to hear the
mysteries of salvation if they will, when they cannot will without some
special motion of Gods spirit. The more this their acute position is sifted,
the more brain is found in it.

The finest wits go a wooll-gathering sometimes, as did Plato, when he would
not be drawn from this persuasion of his, that vice was not voluntary, when
it is well known to be clean against divine truth testifying Genesis 6.5. and
8.21. Mat. 15.19. Job 15.16 Psalm. 62.4. and 36 4. Romans 3.15. Es. 59.7.
every where, that it is willingly committed, and with delight in the
unregenerate. And had he understood of the fall of our first parents, who fell
willingly, he would easily have yielded: Yea had he considered the pleasure
that is taken in sin breaking out of our corrupt nature, he would never have
maintained it. That of the Philosopher reason to be not only a lamp to guide
the understanding, and a Queen to moderate the will, but attributing to it
power perfectly to govern it self, to seek after the best things, to avoid
offense, is no less erroneous, when in truth it not only comprehends not
what true piety is, but remains incapable of many things incident to this
life. Who sees not that humane reason opens her mouth even against the Romans
3.5. (...).
righteousness of God it self invents some obloquie always against his
sacred truth? Grace has need of nature, Luminis naturalis ductum repellere non
modo stultum est, sed impium Aug. de Trinit. l. 4, C. 6.
her light and guidance cannot be denied to be necessary: yet in Romans 1.21.23.
discerning of things spiritual stark blind, her science darkness. Let it
be granted, that it is exact, and absolute in it self: yet in comparison of
that great luminary of divine grace it is as nothing: No humane reason can
reach unto that maine principle whereupon our Christian faith depends, that
the sacred books are the oracles of God. Neither can this be so effectually
proved by any other motives and inducements never so strong, and consonant to
reason, as by the testimony of the spirit. All the powers of natural reason
joined with experience and science are not available to work faith, are not
able to see, much less to feel what the special grace of the holy Ghost is,
cannot inlighten, for that only comes from Gods spirit, the understanding: and
as for the donation of grace it concurres solely in the study of the word of
God accompanying no other; and the gift of sanctification is so peculiar to it,
that it is appropriated, and the proper passion thereof. Such a tie goes with
it, as with no science beside, as to be believed what is Hebr. 11.12.
contrary to common reason, and sense it self, first to Es. 7.9. 2 Chr. 20.20.
believe, afterward to learn, and Chrysostom affirming, no inquiry must be
made of it, but subscription, and obedience tendered, Sums 2.2. q. 10. Art.
14.
Aquinas interpreting that of the Romans 14.23.
Apostle, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, says, this may be thus
understood, that the life of Infidels cannot be without sin, when sins are
not taken away without faith: whereunto he adds, that it follows not from
hence infidels to sin in every work, when in them, that natural goodness
of reason, which exhorts to the best things, is not altogether extinct, and
abolished. We grant it to be so concerning the substance of work, sin in
it self, and civil actions: but concerning Sapientia simpliciter est cognitio
divinarum rerum Aug. de Trinit.
spiritual to be so, we utterly deny, and that upon sure warrant of the holy
Ghost, testifying, that Rom 8.7 Hic observemus hominis voluntatem Divinae
voluntati per omnia adversari, Calv.
all wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. The adversary Sophists
restrain it to sensuality, but (...) is not of the sense, but of the reason.
Whereby it appears, that the reasonable part with the will, as well as the
sensual, is averse from God. And so much does the ordinary Omnis infidelium
Vita peccatum est.
gloss intimate, and so does Lib. 6. Annotat. 25^. Anselm and Ambros. l. 1. de
vocat. Gent. speak to this sense.
Sixtus Senensis, a learned man of their own side. Lib. 5. Cap. 6.
Bellarmine seeing these streights slips by it, and falls upon another Lib. Arb.
place, interpreting faith there to be the conscience, affirming all the
Fathers to expound it so. Romans 14.23.
But whether ye take (without faith) concerning that of the Infidel, or weak
Christian, though they both want it: yet are they not without conscience. And
as for the Fathers, they affirm, that faith there is the knowledge of
Christian liberty, which more particularly concerns conscience, then
generally to understand the same according to his sense, whatsoever is without
faith, that is without conscience, is sin. The truth is, whatsoever we enter
upon unlawfully under the guilt of conscience, and under the knowledge of the
breach of Christian liberty, is sin. And therefore the law of God written in
the consciences of the infidel Gentiles accuses them when they sin against
it, and convinces them of transgression. Wherefore to grant Bellarmine what he
desires, that whatsoever is against conscience, not whatsoever is against
Christian liberty, which is the orthodox exposition, is sin, he has gained
nothing. I resolve the point then with In Cap. 1. Job.
Origin, That I may speak briefly and boldly, all things whatsoever men shall
do, either in virginity, or abstinency, or in the chastity of the body, or in
the distribution of their goods they do all in vain, if they shall not do it
in faith. For all severity, all justice, which any man shall use without a true
inward faith, he uses it to no purpose: it shall nothing profit him in the
day of perdition, nothing help him in the day of wrath. Thus far of
differences in a triplicity. Now in a duplicity some few more which stand
between the Christian and Ethnic.

For these our points of morality they have spoken wonderful well, and if any
shall say otherwise, he shall wrong them. Christianity then has this in
common with them, and her sons disdained not to Eustathius a Bishop
commenting upon Homer. Aug. Lact. Iren. Cyp. Hill.
read their books for their goodly documents: but yet so, that it self has
gone a great deal farther. That of Plato before specified, we are not borne
for our selves, etc. is much short of Paul's rule, charity seeks not her
own; and of our Savior, we must love our neighbor as our selves. He goes to
country, parentage, friends, and there leaves: now what becomes of the poor?
These if they had not sold themselves for perpetual slaves incontinently
perished with hunger. Commiseration toward these was accounted no virtue, but
humane passion. Plato himself knew not what charity meant. Dionis. Halic.
Deformed children by the law of Romulus were exposed, and stifled. Vedius
Pollio Dion in Aug.
fed Lampreyes with the bodies of his slaves, they were set upon the Theater
with naked swords to slay one another, for to make pastime to the people: no
more regard therefore had they to them then to brute beasts. In their
political government they never speak of them. Alexander Severus Lamprid. in
Alex.
poesy, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, seems to be learned from
Christ, because never put in practice among the Gentiles; herein Christian
princes and people exceed them. For they erect Hospitals for them, and Kings
have their Almoniers. Paynim religion fills men with pride, persuades that
naturally virtuous: Christian abats pride of heart, and shows that naturally
we are sinful. Paynims persuade to revenge, Christians to patience: yet so,
that in the cause of holy religion they might show themselves magnanimous. It
is false therefore, which is Machiavel of Religion Maxim 3.
objected, that persuasion to patience breeds pusillanimity. For who more
valorous in undertaking the defense of a right cause, then Abraham, Joshua,
David, and in after times then Constantinus the great, the two Theodosij,
Justinian. They, which were guided by the rules of Ethnic Philosophy, cared
not to be inwardly virtuous, as may appear by the examples of those of
greatest reputation for virtue among the Romans, as of Caesar, Pompey, Cicero,
and even of Cato of Vtica himself: for his heart no less then theirs was sore
swollen with an aspiring desire devoide of humility, and conscionable
comportment. But such as followed the precepts of Christian philosophy, sought
not outwardly only, but so to adorn their hearts, and consciences with
virtues, as in truth they might best please God. Numa Pompilius ceremonies were
disavouched by Quintus Petilius, and hereupon it was resolved by the decree of
the Senate, that his books touching the same should be publicly burnt, as
damageable to the Roman commonwealth. Never truly affected council did
disallow the Christian faith: the Doctors of the Christian Church have confuted
the Heathens out of their own Aug. de Civ. Dei. Firmianus Lact. Institutions.
books, which no man could the Christians out of sacred books. None of the
sacred books have at any time been lost: but the Goths being enemies to all
good letters, making irruptions into Gaul, Italy, Spain, burnt as many books
of the ancient Paynims, as they could find. Ethnicks themselves confess the
truth of the Scriptures, as Trebellius In Clau.
Pollio that Moses was familiar with God, Annal. l. 21.
Cornelius Tacitus though calumniating the Jewish religion, yet acknowledging,
that the King of Egypt made the Hebrews depart out of his country for many
maladies wherewith the Egyptians were infected: not denying that Christ was put
to death in the time of Tiberius by Pontius Pilat his Lieutenant in Iudaea.
Lib. Annal. 15.
Moreover he, and Suetonius speaking of Vespasian say, That it was a constant
opinion through all the East countries, that from Iudaea should come the Ruler
of the world. The antiquity of Christian religion is above the Pagan. For there
was no Greek or Latin author, but was after Moses, who writ his books many
hundred years before Homer, Berosus, Hesiod, Manethon, Metasthenes, and
whosoever beside. Empedocles and Plato maintain, contrary to other heathen
Philosophers, that the world had a beginning: yet by lean reasons, and not of
that solidity as do Christians. The Gentiles aspired in their minds to Cicero
in Some. Scipionis. Plato in Phaedo.
eternity in some sort which may be seen in their worthy acts to keep their
names in perpetual memory, some reasons they had, which lead them to it, as
that God being just would not equally deal with the good and bad: and from the
brevitie, and misery of this life, and thereby most unhappy of all creatures,
if no felicity were to be found after death; but yet without assurance
according to truth. The resurrection of the body is a thing incredible to the
Heathen Philosopher, because he holds from A privatione ad habitum impossibilis
est regressus Arist.
privation to habit regression to be impossible. But it is to be considered
the Supra rationem, non contra potentiam facientis est ratio facti, considera
authorem, and toll dubitationem, Aug. Ep. 8. ad Volus.
power of God the author thereof to be above, not against reason, think of
the author, and remove the doubt, his omnipotency is reason sufficient. The
Epicurean Philosopher maintains Fortune to rule, and overruled in the world;
the Astrologer all sublunarie bodies to be governed by the efficacy, and
influences of the stars; certain Philosophers incorruptible bodies only, not
corruptible to be subjacent to Gods providence; Stoics the perpetual
connection of causes, the indeclinable order of things, which they call Arost.
de mundo (...).
(...), because knit together without impediment, which is fatal necessity,
and unavoidable, the enumeration whereof to every one that understands the
first principles of Christianity is confutation enough. The Ethnic had some
knowledge of the corruption of man, as that the soul is wrapped up in
continual perturbations and passions, the body subject to innumerable
troubles, disquietnesse, and violent untowardnesse, but was ignorant, the fall
of our first parents to be the first, and true cause thereof. Plinies
indefatigable study, and for his profound knowledge in the mysteries of nature
is such as few, or none have attained unto, worthy the pen, and praise of
learned: Yet Tacitus commending him to posterity in his denial of the
immortality of the soul, has made himself a monster in nature, and more
prodigious then Vesuvius that devoured him. One of his line or Not himself,
for he lived in the time of Vespasian to whom he dedicated his natural history.
name that wrought for the Eusebius. 1.3. C. 30.
ceasing of the persecution of the Christians to Trajan the Emperor knew as
much; Many things, says he, Nature Histor. l. 7. C 55.
are found to live longer then men, yet no man divineth of their immortality.
It was the vanity of Democritus to promise the reservation of the bodies of
men, when himself being dead revived not. Why must the body rise again, but
for that it follows the matter of the soul: but after death where is
cogitation, where the sight, the hearing, or whereupon is it employed? The dead
are made gods; when they cease to be men, what do they else, but as other
living creatures do, vent out their last breath? What a madness is this, life
to be iterated by death? What rest shall there be at any time to that is
begotten and borne, if the sense of the soul remains in sublimitie, and the
ghosts Post sepulturam aliae atque aliae manium ambages.
wander above, and beneath the spirits? This credulity surely loses the
chiefest good of nature, which is death; death is doubled by the estimation of
grief to follow after. To live is sweet for the present: but to whom can it be
sweet that he has heretofore lived? But how much more easy, and more certain
is it for every one to believe what he finds in himself, and to take a token
of his security, by that he was before he was begotten. Never was heard more
wild, and windy stuff. But it is to be noted, that he deduceth his arguments
from Democritus, and others that dealt upon no sure ground, Romans 1.21.
were vain in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts full of darkness.
Such was the vanity of the idolatry of the Gentiles, that Lucian might justly
deride it, and it is true here, which he alleges, that the dead are made
gods. For even Jupiter himself the chiefest was a mortal man: the Lact. l. 1.
C. 11: Cic. de Not. Deorum, l. 3.
mention of his burial and sepulcher in Crete is frequent. It is more to be
wondered at therefore, what induced Pope Calv. Instit. l. 4. C. 7. S. 28.
John the two and twentieth to be of his mind, and had not the Romans 1.28.
Apostle both opened the cause, and showed the danger of such impiety, it might
seem strange indeed: as they regarded not to know God: so delivered he them
over to a reprobate mind, and as a just recompense the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all the ungodly, which withold the truth in
unrighteousness. We come lastly to the differences recorded in our author.
Christian patience is sweetened with the goodness, and fatherly love of the
Almighty nourishing, and sustaining our hope of Romans 15.4.5.
consolation in adversity, that all aggrievance is made light. The patience of
the Ethnic is patience perforce, thinking it wisdom to bear injury, when
compulsion lies upon it, a remedy against all griefs, when they cannot be
avoided. Stoics more precise observers of it then others, beeause of their
dependence of causes upon fatal necessity, and this was their motive to
endure whatsoever misery. The rule they gave for it was broken, if they were
once moved, or touched with sorrow for the greatest calamity. And therefore
Socrates did not once stir when his Xantippe sharpened her tongue against
him. He that would be of this sect must be void of all affections and
perturbations, and become senseless, and blockish like a stone. Christian
religion requires no such strictness, but to moderate, and mortify the
Ambroses Offic. l. 1. Cap. 3. and 12. The Thomists number them to eleven, and
add hereunto abomination, and audacity, placing 6. in the coveting appetite,
and 5. in the invading, these all in their nature be indifferent, neither good
nor bad.
passions as anger, grief, fear, desire, delight, love, hatred, hope,
despair, not to slay, and kill them after their opinion. And the truth is they
deal by patience as Plato does in his Idaea, or Moore in his Vtopia, they
paint us out only a picture of it, as these do of their Commonweal. Other
Philosophers have other inducements to lead them to it, the Academicks, as
Plato, have honesty; the Peripateticks Ipsa quidem virtus sibimet pulcherrima
merces.
virtue, Euripides the poet morality, because better to be stricken then to
strike, to be vanquished then to vanquish, all of them did convene in one that
nobile vincendi genus, murus ahaeneus, that it is a noble kind of victory,
and an invincible tower. Tacitus against Metellus speaking evil of him in the
Senate House, held it to rest in silence, Diogenes in wisdom to answer
Xenophon in the testimony of conscience, Tarentine the Archite in repressing
anger before correction. All these with Panetius borrowed the same, Offices l.
1. C. 36.
and Pythagoras his concerning silence of David. Offic. l. 1. C. 10,
Whereby is manifest that Divine Philosophy is more ancient then humane,
better, working Offic. l. 1. C. 2.4.5.6.
greater, and more admirable effects, and theirs but an apish, and peevish
imitation. For art imitates nature, comes not near it, neither does nature
come near what is given by inspiration. The services of religion in our
Congregations are done in decency, and order, the Heathens howsoever in the
Theorie stand for it, yet in their idolatrous devotions Offic. l. 1. C. 26.
execution they are most confused, obscene, and abominable. According to
Divinity to number the stars, to measure the air, to account the sands of
the sea belongs only to God: according to Ethnic learning forgetting therein
the rule of comeliness, and honesty, their Offic. l. 1. C. 26.
Astronomers, and Geometricians presume to do it. Moses example being called
rejecting the learning of the Egyptians, may be an instruction for a
Christian, how cautious he must be in such profession. The Christian ascribes
the whole government of the world to the divine providence of God, but not only
Epicures, but Offic. l. C. 1.13. and 14
Aristotle, and other Philosophers among the Gentiles in some part oppugn it.
The Ethnic makes Offic. l. 1. C. 27.
prudence the fountain of all office, when in divinity it is Prove. 9.10.
Minerva (...) Hom. Iliad. l. 1 came of Jupiters brain.
piety toward God. The Ethnic form of justice is not to do injury unless
Offic. l. 1^ C. 28.
provoked: the Christian not to do it though much, and many ways stirred up,
and provoked. In case of justice the Ethnic maintains what he possesses in
common, to be converted to the common use, but what he holds in Offic. l. 1.
C. 28.
private to be turned to his own benefit; but this is not only against divine
philosophy, but against even nature it self. Among the Heathens, Scipio
African, Alexander, Cyrus, Archytas, Xenocrates, are highly extolled for their
Offic. l. 1. C. 45.
temperance: yet this being in the outside, and by the gift of restraint only,
not in the inside, it is not that, which is in a Math. 5.28.
Christian heart, and was in the heart of Genesis 39.9.
Joseph sanctified by the Spirit of God. Ethnic philosophy gives rules for
utility, joined with comeliness and honesty, as they belong to this life: the
Offic. l. 1. C 9.
Christian as they may further to eternal life: the one estimating them so, as
they make us virtuous and happy here, the other so, as they make us godly here,
and hereafter blessed. Esters, the daughter of Iephthes, and Iudiths fortitude
was more then that of the two Pythagoreans, Offic. l. 3. 11. 12. 14. Pylades
and Orestes Cic. l. 2. de fine. 1 John. 3.16. like ought to be done in
imitation of Christ.
Damon, and Pythias, because theirs true fortitude in a good cause, to the best
end, with undaunted courage, this in none of these respects commendable, their
cause was the preservation of the Church of God, end, the honor of his Name,
for this even the daughter of Iepthes aimed at.

And as for charity not all but Heb. 13.1. (...).
brotherly, not one, but every Luke 10.36.
neighbor is to be esteemed as a friend, to do for a friend, not to Exodus
23.34. Ezech. 18.20.
die for the saving a friends life, but soul is required. The like may be said
of the Heroicks, and noble spirits of the Heathen in peace and war: it is the
cause that must magnify their courage, causa facit Martyrem, and causa facit
militem (...).
palmarium; the Offic. l. 1. C. 40.
Maccabees sought the glory of God, these their own ends, and they had their
immortal reward, and renown, not in heaven, but on earth. The Gentile
Philosophers felicity being in a great, confused, and almost endless variety
is by the light of the Gospel, as the mist before the Sun, clean Offic. l.
2. c. 2. and 3.
vanished away; Solons (...) Ovid. Metamorph.
Vltima semper expectanda dies is disavouched by Ethic. l. 10. C. 1.
Aristotle upon this argument, beatitude is an operation according to virtue,
for so he defines it, the dead cannot work according to virtue, therefore
beatitude cannot be attributed to them: which though every Christian sees how
weak it is, yet is this the general tenet of them, that it may not be
attained in this life: and this is against Christianity. The way which is the
knowledge of God, and good Works they are ignorant of. For this is the way
according to Offic. l. 2. C. 2:
Christian information leading to it. They never dreamed this the only means
to obtain that heavenly felicity, when they never imagined it to be such at
all: much less the steps tending to happiness to be through many Offic. l.
2. C. 6.
sorrows, necessities, and afflictions. They were not far indeed from this
persuasion in that their fancied Epicureans.
earthly: and likewise therein, that, what is reputed good in the estimate of
the world, is an hinderance, and what Stoics.
evil, a furtherance to it. For what some deemed to be true concerning the
good of prosperity (in the phrase of the world) accounting it felicity: and the
evil of adversity as others, to bring unto it the imaginary: the Christian
knows by warrant of the Word to be certainly true, concerning true
beatitude. For he expects a sea of salt Mat. 5. Offic. l. 2. 4.
sorrows before he may taste of those sweet rivers of pleasures. In the point
of friendship, fidelity, kindness, benevolence, mercy philosophy Christian is
far discrepant from Ethnic. For his knowledge reached not to this, how then
should he practice it? That is, that Offic. l. 3. C. 16.
there can be no sure friendship in that man, who is unfaithful to God: nor of
this rare, and royal prerogative that God vouchsafes to a Luke 16.9.
poor Saint in our usual language a poor naked snake, that he that makes
him Offic. l. 3. C. 16.
friends with him by parting with his mammon for his relief, he shall receive
him into everlasting habitations. And verily, for the Spirit of God assures
it, the prayer of a James 5.16.
righteous man avails much with the Lord: and for stronger evidence an Psalm.
41.3.
instance is given, and a promise sealed, he will strengthen him upon his bed
of sorrow. Christian philosophy also draws friendship to an higher strain,
and larger extent, teaching to bear with his brothers Ephesians. 4.2.
infirmities, and therein to Gal. 6.1.2. Romans 15.1.
support him, to prefer him in estimation, and yield him the Phil. 2.3. Romans
8 10
precedence above himself, not to seek his own, but another Cor. 10.24.
Phil. 2.4.
man's wealth, comprehending therein upon all occasions, regard to be had to
the whole (...): as Gal. 6.10. Lex charitatis sicuti vult proximos amari a
nobis ut nos ipsos Calv. in 1 Cor. 10.24.
mass of humane race, more then to his own private estate, renouncing
(through selfe-conceipt) selfe-respect, self-love, selfe-care, pleasing
himself: and seeking to Romans 15.2. Offic. l. 3. C. 3.
please his neighbor in what is good to edification. It proposes such a
matchless, and peerless president that all the Examples of the Gentiles,
Jews, and Christians too were they put together, are not worthy to be
paralleled with it, shall I say, or rather not once to be Not the three Curij,
not the two Horatij, not Curtius, not Codrus. not any other, because these dyed
either by instigation of Satan for greediness of vain glory, or in
desperation: not any of the Martyrs because by death they could merit nothing.
mentioned with it: namely, that the Son of God the Lord Christ our Savior
being in the form of God, made himself of no Phil. 2 7.
reputation to bring us to honor, poor to make 2 Cor. 8 4.
us rich, ignominious under the shameful death of the Phil. 2.8.
cross to bring us to glory, being Romans ^.10.
enemies reconciled us, being under the curse for breaking the law of
ordinances redeemed Gal ^.5. and 3.13. Col. 2.14.
us, being under the tyranny of Col. 2.15.
Satan, 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 John 1.7 and 2.2.
sin, 1 Cor. 15.55.
death, and Rev. 1.18. and. 20.6.
eternal condemnation ransomed us, infranchised us for Hebr. 12.22.
citizens, advanced us for Revel. 20.6.
kings, and priests, adopted us for sons and Romans 8.16.17.
heirs, yea fellow heirs with him of his heavenly Father, in his kingdom of
glory there to reign Rev. 20.4. and 1.6. and 22.5. Psalm. 16.11.
with him, where is fullness of joy and pleasures, such as have never entered
into the heart of man with the fruition of his presence, vision of his
countenance, which is the perfection of all happiness for evermore. To
conclude this part the Barbarians never knew by the teaching of their Offic. l.
2. C. 20. and 29.
gymnosophists, Dryades, or the like, what mercy meant, as appeared by their
savage cruelty in the spoiling without all remorse the countries laid open to
their furious rapin, as Sclavonia, and Thracia, and as in these our days it
notoriously appears, and famously to their eternal infamy brands the Papists
by the teaching of their swarms of Friars, but without all fraternity, arising
up out of the bottomless pit as locusts, and of the Satanicall brood of
Jesuits in name; but in their game, and garboiles they make in all countries,
bearing the true, and undoubted stamp, and character of Iesabels, as in their
tragedicall stratagems without number every where acted, and among the rest in
their butcherly French Massacre, divellish English Powder treason, and in their
daily and damnable Italian, and Spanish Inquisition; Indian, upon the poor
Savages, barbarous and bloody executions. Thus have I taken some survey in
producing the agreements and disagreements, proposed in a threefold manner of
difference. And again the latter in a twofold, and herewithall have trodden in
the footsteps themselves of this our father. Now lest some man should be
offended at the name of philosophy, for that the holy Col. 2.8.
Apostle has warned to take heed of such learning; we must wisely observe
with a most judicious Divine of Hook. Eccles. Policy.
ours, that we are not admonished to take heed of that philosophy, which is
true and sound knowledge attained by natural discourse of reason, but that
philosophy which to bolster heresy, or error casts a fraudulent show of
reason upon things, which are indeed unreasonable, and by that means, as by a
stratagem spoileth the simple, which are not able to withstand such cunning. He
that exhorts to beware of an enemies policy, does not counsel to be
impolitique, but rather to use all circumspection. The way not to be inveigled
is to be armed with that true philosophy teaching against deceitful and
vain. Our author undertaketh the refining the purest, and most profitable
piece of philosophy, which is morality, confuteth what is opposite, pitcheth
eftsoons upon this very argument, putting down the disagreements between the
Christian and Ethnic, proving exquisitely out of the book of God whatsoever
his propositions. When S. Paul speaks of temperance, righteousness, and the
judgment to Acts 24.26.
come Felix trembled, and opening to Ib. 26.28.
Agrippa the heavenly vision working his own conversion, he was almost made a
Christian. My hearts desire, and prayer to God for our Nation is, that this my
poor travel may, together with many other special pious labors, help to
move forward to the gaining that saving effect, which he earnestly contended
for in the one, and craved for in the other of these his auditors: that so it
might by the power of the Word therein plentifully comprehended, cause first,
the Es. 66.5.
trembling of conscience, which is as the needles eye to make way to the thread
of grace, next, the true Christian reformation, and final salvation of this
our unreformed generation. Perdenda sunt multa ut semel ponas been. The Lord
the most high God, ruler of heaven and earth, through the mighty power of the
invaluable death of Christ Jesus his only Son, and our only Savior by the
effectual operation of his holy, and ever blessed Spirit, add such a blessing
unto it in the whole, or in some part, as shall be acceptable to himself, and
make for the endless good, if not of many, yet of some of his servants.

Sundry testimonies for the commendation of our Author.
The relation of Socrates concerning S. Ambrose his Consecration l. 4. c. 30.
AMbrose the Lieutenant of the city of Mediolanum, who was also a Consul,
fearing lest the uprore about the election of a Bishop, especially because of
the Arrians, would breed mischief, came purposely into the Church to appease
the sedition. After that his presence had prevailed much with the people, after
he had given them many notable exhortations, after he had mitigated the rage
of the heady, and rash multitude, all of a sudden with one voice, and with one
mouth nominated Ambrose to be their Bishop, which when he utterly denied,
Valentinian the Emperor wondering at the agreement of the people, supposing
that which was done to be the work of God, to ratify the same commanded the
Bishops to obey the will of God, and create, and install him Bishop there; for
God, says he, rather then men has preferred him to this dignity.

S. Augustines testimony of him in his confessions which he makes to God, l.
5. c. 5.
VEni Mediolanum ad Ambrosium Episcopum in optimis notum orbi terrae, pium
cultorem tuum, cujus tunc eloquia strenue ministrabant adipem frumenti tui, and
lectitiam olei, and sobriam vini ebrietatem populo tuo. I came to Millan to
Ambrose a Bishop well known to the world for his good deserts, thy faithful
worshipper: whose divine speeches then did strongly administer to the people
the fat, and flower of thy wheat, the purest, and choysest of thy oil, the
sobriety, and satiety of thy wine.

Erasmus testimony of him to the Archbishop Alascus Primate of Polonia.
AMong the ancient Latin Doctors of the Church I scarce think any other, whose
whole lucubrations are extant, more worthy then S Ambrose; and I would have
this to be thought spoken from my heart, and without the contumely of any
other of the ancient Fathers. Let S. Hierom be more skillful in the tongues,
and Scriptures, let Hilarie use a more elaborate phrase, let Augustine be more
subtle, and witty in undoing the knots of hard questions; let it be granted
also others to have excelled every one in his peculiar gifts, but whom will thou give me, who handles the holy Writ with the like synceritie, who has
more cautiously avoided suspected opinions, who so every where behaveth
himself like a Christian Bishop, who so breaks out his fatherly bowels of
affection, who has joined together the great authority of a Prelate with so
great mansuetude and modesty? Every where thou may clearly perceive him to
be affected, and to have a lively feeling of what he speaks. In his speech
there is a certain modest, and pious pleasantness, and an acceptable
civility, he is such that not unjustly thou may call him the mellifluous
Doctor. According to his name, derived from Ambrosia, does food truly heavenly
flow from him, and he is truly named Ambrosius, that is immortal, not only
with Christ, but among men.

His further Testimony.
AS the singular integrity of this man joined with his great constancy, and
mansuetude brought to pass, that he did neither give place yearly to omit
the due execution of his office, to Regal dignity, nor submit himself to the
improbity of the evil minded, but was acceptable, and had in venerable regard
even with strangers, and with such as bare him little good will: so no man's
writings at any time were in more fame, reverend esteem, and in more men's
hands, subject to less envy then his. Some others labors were long before
they got any credit; some spent their time in the study of emulation, the
travels of very many did utterly intercide and perish. But why it was otherwise
with Ambrose, I deem the chief cause to be a certain moderation in all his
writings: yet not such wherein he is forgetful to reprove the vices of men,
but remembering therein what belonged to Christian mansuetude and mildness.
Thou may affirm him to grieve much at the enormities of men, but not to be
angry: neither at any time to run out into the least show of levity, and
ostentation: so that every where thou must acknowledge in him a truly Roman,
yea a true Christian breast. There were some that changed Cyprian into Caprian:
Origin, no not when he was dead, could escape the Hydra of envy; Hierom even
to the last day of his life had bitter contention with his emulators.
Tertullian had perished first by depravation, afterward by lying in the dust,
and want of using, if Rhenanus had not restored him again to the light. The
like had happened to Irenaeus, so worthy an author, to have been unworthily
lost. But there is no man, no not among the Heretics themselves, that makes
not honorable mention of S. Ambrose. Such was his authority, so great his name
while he was living, that the like has not befallen others, no not in respect
of their works of greatest worth, which commonly then were in most esteem,
when their bodies were consumed into dust.

S. Augustines further testimony against Julian Pelagian lib. 1.
SEd audi alium excellentem Dei Dispensatorem, etc. But hear thou another
excellent dispenser of the mysteries of GOD, whom I reverence as a father (for
he has begotten me in Christ Jesus by the power of the Gospel, and of him
being the minister of Christ I have received the laver of regeneration) I say
that renowned Ambrose of blessed memory, of whose powerful spirit of grace,
constancy, labors, dangers, as well in practice, as in speech for the
maintenance of the Catholic faith I have both had in mine own knowledge, and
experience just trial, and also the whole Roman Monarchy does publish the
same abroad with me to all Nations, as undoubtedly true.

An illustration of the annexed, and here infolded tree concerning his order of
writing.
Wherein may be seen, that S. Ambrose in these three books of his Offices
performs, what true prudence requires for the fit direction of the virtues
about their media: first consulting, and setting down truly what belongs to
them which is invention; secondly, selecting such as are agreeable to the
intended end, which is judgment; thirdly, using forcible inducements to draw
to action, which is persuasion. Aristotle's method in his morals is analyticall,
proceeding in circular-wise, and so accounted the perfectest: namely beginning
from the total, and ending the whole ergasie, or tractate with it. Cicero and
Gellius mention two sorts, one exotericall, which is in common, and civil use,
the other acroamaticall more accurate, which belongs not to Ethics, but to
exquisite demonstration and Mathematics. In the former are sufficient
arguments for probability, such does our author S. Ambrose here follow, not the
other. Office, for that it generally pertains to all men, and therefore being
an act, or duty belonging to every man's person, has its foundation from
honesty accompanied with decency and utility. Honesty in like manner with those
associates, is the root, from which the four Cardinal virtues, prudence,
justice, temperance, fortitude with all their retinue, grow, the Pillar, on
which they lean, that which concurreth with their Comportment, that which
makes up their complement, that which obtains, it self first flowing, and
daily assisted from the divine hand of God, true beatitude, and an ever-blessed
life. It is the order rather of nature, which he observes then of art rather
Rhetorical, and persuasive, then logical, and compulsive by force of reason,
notwithstanding more powerful: because the proofs are impregnable, as deduced
out of the irrefragable authority of the book of God, and that most
frequently, and the three fold cable is not easily infringed. The efficient
cause of all, that is of Office, honesty, virtue, is God; honesty the formal
of her two associates, decency and utility, with the four Cardinals their
integrall subjective, potentiall parts, the material man, the final the Lords
honor, the motive holy presidents, and precepts with invincible reasons.
Fostering of friendship is the upshot of all: and that not without special
cause, for that Christian friendship in the inviolable Communion of Saints,
which is the sweetest on earth opens the bowels, and in the inseparable union
by the reconcilement of Christ to the Father of all comfort, acquireth that
love, which is the bond of perfection.

An Introduction taken out of this our Fathers book of Paradise, and third
chapter. What succors the soul, which is figured by Paradise, has in
suffering of dangers; For by the fountain there, divided into four rivers,
the four Cardinal virtues are expressed.
PAradise is a certain fertile ground, that is, a fruitful soul planted in
Eden, that is, in a certain pleasant place for exercise and recreation, in
which the soul takes her solace and delight. Also (...) which is the mind, is
as Adam, the sense likewise is as Evah. And lest thou might have something
to object against the infirmity of nature, or against her miserable condition,
as too too obnoxious to the dint of dangers, consider what succors this soul
has to sustain and support her in this her estate. There was a Fountain
which did water Paradise: what Fountain was it, but the Lord Jesus, the
Fountain of eternal life, like as is the Father? Because it is written Psalm.
6.9.
with thee is the fountain of life; and moreover John 7.38.
out of his belly shall flow even rivers of water of life. Both the Fountain
is red, Legitur.
and the River is red, which waters the fruitful wood of Paradise bringing
forth increase to eternal life. This Genesis 2.10.11.12.
fountain is divided into four heads, Pishon, Tigris, Euphrates. But as the
wisdom of God is called in the Gospel the fountain of life, the fountain of
John 7.37.38.
spiritual grace, if any man thirst let him come unto me, and drink; and in
the Prophet Prove. 5.15. and 9.5.
come eat of the bread, and drink of the wine that I have drawn: so is it
the fountain of all virtues, which direct our course to everlasting life, the
chief whereof, and upon the which the rest depend, are prudence, temperance,
fortitude, and justice. The Lord is as the fountain coming out of Eden, the
soul as Paradise; as those four Rivers watering the same. Pishon is Wisdom,
and therefore it has good gold, shining Carbuncle, green Praefertur gemmis
viridantibus. Chrysoprasus, porri succum and ipsa referens Plin. 37. cap. 8.
Vnde color prasinus: A leeke green color: the stone is such (...), rare, and
precious Rev. 21.20. Exo. 28.18. Hebr. Nophec Hiero. in Es. 45.12. relegat ad
Epiph.
Prasius, precious Pearl, the Onix stone; for we oftentimes take Zach. 6.11.
and 4.2. and 13.9. Rev. 1.12. Ps. 45.9.
gold for wise inventions, hence the Lord by the Dani. 11.43. Zach. 14.14.
Ezech 21.26. Platoes golden and silver wits, etc. Like as Es. 3.1. by bread
meant the prudent, and so by crown of glory and diadem of beauty, Es 28.5.
consisting of gold, the same as the consequent words make evident, v. 6.
Prophet; I have given them gold and silver; and Psalm. 68.13.
David of the wise, though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as
the wings of a Dove that is covered with silver, and whose feathers are like
yellow gold. It has the Carbuncle, for prudence is as bright sparkles kindling
the light of the soul, and therefore as the orient Onix, and the precious
Pearl; for what more precious then Wisdom, and what more green and
flourishing then it? and like to the Prasius jasper or Smaragdus.
Emeraud. According to the Hebrews it is called feoison, that is a chaining of
the mouth flowing about Lydia, and many other countries, yea all countries for
prudence is not straight and narrow, but large, and rich of commodities. This
Pishon the same which Pasis, and Pasitigris, the channel of Euphrates called
Basilius, this falling into the red sea was a neighbor to the Israelites.
river is frequented of many, as appears most of all in Christ's coming, his
wellhead flowing in. Therefore it is the prime, and first of the four. The
second is Nilus. Rameses a city of Goshen, fit for pasture bordered upon it.
From thence the Israelites departed out of Egypt, and then when they were about
the celebrating of the Passover and so passed forth with their loins girded,
Exodus 12.1.11.37.
Gihon, by which the commandment was given to the children of Israel, when
they were in Egypt: to depart with their loins girded, which betokens
temperance. It signifies a gaping of the earth. As the earth therefore gaping
swalloweth up whatsoever ordure, and off-scowring: so does temperance abolish
whatsoever inordinate lusts of the body. It compasses about the whole land of
Ab (...) cremo, and (...) of a burnt countenance, (...) stultus, Maurus, and
Mauritaria a (...) quod est nigrum. Hebr. Chus as Cusi 2 Samuel 18.21. black.
Saul so called in the title of Psalm. 7. because he changed not his heart from
the hatred of David, but remained as unchangeable therein, as the skin of the
Ethiopian.
Ethiopia, which is by interpretation vile. What so like Ethiopia black with
the blackness of sin? The third is Tigris is a Persian word signifying
swift, and is called also Tiglah, sharp or straight Josephus In the fountain
Pliny affirms it to be termed Diglito, Hidelito, and meeting after it has
made many channels Pasitigris or Pisitigris. Munster fetches Hiddekel from the
root Hadal, signifying sometimes not desijt, but deseruit,
Tigris, which goes opposite to Ashur, where prevaricating Israel was held
under captivity. This is the swiftest of all. The Ashur of Ashri Hebr. beatus.
Assyrians by interpretation, directors inhabit upon it. He which directing
his course to higher projects, and by the fortitude of his mind captivating his
vices, he is in estimation as this river. Fortitude by his strong, and swift
course repulseth and beats back the obstacles, neither can any obstructions
debar his passage. For courage will go through with her work, and scorns
whatsoever confronting encounter. The fourth is Euphrates, which in English is
fecundity, and abundance of fruits, carrying before it a certain flagge, or
ensign of Justice feeding with comfortable hope every soul. For no virtue
does flow with more plenty, and store of all good fruits then does justice and
equity. For it seeks to profit others above it self, and neglecting her own
in private, prefers the public, and common emolument and good. The most
deem Euphrates to be deduced (...), that is to say Perath Hebr. which is
Euphrates, seems to come from parash expandere, and pison from pasah crescere.
rejoicing, because mankind rejoices in nothing more then in justice and
equity. But the cause why the regions, and passages of the other rivers are
described, and not of this, is according to the received opinion, for that the
water hereof is affirmed to be vital, and is of a fostering and augmenting
nature. Whence the Sages of the Hebrews, and Assyrians have termed it Auxe: It
runs in a contrary course, and is the confluence of other waters; For where
prudence is, there is malice; where fortitude there is anger; where temperance,
there is intemperance, for the most part, or other vices: but where is justice,
there is a confluence of the sweet land and fresh waters, and a concordancy of
all the rest of the virtues stripped of all their repugnant vices. In respect
therefore of the way of her journey, and channel she is unknown; for justice
is no piece of any other virtues, but is complete of her self, and the mother
of them all.

A TREE, SHADOWING THE METHOD OF St. AMBROSE in these three Books: the root of
office, of Virtue, of its four Cardinals, together with their branches, ruins,
or extremes, subject, top, or upshot, being therein discovered.
Subject. Ruin, or extreme Root, or foundation. Branches. Ruin, or extreme.
Top, or Upshot. A Christian man subject of Office generally, of honesty with
her associats, and of all virtues, more principally a Bishop, l. 1. c. 1. and
in Supply, and c. 50. more particularly taciturnitie, with patience in a
Christian, l. 1. c. 10. as in anger, l. 1. c. 3. in whatsoever affections
stirred up, l. 1. c. 4. in provocations, l. 1. c. 6. Of Justice. Prodigality.
l. 2. c. 21.

Of Fortitude. Flattery. l. 1. C. 42.

God primarie l. 1. c. 13.

Rewarder l. 1. c. 16.

Of Office, l. 1. c. 8. 9. 11. 1.

Honesty secondarie l. 3. c. 5. 8. 45. 46. l. 2. c. 4.

With comeliness. l. 1. c. 10. 22. 44 45. 47. with Utility, l. 2. c. 6. l. 3.
c. 2. 3.

God primarie of virtue in general, l. 1. c. 1. Introduction and l. 1. c. 25.
27. l. 2. c. 9.

Honesty with comeliness, and Utility secondarie, whereof it consists.

God primanrie of the four Cardinals.

Honesty with comeliness, and utilitie secondarie, viz. of prudence, whereof
God the fountain, l. 1. c. 28. l. 2. c. 13. 14. 19. 20.

Of Justice l. 1. c. 28. 29. l. 2. c. 22. 23.

Of Fortitude l. 1. c. 34. 35. 36. 38. 39. 40. 41. 49. l. 3. c. 15.

Of Temperance l. 1. c. 42. 43. l. 2. cap. 16.

Of Prudence. Judgment to discern what is right l. 1. cap. 9.

Searching out truth l. 1. c. 26.

Hearing counsel of many l. 2. c. 8. 11. 17.

Of Justice. Pity l. 2. c. 21.

Liberality l. 1. c. 32. l. 2. c. 16. l. 3. c. 6.

Faith l. 3. c. 10.

Fidelity l. 3. c. 13.

Beneficence l. 1. c. 30. 31. l. 3. c. 3.

Benevolence l. 1. c. 32. 33. 34

Benignity l. 2. c. 27.

Hospitality l. 3. c. 21.

Of Fortitude: patience l. 1. c. 37.

Suffering injury l. 1. c. 48.

Afflictions l. 2. c. 4.

God takes away offense therein l. 1. c. 15.

Of temperance; chastity l. 3. c. 13.

Verecundie l. 1. c. 17.

Friendship joined with these in affinity l. 3. c. 16.

Of virtue, in general. Vice, l. 3, c. 20.

Of prudence in giving good counsel, taking evil counsel, l. 1. c. 12. 18.

Of Justice. Avarice, l. 3. c. 11. l. 2. c. 27. l. 3. c. 9.

Fraud, l. 3. c. 9. 19. 11.

Calumny l. 3. c. 3.

Of Fortitude: ambition, l. 2. c. 24. 42.

Popularitie, l. 2. c. 21.

Of temperance: Intemperance l. 1. c. 19. in Supply, and c. 22. Anger, l. 1.
c. 21. 48. Jests, l. 1. c. 23.

Appetite inordinate, l. 1. c. 24.

Vanity, l. 1. c. 39.

Blessedness whereof God the author, lib. 1. cap. 15. gotten by honesty, l. 2.
c. 1.

Variety of opinions concerning it, l. 2. c. 3. all vanish away through the
light of the Gospel, l. 2. c. 3.

Worldly supposed good things are enemies to it, l. 2. c. 5.

To be estimated by internal gifts, l. 1. c. 12.

Gotten by adversity. l. 2. c. 4.



CHRISTIAN OFFICES CRYSTAL GLASS. OR St. Ambrose Bishop of Millan his Offices.
Book I.
CHAPTER. I. The proper office belonging to a Bishop is to teach the people.
I Suppose it shall not seem a matter of arrogance, if I among the the rest as
a son shall bear an affection to teach, when the Master himself of humility
has said, Psalm. 34.11.
Come ye sons and hearken to me, J will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Wherein we may see both the humility, and grace of his modesty. For in
saying, the fear of the Lord, which seems to be common to all, he has
expressed a notable document of modesty. And notwithstanding since the fear
of the Lord it self is the beginning of wisdom, and worker of blessedness
(because Psalm. 112.1.
they are blessed that fear the Lord) he has modestly signified himself to
be a teacher how wisdom should be learned, and an opener of the way to
obtain blessedness. And we who are careful to imitate his modesty, and no
Ier. 23.22. Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.4.
usurpers in [this duty of] conferring of grace, such things as the spirit of
wisdom poured on him, the same things being manifested by him to us, and by
experience, and examples proved to be true, we deliver to you as to children:
since now we cannot avoid the duty of teaching, which (though we indevoure to
avoid it) the 1 Cor. 9.16. and 4.2. 1 Timothy 4.15. and 2 Timothy 4.2. with stirring
up. 2 Timothy 1.6. the manner Tit. 2.7.
necessity of our ministry has cast upon us. For God has given Ephesians. 4.11.
some to be Apostles, some Prophets, other Evangelists but other pastors. I
do not therefore challenge to my self the glory of the Apostles; For who do
this unless they whom the Son of God himself has chosen? Not the grace of
the Prophets, not the power of the Evangelists, not the circumspection of
pastors, but only I desire to attain an intention, and diligence about the
Ephesians. 5.17. and 4.12. (...). John 5.39. (...).
divine Scriptures. This last the Ephesians. 4.11. (...) teacher.
Apostle has placed among the offices of the Saints, and the selfsame is
that I endeavor to gain by my study in teaching others. For there is one true
Minister, Math. 23.8. (...).
who alone never learned what he taught all men; For men learned before, what
they may teach and do receive from him, that they deliver to others. Which
thing never befell me; For being pulled away from the tribunal, and Calvin
reads otherwise then our book. viz. ab administrationis infulis sacerdotum.
Hence Infularus protomysta, a mitred Archbishop, howbeit it is used also for
the Imperial ornaments, ut apud Am. Marc Infulae principatus.
state of administration of justice to the priesthood, I begin to teach you
what I my self had not learned. Therefore it so came to pass, that I in the
former place began to Hic est juxta proverbium, In dolio discere artem figuli
vel simul et semel discere and docere.
teach, then to Redemptor noster cum caeli sit conditor, ante triennale tempus
in terra Magister noluit fieri hominum, Gregor Magn.
learn: Because I had no leisure to learn before, I must of necessity both
learn and teach together. And albeit every one has profited, yet there is no
man while he lives, but needs to be Optabile est, and mihi praeclarum vsque
ad ultimum discere senectutem: quoniam nulla aetas ad perdiscendum sufficere
potest. Greg. Nazian. in Apologet.
taught.

CHAP. II. By silence we fly danger, and learn to speak well.
But what is that which we ought to learn first in comparison of other
things? Is it not to learn to be silent, that thereby I may be able so to
speak, that mine own voice do not first condemn me, before another man's
absolve me? For it is written, by thy words thou shall be Math. 12.37.
condemned. A poor matter therefore is it, that thou should incur the
peril of condemnation by speaking unadvisedly, when by silence thou may
remain more secure. I have seen very many by speaking, scarce any one by
keeping silence fall into sin. And therefore it is an harder thing to know
how to be silent, then how to speak. I see in most men speech when which way
to hold their peace they are to seek. It is a rare thing for any one to
contain himself, though it availes him nothing to speak. He is wise
therefore that has wisdom to forbear words. The wisdom of God has said it;
The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know to
administer a word in due Jsaiah 50.4.
season. He is worthily therefore reputed wise that has received from the
Lord that gift opportunely to express himself. To which purpose the son of
Sirach, a wise man will first spy his Eccles. 20.7. (...). vsque ad tempus.
opportunity before he open his mouth. Therefore the Saints of the Lord,
because they understood, that the voice of man for the most part is the
messenger of sin, and the speech of man the beginning of error, loved
taciturnity. Beside the righteous servant of God says, I will keep my Psalm.
39.1
ways that I offend not in my tongue. For he knew, and had read that it was
of divine Psalm. 39.2. Ier. 9.3. we read it concerning evil tongues of others.
Psalm. 64.9.
protection for a man to be hid from the whip of his own Exodus 22. Math.
12.32.34.36.37. and 15.18.19.
tongue, and from the griping of the testimony of his own John 3.20. Es. 57.20.
and 48.22.
conscience; For we are smitten with the secret upbraiding of our thoughts, and
judgment Romans 2.15.
of conscience. We are smitten with the stroke of our voice, when we speak
those things by the sound whereof the heart is galled, and the Prove. 18.14.
spirit wounded. And who is he that has his heart clean from the stinking
sink of sin, or that belcheth not out the corruption thereof with his
tongue? Therefore because he knew no man to be able to keep his mouth chaste
from the uncleanness of speech, he by silence imposed upon himself the law of
innocence, that he might decline the fault by holding his peace, which in
speaking he might hardly be able to shake off. Let us hear therefore the
Master of caution, I said Psalm. 39.1. and 62.1. and 141.3.
I will take diligent heed to my ways. That is, by the silent precept of
inward thought, I have enjoined my self as under a Linguae obseravi claustra
fraeno, Buch.
bitte a restraint to my ways. Some ways there be, which we ought to follow,
some that we ought to watch over: to follow the ways of God, to watch over our
own lest they be ordered amiss. But thou shall be able to watch over thine
own in due sort, if thou speak not suddenly, nor unadvisedly. The law says
Deuteronomy. 6.4.
hear O Israel the Lord thy God: It says not speak thou, but hear thou.
Therefore Evah fell, because she spoke that to her husband, which she never
heard of the Lord her God. The first voice of God says to thee hear thou. If
thou hear thou walk accordingly, and if thou have fallen forthwith thou
redressest thy fault. For, wherewith shall Vis verbi divini. Psalm. 161.9.
a young man redress his way, but by taking heed to the word of the Lord.
Wherefore in the first place hold thy peace, and hear, and then shall thou not
offend with thy tongue. A grievous evil, that any one should be condemned by
his own mouth. For if every one for every idle word (...) per crasin (...),
ociosum, quod negotio vacuum,
that he shall speak shall give give account; how much more heavily, and
fearfully for every word, of impurity, and uncleanness? For the words of
precipitation (that is thrown forth rashly out of an headstrong, and
incorrigible passion, as those of blasphemy) are more grievous in the sight of
God, then such as are superfluously vented forth. Therefore if for every
frivolous and vain word a reckoning is required, how much more is there a
payment laid out for what is impiously and ungodly spoken?

CHAP. III. Silence to be moderated, and to be used in the time of anger.
WHat then? ought we to be dumb? Not so. For there is a time to keep Eccles.
3.7.
silence, and a time to speak. Again, if we shall give account for every idle
word, look we to it lest we be constrained also to do it for all idle and
unprofitable silence. For there is a great and difficult silence, such as was
that of Susanna, History of Susanna. v. 40.
who prevailed more in extreme danger by holding her peace, then if she had
been free of speech. For in the case of her innocence she opened not her mouth
to men, but cried to God. v. 43:
Neither could there be any better declaration of her chastity among men then
her silence. Her conscience spoke where her voice was not heard, and what
needed she seek the judgment of men, when she had the testimony of the Lord
to plead for her? Therefore she would be absolved by him whom she knew could by
no means be deceived. The Lord himself in the Luke 23.9. Math. 26.63. and
27.14. Ex his locis patet Christum siluisse coram Pilato, Herod, Pontifice
penes quos solum erat judicandi potestas. Foretold Es. 53.7. Act. 8.32.
Gospel by holding his peace wrought our salvation. David did Psalm. 39.2. His
zeal caused him to speak. The greatness of his pain v. 12. Elihus fullness
of matter, Job 32.28. But when we ought to be silent 1. David's practice is a
notable document, 2 Samuel 16.5 2. It ought to be when there is just cause of
complaint, Job 31.34. 3. The end of it is to receive instruction, Job 6.24.
not bind himself to perpetual silence, but to a perpetual watch. Let us
therefore keep a watch over our heart, let us keep a watch over our mouth.
For both is written here, that we keep it over our mouth; Elsewhere thou art
bidden to keep thine heart with all Prove. 4.23. Ephesians. 4.26.
diligence. If David kept it wilt not thou keep it? If Esaias Es. 6.5.
had polluted lips, who said, Woe is me I am a man of polluted lips. If
the Prophet of the Lord had unclean lips, how should we have clean? And to
whom is it written but to every one of us, Ecclus. 28.24.
hedge thy possession with thorns, bind up thy silver and gold, and weigh thy
words in a balance, make a door, and a bar for thy mouth? Thy possession is
thy mind, thy gold is thine heart, thy silver is thy speech. The words of the
Lord are Psalm. 12.6.
pure words as the silver tried in a furnace of earth fined seven times. A good
possession likewise is where is a good mind. Lastly, there is a precious
possession where is a man unpolluted; Hedge thou therefore this possession,
trench it round with godly thoughts, fence it with godly cares, lest the
unreasonable passions of the body rush in upon it, lest noisome motions invade
it, lest the passengers spoil the vintage. Take heed to the inward man, do
not neglect it, and loathe it as a thing of naught, because it is a precious
possession. And worthily precious, because the fruit thereof is not fading, and
temporary but stable and steadfast, bringing eternal salvation. Husband Break
up your fallow ground, and sow no longer among the thorns, Ier. 4.4.
well thy possession, that thou may have thy tillage prepared, bind up thy
speech that it be not luxurious, that it be not lascivious, and lest by much
talk it rake into thy bosom many sins, let it be with restraint, and held
strongly within the banks. An overflowing river soon gathers dirt. Bind up
what thou conceivest, let it not be loose, and dropping out, lest it be said
of Es. 1.6. Non est malagma ponere in our author, in the vulgar translation
curata (referring it to Plaga before) medicamine. Whereby we may see the
translation which he used was another: yet in neither is the Hebrew word zora
expressed, which seems to be as much in sense as mazor percussio vulneris,
and therefore rendered by Arias Montanus compressa sunt, by Tremel. and Iun.
exprimuntur.
thee thou art not wrapped or bound up, nor made supple with oil, nor Psalm.
4.4. (...) iuxta Sept. Hebr. rigzu of rugaz signifying to tremble with fear,
or anger, meaning tremble, or be angry against your selves in respect of your
sins, 2 Cor. 1.11.
cured by medicine of thy swelling tumors. Sobriety of mind has its raines
with which it is guided and governed. Set a door before thy lips, that they
may be shut when they ought, and sealed up with all diligence, lest when thou
art provoked thou break out with thy voice into anger, and so rendrest reproach
for reproach. Thou have heard it read to day, n be angry and sin not.
Therefore if we be angry, because a natural affection over which we have not
power, let us beware lest evil speech proceed from us, that we fall not into
sin. Let thy words be under the yoke, and balance, that is, in humility,
and measure, and so thy tongue may be made subject to thy mind; Let it be
restrained with the bonds of the bitte, let it have its coercive curbs whereby
it may be checked at thy pleasure; Let no speech proceed from thee until it
be exactly tried according to true measure in the scales of justice, that thus
may be found soundness in the sense, weight in the sentence, and in the words
discretion.

CHAP. IIII. Let not affection, but reason draw us to speak. For we following
our affections, the invisible enemy lies in wait, and winding himself into
our speech insnares us.
THese things if any one observe he thereby becomes meek, gentle, and modest.
For in watching over his heart, and bridling his tongue, neither speaking
until demand be made, until due examination first used what is to be spoken,
what is not to be spoken, and mature consideration how it may best fit the
time, place, and persons, is modesty, gentleness, and patience undoubtedly
exercised by him: yet so far forth that out of his indignation and anger, he
break not out into speech, he show no token of passion, no flame of heat, no
prick of fury in his words: Lastly, so that his outside of speech, which ought
to commend his inside, do not bewray and lay open some vice residing in his
manners: For then especially the adversary lies in wait to entangle, when
he sees some passions stirred up in us, then he puts fire to the
touchwood, every way has his wiles in a readiness; Where not without cause
(as ye have read to day) the Prophet says, because he has delivered thee
from the snare of the hunter, and from that word of Psalm. 91.3. Sept. (...)
Heb. middeber chavoth of chavah a grievous pestilence.
asperitie. Symmachus has called it the word of irritation, others of
perturbation. The snare of the adversary is our speech, but our speech it self
likewise is no less an adversary to us. We speak for the most part what the
enemy catches before it fall to the ground, and wounds us as it were with
our own sword. How much more tolerable is it for us to perish with another
sword then with our own? The adversary therefore is an espiall into our
armorie, and sharpeneth and shakes together his own darts. If he shall see
that we are moved he fasteneth his sting, that he may blow the coals of
garboiles. If I shall let slip an unseemly word he draws his net, and
incloseth that in. Sometimes he lays for me the possibility of revenge, that
while I desire the same, as one overhasty upon hot blood, I may catch my self
in the trap, and work mine own downfall. Wherefore whosoever perceives this
adversary to be present, he ought much more carefully to keep centinell here
in this quarter, where the tongue is more then half quartermaster, that so
being barred from his entrance, he may the better be beaten off from his
harbor. But alas! how few be they that discern this invisible enemy?

CHAP. V. That when carnal enemies instigated by Satan provoke us to
reviling, we ought to overcome them by patience. David's example suffering the
railing of 2 Samuel 16.5.
Shimei is inferred as a proof hereof.
But he also is to be shunned which is visible whosoever he be that
provokes, whosoever he be that inciteth, whosoever he be that exaspereth,
whosoever he be that gives the first breath, that suggesteth the first blast
to kindle the coals to luxury, and lustfulnesse. When some one therefore does
rail at us, does vex, provoke to violence, stir up to wrath, then let us
exercise silence; then let us not be ashamed to be dumb. For he is a very
sinful wretch, that provoking, that offering injury is desirous therein to
make us like himself. To shut up the matter if thou hold thy peace, if thou
seem not to regard whatsoever he speaks, he is wont to say, why art thou
mute? speak if thou dare? but thou dare not, thou art put to a nonplus, I
have made thee lose thy tongue; If therefore thou be silent he is more
molested, and ready to break with anger, because he thinks himself overcome,
skorned, deluded, and contemned. If thou answerest again, he thinks himself
a better man then thou, because he finds thee such an one as himself. If
thou forbear it shall be said, that fellow reviled this man, but he despised
it. If thou rendrest reproach for reproach, it shall be said, that both of them
reproched each other. And so neither of you are requited, but both condemned.
Therefore this is the study of an evil man to provoke me to the like words,
to the like deeds to his own. But it is the part of a just man to pass by
them, to say nothing, to retain the fruit of a good conscience, to commit more
to the judgment of good men, then to the insolency of any accuser, and to
content himself without any further respect to the gravitie of his own
carriage; This is to abstain from good Psalm. 38.2.
words; Because he is guilty to himself of no evil, he ought not to be moved
with false accusations: neither to esteem the weight of another contumely
above his own due testimony. This he may do, and yet contain himself
within the bounds of humility. But if he would not seem thus far to be
humbled, he pondereth these things in his mind, and so speaks to himself.
This man of set purpose, that my person may be had in contempt speaks such
things against me to my face, as if I were not able once to open my mouth by
way of replication. Why may not I in like manner produce against him what may
gall him? This man for the nonce how does he me injury, as if there were not
manhood in me, as if I were not able to avenge my self? How grievous things
does he lay to my charge, as if I could not find out matter of greater
aggrievance against him? He which uses any such speech, or nourishes any such
thought, is not a meek and humble minded man, is not free, but troubled with a
dangerous tentation; For the tempter it is that thus turmoileth his thoughts,
that foisteth into his pate such an opinion. That evil spirit in these
streights, causes commonly some bad companion to close with him that may buzze
such things in his ears; But thou being fixed upon the rock, stand fast in
thy resolution of forbearance. If a servant upbraid, he that is righteous is
silent. If he that is weak breaks out into contumely, the righteous opens
not his mouth. If a poor man come with a wrongful complaint, the righteous is
nothing moved to make answer. These be the weapons of the just in yielding to
overcome, in flying to be made Lords of the field. No otherwise then those
skillful The Parthians whose manner was to shoot flying away.
darters who by recoyling are wont to gain the day, and by running away to
pierce the pursuer with sorer strokes.

CHAP. VI. The example of David's See the great difference between the
Christian philosophy here, and that Ethnic in Homer, advised even by Minerva
her self, (...) Iliad. lib. 1.
patience.
FOR what need is there that we be moved when we hear contumelies? Why do
we not imitate him who says, I was dumb, I was Psalm. 29.2. (...).
humbled, and I was silent even from good words. Has David said this only, and
has he not done the same? yea he has done it also. For when Shemei railed on
him he held his peace, and though he had many armed men about him, yet did he
not retort ought savouring of revenge, yea repelled with the high courage of a
patient spirit the instigation of the son of Servia. He went therefore as
one dumb, and humbled to the dust he went as one mute and not moved at all, no
not with the inexpiable infamy of a Against God only had he sinned, and
belonged to Nathan not to him to reprove it, and because purged before with the
tears of repentance, Psalm. 51.17. and cleansed with hysop in the blood of the
Lamb not now to be objected.
murderer, and man of blood, howbeit he knew himself to be disposed in his
own affection to meekness. He was not therefore moved with whatsoever
revilements, for that a conscious acknowledgment of his other good works did
abound in his meditations. Therefore he which is soon moved with injury,
while he would show that he has not deserved it, makes himself seem worthy
of contumely; Wherefore he is better that contemns injury, then he that
grieveth, and groaneth under it. For he which contemns it, as if he felt it
not, disdaineth at it: but he which grieveth thereat is so wrung, and wrath
with it, as if he felt some unsupportable weight lying upon him.

CHAP. VII. That Psalm 39. is admirable, not only for the commendation of
silence, but also for the contempt of humane things.
NEither writing to ye my sons have I used the proeme of this Psalm which
the Prophet gave to be sung to holy Jeduthun, without due consideration. I my
self being delighted with the profound sense, and worthy sentences of the same
do persuade you to embrace it with all care. For we have observed by those
things which we have briefly touched, both the patience required in keeping
silence, and the opportunity in speaking, and in the latter parts the contempt
of riches, which be the chief grounds of virtues, to be taught as arising from
this psalm. S. Ambroses motive to write of Offices, was his meditations upon
Psalm 39.
While therefore I considered with my self upon the contents of this psalm,
it thereupon entered into my mind to write concerning offices. Of the which
argument also, if certain studying philosophy have written, as Panaetius and
his son among the Greeks, Tullio among the Latins. I thought it nothing out
of our element and study of Divinity, for my self in like manner to write
thereof. And as Tully undertook the same for the instruction of his son, so
do I, my sons, for your better information. Neither do I less love you
whom I have begotten in the Gospel, then if I had received you from God in the
holy bond of wedlock. For nature is not a more vehement motive to love then
grace. Verily we ought more to love them whom we believe shall be ever with us,
then those who shall remain only with us in this world. Those natural
children are oftentimes such as do degenerate and bring discredit upon their
father: you we have made special choice of, that our love might be
unchangeable. Therefore they are beloved of necessity, which is not a fit
mistress, and of continuance enough for everlasting love: you in judgment,
whereby a great weight to enforce love, is laid upon the neck of charity it
self to approve those whom thou love, and to love those whom thou have
chosen.

CHAP. VIII. That the name of Office is not only in frequent use with the
Philosophers, but also with the Divines.
WHerefore seeing the Here by translation the person is taken for the quality
of the mind.
persons do agree (as being both lovers of wisdom) let us see whether the
subject it self that is to write of offices, be a thing sitting only for the
Schools, and not found also answerable to the sacred Scriptures. When we went
on fairly in reading the Gospel today (as it were of purpose to exhort us to
write) the holy Ghost has offered readily to our hands for confirmation of the
point that Office may be said to be a matter within the lists of our calling.
For it came to pass, says he, when Zachary the Priest was stricken dumb in
the Temple, and could not speak after the days of his Luke 1.23. (...).
Office were fulfilled, he departed to his own house. We read therefore that
we may treat of Office: Neither does reason disavouch it seeing that officium
is thought to be derived ab efficiendo as if it were efficium that is a
performance. Or truly, that in office thou may do that which may Officium
quod nulli. officiat.
offend none, and profit all men.

CHAP. IX. The division of office and whence Christians take their measure for
the estimation of that is honest, and that is profitable.
But the Philosophers have thought Offices to be deduced from that which is
honest, and that which is profitable, and of two that to be chosen which is the
better. If we meet with two things honest, and two things profitable, then
they would that to be inquired after which is more honest, and which is more
profitable. First therefore office is divided into three parts, into that which
is honest, into that which is profitable, and into the choice of that which is
the better of the two. Beside they have divided these three into five kinds,
into two things honest, two profitable, and the judgment of choosing. The
first they say pertaines to the honor and honesty of life. The second to the
commodities, plenty, riches, possessions belonging thereto. Judgment of
election to be under them. So they. But in our measure nothing is comely and
honest, but what goes under the form of future, rather then of present
condition: and we define nothing profitable, but what profits in the cause of
life eternal, A difference between Christian and Ethnic Philosophy, that the
one seeks after the present and secular, the other the future and celestial.
not any thing that serves for present delectation. Neither do we place
commodity in the goods of this life and abundance of riches, but think these
a discommoditie rather if they be not rejected, and to be esteemed a burden to
have them rather then a loss to spend them. The work of our writing therefore
is not superfluous, because we estimate office by another rule then they. They
hold profit to consist in the goods secular, we reckon these for damages:
because he which receives them here as the rich man, is crucified in the life
to come, and he which suffers here as Lazarus, finds comfort there.
Furthermore, they which read not what they have delivered, let them read if
they please what we set down, not looking after a storehouse of words, and
art of speaking, but the simple grace of things.

CHAP. X. Of comeliness, and that the first office is the moderation of the
tongue.
BUT in our writings we have set comeliness in the first room (which in
Greek is (...)) which we are instructed and taught to do when we read
thus, Hebr. leca dumijah thehilla Psalm. 65. tibi silens laus, Treme. Iun. certa
laus (...) a sure praise without contradiction, intimating an orderly, due, and
comely observation thereof, 1 Cor. 14.40.
A song well beseems thee, O God in Sion, or to render it in Greek, (...).
And the Apostle says, speak things that Tit. 2.10. (...)
become wholesome doctrine. And in another place; It became him by whom are all
things, and for whom are all things, seeing that he brought many children to
glory, that he should consecrate the Prince of their salvation through
afflictions. Was Panaetius, was Aristotle, who himself also disputed of office
before David, seeing that Pythagoras himself whom we read to have been more
ancient then Socrates did follow the Prophet David, Hebr. 2.10. (...)
and from him gave the law of silence to his scholars? But Pythagoras that he
might forbid his scholars the use of speaking for five years: David not that
he might diminish the gift of nature, but that he might teach how to keep
watch for the well ordering the speech. The one that he might instruct in not
speaking to speak, the other that in speaking we might rather learn to
speak. For how can there be doctrine without exercise, or proceeding without
use? He that will attain to military discipline is always exercised in
arms, and as one being in a readiness, as it were, does practice before hand
how to handle his weapon, how to order the field, and in resemblance pretends
an enemy, sets him in a sort before him to combat with him, and that he may
grow skillful and strong to shoot, he does either make trial of the force of
his own arms, or avoideth the strokes of his adversaries, and ever goes out
with a watchful eye. He which would govern a ship on the seas, with stern,
or rudder, or drive with oars, does first assay what he is able to do in the
river. They which affect the sweetness of singing, and the excellency of the
voice, strive before by little and little, while they practice to sing, to
raise up their voice. And they which by the strength of the body, and lawful
combat in striving for masteries desire the garland, continuing in the daily
use of wrestling, and hardening their limbs attain to endure labor with
patience; yea nature it self does teach us in little children that they may
learn to speak, how that they muse before hand upon the sounds of words.
Therefore the sound is a way for to stir up, and a school for exercising the
voice. Wherefore such as will learn to speak circumspectly, let them not deny
what belongs to nature, but what belongs to moderation, that let them observe,
no otherwise then as an espiall upon a beacon, let them see to that by
watching, not by sleeping. Every thing by our own private, and domestic
practice receives increase. Therefore David was silent, not always, but for
the time, neither did he spare to answer always, but to the adversary
incensing, to the sinner provoking. And as he has elsewhere, he was as a
deaf Psalm. 38.13. viz. against such as talked wicked things, imagined deceit
continually, went about to do him evil, and to take away his life, v. 12.
man, and heard not, and one dumb not opening his mouth, and because it is
written in another place, Prove. 26.4. he must not be answered according to his
wicked talk, nor consented to in his naughty deeds, but in v. 5. an arrogant
fool ought to be answered.
answer not a fool according to his foolishness, lest thou be made like him.
The first James 3.2. Psalm. 37.30.
Office therefore is moderation in speaking. Hereby the sacrifice of praise is
If in singing psalms thou joynest with the congregation, if to reading
Scriptures and supplications of the Church, thou say, Amen, if to elders
demands thou respectively openest thy mouth.
paid to God, hereby reverence showed when the divine Scriptures are read,
hereby parents honored; I know the most part of men for that cause to be given
to speak, because they are utterly unable to shut their mouths. A wise man
when he has any thing to say, he considers what, to whom, in what place, at
what time he is to speak; In silence therefore, and in speech moderation is
to be respected; And no less in deeds then in words is there Eccles. 3.7.
a mean to be observed. Wherefore it is a fair course every way in office to
keep measure.

CHAPTER XI. Every Office to be in the Majora sunt, vende omnia, minora, non
homicidium facias, etc. Aug. lib. Sermon. sermon. 20^.
middle rank or in Perfection of parts is obedience in uprightnes of heart,
not to some certain, but to all the Commandments of God. Perfection of
degrees, full performance of duty according to the extreme rigor of the law.
perfection (meaning according to the perfection of parts not of degrees.)
But every Office is either in a middle rank or in perfection, which we are
able in like sort for to confirm by authority of the holy Scriptures. For we
have it in the Math. 19.17.
Gospel the Lord to have said; If thou will enter into life keep the
Commandments. The young V. 20. (...).
man answers which? Jesus said to him, thou shall not kill, thou shall not
commit adultery, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness,
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. These are middle Offices, to the
which some thing is wanting. Therefore when the young man had said, all these
things have I observed from my youth, what lack I yet? Jesus replied, If thou will be Ille qui mutavit pro divitijs paupertatem ut fiat perfectus, non in
ipso tempore quo tradidit bona sua pauperibus fiebat omnino perfectus sed ex
illa die incipit speculatio Dei adducere eum ad omnes virtutes Orig. super hunc
locum.
perfect, go sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in heaven: and Deinde addidit and sequere me, ne cuiquam cum haec
fecerit aliquid prodesse existimetur si non sequitur Christum. Aug. Epist. 89.
come and follow me. And before he commanded to love our enemies, to bless
them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, to pray for them that
trouble and persecute us. This we ought to do if we will be perfect as our
heavenly Father is perfect, who makes the Sun to shine upon the good and the
bad, and the rain and dew to make fat the ground of all without difference;
That is a perfect office, which the Graecians call A bringing to that is right.
Of which in the renewment of the person, Bernard, eo perfectiorem quisque se
probat, quo ad majorem tendit perfectionem. And in the precdent Words he
shows how to grow toward it, Nemo perfectus est qui non perfectior esse
appetit.
(...), whereby all things are corrected which might have any slippes. Mercy
likewise is good, which also it self makes perfect, because it imitateth a
perfect Father. Nothing does so much commend a Christian soul as mercy,
chiefly toward the poor that thou judge the right of natures birth common,
which does engender its fruits for all men's use: that what thou have thou
may bestow with a free heart, and a liberal hand to the relief of the
poor made of the same mould, of the same Acts 17.26.
blood, and being thine Is. 58.7. Tanto quisque perfectior est, quanto
perfectius sentit dolores alienos. Greg. Tamen nuditas, and privatio omnium
facultatum non perfectio, sed perfectionis instrumenta sunt, as another ancient
writer has.
own flesh. Thou impartest money, he partaketh life, thou distributest thy
coin, he valueth it as his own corpse, thy penny is his revenew. Moreover, he
recompenceth thee with much more, when he acknowledges himself a debtor to
thee for the preservation of his life. If thou cloathest the naked, thou
clothest thy self with justice; If thou bring the stranger under thy roof;
If thou lodgest the needy, he will procure thee the friendship of the Saints,
and eternal James 2.5. Qui sunt qui habebunt tabernacula aeterna, nisi Sancti
Dei? and qui sunt qui ab ipsis accipiendi sunt in tabernacula aeterna, nisi qui
eorum indigentiae serviunt, and quod eis opus est hilariter administrant? Aug.
in Luc. Sermon. 35.
tabernacles. This is no small favor. Thou sowest things corporal, and
reapest spiritual. Do thou admire the judgment of the Lord upon holy Job?
Admire his virtue who was able to say; I was an eye to the blind, and a foot
to the lame: I was a father to the poor, and his loins have blessed me,
because he was warmed with the fleece of my sheep: The stranger did not lodge
in the street, but I opened my door to him that went by the way. He was
undoubtedly blessed, from whose house the poor never departed with an empty
bosom. Neither is any man more blessed then he that judges Psalm. 41.1.
wisely of the necessity of the poor, much misery of the weak, and needy. In
the day of judgment he shall receive salvation from the Lord, whom he shall
have a Prove. 19.17.
debtor to him for his And contrariwise the merciless shall have him a debtor
for judgment, James 2:13. The debt on the Lords part for mercy extended, when
it is no more then a mere duty, must be acknowledged to be of his continual
bounty. For herein as in all other good deeds, the truth of that assertion
clearly appears, Haec est in omnibus sola perfectio suae imperfectionis
cognitio. Hieron. Epist. ad Theod.
mercy.

CHAP. XII. Felicity is not estimated by external, but by internal and
eternal blessings.
But the most part of people are drawn away from the Office of dispensative
mercy, while they imagine that God regards not the actions of men, or that he
is ignorant of what is done in secret, of what remains in the conscience, or
that his judgment is unjust, when they see sinners to abound in wealth, and to
enjoy honor, health, children: but contrariwise the just to live in want,
without honor, without children, in much weakness of body, in much
lamentation. Neither is that a matter lightly to be passed over, when those
three Kings Jobs friends, did therefore pronounce him a sinner, because they
saw him of a rich man to be made poor, of a fruitful father naked of
children pestered with sores, rough with scarres, withered with wounds, from
the soale of the foot to the crown of the head. To whom holy Job puts this
question, Job 21.8.9.
If for my sins I suffer these things, why do the wicked live? But they have
waxed old, and abound in wealth, their seed is established according to their
desire, and in their sight, their houses are peaceable and without fear, and
the rod of God is not upon them. Which when the weak man, and not well
grounded in the truth beholds, he is troubled in his heart, and casts
aside his good indevours. To support this man in his weakness, holy Job makes
this preface; Suffer Job. 21.3.
me to speak, and when I have spoken spare not to deride. For if I be
reproved I am reproved as a man, bear therefore the burden of my speeches; For
I shall speak that I allow not of, but for your reproof I shall produce
unjust speeches. Or in truth because the verse is so; But what is it? Am I
Ibid. v. 4.
reproved of man? That is, man cannot reprove me as transgressing though I be
worthy to be reproved: because ye reprove me not upon evident fault, but
injuriously censure the deserts of mine offenses; He that is weak therefore
when he sees the ungodly flourish through prosperous success, himself
trodden under-foot, says to v. 14.15.
the Lord, depart from me, J will none of thy ways, what profit is there that
we serve him? what benefit that we pray to him? Lo their goods are all in
their own In this their fantasy the wicked thus please themselves.
hands, but as for their wicked works he sees them not. It is commended in
Pluto, because in his policy he has imposed upon him undertaking the adverse
part, namely to dispute against justice, to crave pardon of what he has
spoken, as not approving the same in himself, and to confess, that what he
urged under the person of an opposite, was for the cause of finding out the
truth, and exacter disquisition. The which Tully does so far approve, that
himself in his book De Republica, grows of the same judgment. How much
more ancient is Job then these who first found out this course? Neither did he
think that prefaces ought to be used for the surface of eloquence, but for the
searching out of the truth. Incontinently therefore in the same place loosed
he the knot adjoining that the candle Ibid. 21.17.
of the wicked shall be put out, and their destruction come upon them. God the
teacher of wisdom, and discipline not to be deceived, but to judge righteous
judgment. And therefore the beatitude of every one not to be esteemed
according to outward abundance, but according to the inward conscience, which
discerns between the deserts of the innocent, and the guilty, and is true,
and incorrupt in determining of punishments and rewards. The innocent dies in
the strength of his own simplicity, in abundance according to his own
desire, as one having as it were That is, howsoever it is with him with his
full contentation of heart.
his soul satiate with fatness. But the sinner though he outwardly overflow
with wealth, swim with delights, be sweetened with all manner of perfumes,
and fragrant odours, yet He seems to invert Jobs words, v. 25.
spends his days in the bitterness of his soul, shuts up his last breath
carrying no part of his so many banqueting dishes, no part of his great
substance with him save the This sour sauce to his sweet meat, as he ever
found here: so shall he find, and feel there.
price, and payment of his sins, which only he sweepeth away with him as his
own. Considering these things deny it if thou can, that there is a
remuneration of divine justice? The innocent person remains blessed in his
own conscience, the sinner wretched; The one also loved in his own judgment,
the other guilty; The one replete with joy in his departure out of this life,
the other oppressed with grief. By whom should he be absolved standing
condemned in himself? Tell ye me, says Ihid v. 28.
he, where is the Psalm 73.20. Job. 27.19. Es. 29.7.
protection of his Tabernacles? There shall be found no sign thereof; For the
life of the wicked is as a Psalm 55.20. (...), Sept. Hebr. sheol which notes
generally whatsoever station of the dead, and therefore to be applied sometime
to the grave, sometime to hell by synechdoche according to the argument of the
place. Our author shows immediately following his meaning to be the grave.
dream, he opened his eyes, and his resting place was gone, his delight was
vanished away: howbeit even the very Psalm. 49.14. Heb. Es. 52.20.
rest it self, which the wicked seem to have while they live is in their
grave; For living they descend into their Luke 12.19.
graves. Do thou see the banquet of the sinner? ask his conscience how it is
with him. Is not the sent thereof more noisome then all graves? Thou beholdest
his mirth, admirest this bodily health, his many children and abundance of
wealth. Look thou more narrowly, and thou shall perceive what ulcers, and
botches he bears in his soul, what gaulings, and gripings in his heart; for
what shall I speak of his goods, since thou read that his life rests
wholly upon Rev. 3.17. Laodiceans were rich, because no due examination was
made of themselves. Until which time conscience does not arrest such gay
Gospellers as these were: but these here be arrested strongly, as are all such
whose consciences do accuse them, Romans 2.15. be therein defiled, Tit. 1.15.
or do condemn 1 John 3.20.
them, since thou know, that howbeit he seem to thee rich, yet in his own
knowledge he is a very poor creature, and refels thy judgment of him by his
own verdict? Concerning the multitude Job 21.8.11.
of his children, and feeling of no sorrow, what shall I say, since he
miserably mourns in his own behalf, and judges that hereafter he shall
become childlesse, since also he would not his Luke 16.28.
successors should be followers of his own ways? And no marvel, for the
sinner has Prove. 27.24. Psalm. 123.18. and 109.13.15. and 140.11. and 129.6.
Contrariwise the children of the godly an inheritance, and of continuance,
Psalm, 127.3.
none inheritance. The wicked therefore is his own Sanguis fratris tui clamat
ad me, id est, conscientiae tulipsius criminatione constringit. Ambros. Sermon.
65.
execution, but the just a Psalm. 84.11. and 73.24.
glory and crown of Job. 31.36. Psalm. 112.6.
rejoicing to himself. And the guerdon either of good or evil deeds is
recompensed to them both of Sicut in his quos elegit Deus non opera, sed sides
inchoat meritum, Vt per manus Dei been operentur: sic and in his quos damnat,
infidelitas, and impietas inchoat paenae meritum, ut per ipsum paenam male
operentur, August. in Epist. quadam Proposit. ex Epist. ad Rom Nemo laeditur
nisi a scipso.
themselves.

CHAP. XIII. God, even then, when he is not so thought to do, governs all
things that he has created.
BUT return we to the purpose, lest otherwise we may seem to have passed by
our Chapter 11.
division. Because we have Chapt. 12.
already met with their opinion, who seeing certain wicked rich men living in
pleasure, honor, and authority, when most of the just live in want, and weak
estate, think straight way thus with themselves, surely it is so now, as the
Epicures say, God regards us not: or as the notoriously mischievous route
imagine, that God is ignorant of the actions of men: or if he has knowledge of
all things that then he is an unjust judge, seeing he suffers the good to be
pinched with penury, the bad to be glutted with plenty. Neither was it a
superfluous excursion, that to such their opinion, who judge them happy, seeing
they think themselves miserable, their own affection secretly suggesting how
it is with them might answer. For I suppose they would more easily give credit
to themselves, bearing in their bosoms the burden of their own evil then to
us. After the performance whereof, I make it no hard piece of work to confute
the rest. And the first assertion of them, which think that God has no care
of the world: as if Aristotle who affirms, that the providence of God
descends down no lower then the Moon. For what workman does neglect the
care of his work? Who does forsake and fail to support that which upon
serious consultation he has framed? If the imposition of government be an
injury to him, for him to fashion it, was a greater: sithence not to have made
any thing was no injustice, but to neglect what thou have once made, is want of
mercy in the highest degree. If so be that these either deny God to be their
Creator, or think themselves to be of no better account then to be numbered
among savage, and brute beasts: what may we say of them, who under this
pretended injury condemn themselves? They themselves aver that God (...)
specto, carefully to look into or of (...) because he runs and passes
through all. Prove. 13.3.11.
goes through all, and all things consist in his power, that his force and
majesty does pierce through all the elements, the earth, the seas, the air,
the fire: and do they think it an injury done to him, if the knowledge of his
divine Majesty do penetrate, and enter into the mind of man, then the which
we have nothing of more price? But the Epicurus.
great Master of these men's profession as a belligod, drunkard, and patron of
all voluptuousness, the Philosophers themselves reputed sober do deride. For
what, shall I speak of the opinion of Aristotle, who holds God to be
contained in his own bounds, and to live in a prescript manner in his
kingdom, no otherwise then the fabulous Poets have feigned, who report the
world to be divided into three, to one the To Jupiter heaven, to Neptune the
sea, and hell to Pluto.
heaven, to another the sea, and to another hell, to have fallen by lot, and
that in a coercive kind of government, and with that caution, that the charge
of each exceed not the limits, lest upon usurpation they fly out into
contention. In like sort therefore he affirms that as God has no care of
the sea, nor of hell, no more has he of the earth. And how do The assertion
of these in respect of providence, as our author lays it out, is worse. For
the Poets assign to their feigned Gods the government of the whole world in
their several regiments, which these deny. If therefore Aristotle with his
scholars the Peripateticks do, as is here alleged, they are doubtless
justly to be blamed. The world to be (...) without beginning, and the
abnegation of particular providence in God, I assure my self, these may be
truly charged with.
they themselves exclude the Poets whom they follow?

CHAP. XIIII. God to pass by nothing, is proved by the testimony of the
Scriptures, and by the example of the Sun, which albeit it be a creature, yet
either by its light, or heat does penetrate all things.
THat now does follow to be resolved, whether, if the care of his work has
overslipped him, whether the knowledge thereof has overslipped him likewise.
Therefore he which planted the ear Psalm. 94.9. Jer. 17.10.
does he not hear? he which formed the eye does he not see? He that
teaches man knowledge does not he know? The holy Prophets were not ignorant
of this vain opinion. David brings in such as were puffed up with pride, for
what savours so much of pride, when themselves are under the wrath of God for
sin, so to censure other sinners as unworthy to live, thus to break out,
Lord how long shall the wicked? how long shall the wicked triumph? and
afterward, the Lord shall neither see, neither shall the God of Jacob Psalm.
29.7.
regard. To whom the Prophet replyeth, understand Ibid. v. 8.9.
ye unwise among the people: and ye fools when will ye be wise? he which
planted the ear shall he not hear, or he which formed the eye does not he
consider? or he which chastises the nations, shall not he correct? he which
teaches men knowledge shall he not know? The Lord knows the thoughts of man
that they are but vain? He which deprehends what is vain, knows he not
what is done, and is he ignorant of what himself has made? Can it be that
the workman should not know his own work? Let it be but a man that sets
himself on work, there is nothing so secret under his hand, but he takes
notice of it, and has no knowledge of his work? There is therefore somewhat
of deeper profunditie in the work then in the worke-master; and that he has
made something above his own reach, the worth whereof the author cannot
comprehend, and how it stands with his affection is hidden from the umpier?
Thus much for them. But the testimony of God himself is sufficient for us,
speaking on this wise, Lord searches Ier. 17.10. Luke 5.22.
the reins and the heart. And that in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus, Why
think ye evil in your Luke 6.8.
hearts? For he knew that they thought evil. And the same Evangelist
witnesses afterward saying, For Jesus knew their (...).
thoughts. Whose judgment whom shall it not be able sufficiently to move, if
we consider what those men have done? For they will no such judge, whom nothing
may deceive, to be above them. They will not attribute the understanding of
secrets to him at whose hands they fear the discovery of them. But the Lord in
like manner knowing their words (as it were to meet with them) has delivered
them over to darkness. The thief, says he, Job 24.13.14.15:
shall be in the night, the eye of the adulterer shall wait for the twilight,
and say, no eye Es. 29.15 Woe unto them that dare seek to hide their counsel
from the Lord: for their works are in darkness, and they say, who sees us?
and who knows us?
Ecclus. 23 18.
shall see me, and shall disguise his face. For every one that flies the
light loves darkness, being desirous to lie hid: When in truth he cannot hide
himself from God, who has a sight of what is done in the bottom both of the
deep, and minds of men, neither of what alone is already past, but of what
may come to pass hereafter. So he in Ibid. v. 21.
Ecclesiasticus in like sort, Who sees me, J am compassed about with
darkness, and the walls hide me, whom need J to fear? Though when he lies
upon his bed he has these thoughts, yet when he thinks not upon it is he
taken, and he shall be put to shame, because he would not understand the fear
of the Lord. But what is so absurd as to imagine, that any thing is hid from
God: when the Sun the minister of light penetrates even the closest places,
and the force of his beams breaks into the lowest foundations, and innermost
chambers of the house? Who can deny the bowels of the earth, bound before with
the ice of the Winter, to be made warm with the temperate heat of the spring?
The secrets of the trees find as well the vigor of heat as of cold, in so
much that their roots either wither with the cold creeping in, or wax green
with the fostering of the Sun. To conclude, when the clemency of heaven
smiles upon the earth, she opens her womb, and pours forth all manner of
fruit. If therefore the beam of the Sun spreads forth his light over the
whole earth, and cannot be shut out, but will make an inrode into the most
obscure corners, notwithstanding the obstructions of iron bars and thick
folding doors: how can it possibly but be, that the incomprehensible splendour
of the all-seeing eye of God should wind it self into the thoughts, and hearts
of men, especially they being the works of his own cceation? But those things
which he has made does he not see? and harh he devised that what he has made
should be better, and more powerful then himself is, who made it, and such as
should exceed the capacity of the maker? He has therefore ingrafted such
virtue, and power in our minds, that himself when he would cannot comprehend
it.

CHAP. XV. Such as be displeased that it goes not prosperously with the good,
and very succesfully with the evil, the examples of Lazarus, and Paul ought to
satisfy.
WE have absolved two questions, the one that the Lord governs the actions
of men, the other that he has knowledge of their ways: and as we suppose
we have not unfitly fallen upon such disputation. A third question of this
sort remains: Why sinners do abound in riches and wealth, do continually
banquet, being void of grief and mourning, but the just live in want, and are
troubled with the loss either of wives, or children? Whom that Luke 16.19.
parable in the Gospel ought to satisfy, that the rich man was clothed with
silk and purple, and fared deliciously every day, but the poor man full of
sores gathered up the crummes that fell from his table; but after the death of
them both, the poor man was in Abraham's bosom in rest, the rich man in
torments. Is it not evident from hence that either rewards, or punishments do
wait for men after their death? And rightly, because in the race there is
labor, after the race to some shall be given victory, to others infamy. Is the
garland given, or the crown bestowed upon any until the race be ended? 2 Timothy 4.8.
Paul speaks worthily, I have fought a good fight, J have finished my course,
I have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the just Judge shall give to me in that day,
and not to me only, but to all them that love his coming. He says in that
day not here. Here did he strive as a good champion in labors, in perils, in
shipwracks, because he knew that through many Acts 14.22.
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Therefore no man can
receive the reward, but he that shall strive lawfully. Neither is the victory
glorious, but where be conflicts Whereby lazy lubbers, and full bellyes,
drowned in worldly delights stand justly excluded.
full of labor.

CHAPTER XVI. Making mention of the beatitude out of the Gospel, he affirms
labor here to receive a reward in heaven, putting down for illustration the
example of champions, and spectators.
IS not he unjust, who expects a reward before the combat shall be absolved?
And therefore the Lord in the Gospel says, blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. He said not blessed are the rich, but
blessed are the poor. There begins blessedness according to divine
judgment, where humane calamity is thought to begin, Blessed are they that
hunger for they shall be satisfied. Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are they that
suffer persecution for righteousness sake, because theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil sayings against you for righteousness sake, be glad and
leap with joy, for great is your reward in heaven. He has promised a reward
to be rendered hereafter, not presently, in heaven, not in earth. Why do thou
require that in one place which is due in another? Why do 1 Cor. 9.24. (...).
Sed (...), id est, velint quasi decurso stadio ad carceres a calce revocari.
preproperously call for a crown before thou overcommest? why do desire too
too hastily to The father alludeth to the custom of wrestlers, who preparing
for the game first anointed themselves with oil, then cast dust upon
themselves, which after the game was ended, they wiped away.
wipe off the dust, and to take up thy rest? why do delight to banquet before
the race be broken up? As yet the people look on, as yet the combatants
Solvatur for dimittatur, Solve mares Virg. 2. Geor.
are upon the place of exercise, and do thou now desire to be at ease But
peradventure thou may say, why do the wicked rejoice? why do they riot? why
do they not labor also with me? Because they who have not subscribed, nor
given up their names as wrestlers for the garland are not held to the burden
of the combat. They who have not entered the lists of the race anoint not
themselves with oil, dawbe not themselves with dust. Upon whom glory rests,
upon them injury waits. The sweet perfumed, and the embalmed stand beholding,
are regardlesse of the challenge, the scorching Sun, the smothering dust, the
sweat, In stemmate sunt for facinore, or in scammate, which was the place upon
which the wrestlers strove.
the showers can by no means endure. The Champions therefore may justly say to
these, come ye, labor with us. What will be the answer of these beholders,
but that we here in the mean time do judge, but at the length if ye shall
overcome, ye without us will challenge the crown of glory? Wherefore such who
have placed their studies in delights, in riotousnesse, robberies, gains,
honors, are rather spectators then soldiers, They reap the commodity of
them that labor, not the desert of virtue. They give themselves to ease, they
accumulate riches in great abundance by their craft, and dishonesty, but are
sure to pay well at the last though late, the due penalty for their offense.
Thus the rest of these is in hell, thine in heaven; the house of these in the
sepulcher, thine in the select palace of Paradise, To this purpose Job Job
21.32. In congerie mortuorum vigilabit ijskod a shakad, and so rendered by Arias
Montanus.
speaks well, that these shall awake in the heap of the dead, because there
they cannot have the sleep of rest which he had which rose from the dead. Do
not thou understand therefore as a child, do not 1 Cor. 13.11.12.
speak, nor think as a child, neither as a child claim what belongs to riper
years. The crown belongs to those that are perfect. Stand in expectation of
the fruition of what is perfect, when thou shall see, not in a figure and
riddle, but face 12.
to face, the portraiture it self of the naked truth. Then shall be revealed
why this man, that was wicked, and a robber of others was rich, another mighty,
another full of children, another lifted up to honor. Perhaps it was that at
that day it may be said to the extortioner, thou wast rich, why then did
thou take by violence from others? Need compelled thee not, neither did
poverty constrain thee. Did not I then give thee wealth that thou might
have no excuse? Perhaps it was that it might be said to the mighty; Why
did not thou being able assist the widow, the succourlesse and such as
suffered wrong? What, wast thou weak? wast thou not of power to succor?
Therefore I have made thee potent that thou might not use violence toward
the impotent but repel their oppression; Is it not written for thee, deliver
him that suffers Eccl. 4.9.
wrong? Is it not written for thee deliver him that suffers wrong. Is it not
written for thee, deliver the poor Psalm. 82.4.
and needy, save them from the hand of the ungodly? Perhaps also it may then
be said to him that has many children, I heaped honors upon thee, I have
bestowed upon thee an healthy body, why have not thou followed my precepts? O
my servant what have I done to thee, or wherein have I grieved thee? Have I not
given to thee children, conferred upon thee honors, bestowed upon thee
welfare? why did thou deny me? why did thou think that thy deeds
should not come to my knowledge? why did thou lay hold of my blessings, and
despise my commands? To conclude thou may take an example from Judas the
traitor, who was both an Apostle, and chosen out among the twelve for the
stewardship, and had the bags of money for distribution to the poor
committed to him, lest he might seem as it were one without honor, or for
poverty sake to have betrayed his Lord. And did his Lord therefore that he
might be justified in him, bestow these preferments? yea that he not as one
exaspered by injury, but as one dealing by collusion under color of friendship
might make himself obnoxious to a greater offense.

CHAP. XVII. The Offices of young men, and examples proposed, and set before
the eyes of them of his age.
BEcause therefore it sufficiently appears, punishment to be ordained for
Vice, praise, and recompense for Virtue. Let us take in hand to speak of the
duties which ought to be found in youth, that the studies of good actions may
grow together with age. It is the part of the younger sort desirous to be
good, to have the fear of God before their eyes, to honor their parents, to
reverence their elders, to preserve chastity, not to despise humility, to love
gentleness, and shamefastness. Which had, are an ornament and grace to their
younger years. For as in ancient years gravitie, in manly age cheerfulness:
so in youth modesty, and bashfulnesse is commended as a certain special
property, and dowry of nature. Jsaac fearing God, as the towardly son of
his father, the promised, and hopeful child yielded honor so far forth to
his father, that rather then he would be disobedient to his will, he Genes.
22.9.
refused not death. Joseph also when he had dreamed that the Sun and Moon,
and Stars should do Genes. 32.9.
reverence to him; yet with all sedulitie did he obey his father: So chaste was
he, that he would not hear an immodest word, so humble was he, even to the
undergoing of servitude, so shamefast was he, even to flight, when he was
tempted to dishonesty, so patient was he, even to enduring of imprisonment, so
easily was he brought to remit injuries, and so forgetful of them, that he
recompensed them with Genes. 50.21.
remuneration; whose modesty was so great, that his chastity being assaulted by
a woman, he chose rather to leave his garment in her hand, and flee, Genes.
39.22.
then to be found unchaste, and so sin v. 9.
against God. Moses Ierem. 16.37.18.20.
also, and 38.27.
Jeremy chosen of God to declare his Oracles to the people, which they were
able to have done by virtue of the grace and authority they had, under the
veyle of modesty excused themselves.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the virtue of Verecundia.
modesty, which chiefly shined in the holy Mother of God, and that the gesture
of the outward, very often shows the quality of the inward man.
WHerefore fair is the face, and sweet is the grace of the virtue, modesty,
which is not only seen in thy deeds, but also in thy speeches themselves, that
they exceed not the mean, that they sound out nothing unseemely. For the
mirror of the mind does for the most part illustrate it self in the speech;
Let modesty so poise the sound of the voice, that being strained it offend not
the ear. In the matter of song the first discipline is modesty, likewise in
the whole course of speaking, in the degrees of singing to the instrument of
music, or in tuning, or composing the voice, or lastly in fashioning sweetly
the tongue in the beginning, and first entrance, blushing, and awfulnesse has
ever been commendable, and much graced the proceedings. In silence also it
self wherein is the rest, and repose of other virtues, modesty bears no
small stroke. If it be thought to proceed from childishnes or pride, it is
accounted a reproach, if from modesty it is reputed a praise; Susanna was
silent in danger, and did judge the loss of life to be less then the loss of
modesty, neither did she think, that the preservation of her weal, was to be
bought with the peril of such a wrack. She poured out her complaint to Sus.
v. 41.
God, to whom was ever a passage given for chastity to open her mouth, though
abashed, and closed up, when she beheld the impudent foreheads of faithless
accusers; For there is bashfulnesse in the very eyes, that a modest woman
cannot look up on men, but avoideth their sight. Neither is this the praise of
Chastity only: for Modesty is the companion of shamefastness, by whose
society, chastity is more secure; for shamefastness is a good companion for
the well ordering of chastity: for lending her hand, and leading forward to
the preventing of the first, and most fearful assaults, suffers not chastity
to be ensnared. This is that which in her entrance into knowledge is chiefly
commended to the readers in the Mother of our Lord, and it is laid down there,
as a rich testimony how worthy she was to be chosen, and advanced to so high
an honor, that being in secret, solitary in her Luke 1.20.
chamber, and saluted by an Angel, she held her peace, and again, that she
was v. 29.30.
moved with his coming in unto her, because the countenance of a virgin is
troubled at the sight of the male sex, especially of a stranger. Therefore
although she were humble, and courteous, yet for modesty sake he saluting
her, she saluted him not, nor rendered him again any answer, until she had
knowledge of her conception by the Holy Ghost, and that to this end that she
might learn in silence, the divine quality of the fruit of her womb, and
lest by her speech she might happily some way gainesay the voice of the
Angel. In prayer also it self modesty does much please, and does procure much
grace with our GOD. Did not this prefer the Luke 18.15.
Publican, and commend him which durst not lift up his eyes to heaven? Vt
vocabula little defamata, and deformia cum ipsis viderentur, Gellius.
Therefore he is more justified, and that in the judgment of the Lord, then
the Pharisee, whom presumption foully deformed, and justly defamed: Wherefore
let us pray in the sincerity of a meek, and quiet spirit, which is a thing in
the sight of God much set by, as 1 Pet. 3.8.
Peter says: Great therefore is modesty, which also, when it is more remiss
in her right, usurping nothing to her self, challenging nothing, and more
contract, bounding her self within her own power is rich and powerful with
GOD, with whom no man is freely rich. Modesty Dives est modestia quia portio
Dei est.
is rich, because the Lords portion. Paul has commanded prayer to be brought
to GOD in 1 Cor. 7.5. (...) Sobrietas quae in Christianis perpetua est, debet
species esse jejunij. Calv.
modesty and sobriety. He will have this to be first, and the forerunner of
prayer, that the supplication of a sinner be not in ostentation, but spread
over with the veil of shamefastness, look how much more modesty it brings
in through the remembrance of sin, so much more plenty of favor does it
demerit. Modesty likewise is to be observed in the motion of the body,
gesture, and gate. For the disposition of the mind is seen in the state of the
body. Hence the hidden man of the heart is either lighter, or more boasting, or
more troubled and obscure: or contrariwise more heavy, more constant, more
pure, and more ripe. For the motion of the body is a kind of speech of the
mind. Ye may remember (my sons) a certain friend, when he seemed to
commend himself for his sedulity in duties, for this only cause
notwithstanding, not to have been received by me into the Clergy, for that
he carried himself very unseemly in his gesture; Ye may remember also
another, whom when I found to be already admitted, I commanded never to go
before me, because with the stroke of his insolent gate he much wounded mine
eyes And this I speak, because when after an offense he was restored to his
office, against this only I toooke exception, neither was I deceived. For both
of them departed from the Church, cast off their profession: so that what their
gesture did bewray; the same at length did the treachery of their mind
demonstrate. For one of them in the time of infestation of the Arrian heresy
forsook the faith, the other lest he should be called into question to the
loss of his money, which he much desired to keep, denied himself to be a
priest after our profession. The image of lightness appeared in their gate,
and a certain picture of runnagate scoffers. There be some which by walking
leasurely, and stately, imitating the gesture of stage players, and as it were
certain Pageants, and shows represented in pomp, and triumph, that as often as
they step forward, seem to keep certain measures. Neither do I think it
fit to walk hastily, unless when some cause of danger, or just necessity
shall require. For we see such as go apace being constrained, to pant, and
blow, to wring, and wrest their mouths, and disguise their countenances; to
whom if there be wanting a cause of just festination, it is a wart in the face
of our conversation, and of just offense. I speak not of those, which use
properation very seldom, and also in the forenamed respects: but of such, with
whom by daily, and continual custom it is turned into an habit, and another
nature. I allow not therefore in those that they should be as the portraiture,
and shape of statues, nor in these that they should be as ruins of things
shaken, and shattered in pieces. There is beside these a manner of gate, which
is approved, wherein namely there is the semblance of authority, the weight of
gravitie, the step of tranquillity: but so if study for the attaining, and
affectation be wanting, and it proceed from a proper, pure, and simple gift
incident to nature, not colored, not counterfeit. For nothing forged, or
forced pleases; Let nature it self frame, and fashion our motion. If there
be any error in nature, let industry correct it: admit there be want of due
skill to correct, yet fail not by some means or other to correct, and
redress the fault. If we look more thoroughly into these things how ought we
to beware, and that much more, lest any unseemely thing proceed out of our
mouths? For this grievously delfileth a man; For meat defiles not a man but
unjust obtrectation, and obscenity of words. Hereof even the vulgar sort
themselves are ashamed.

Concerning the duty that we treat of, or belonging to our function of
teaching, there is no word that falls dishonestly, or disorderly from us, but
it causes blushing. Nay we ought not our selves only to utter nothing
uncomely, but with Joseph not once to lend our ear to the same, or to
whatsoever is unsavory, who lest he might hear somewhat incongruent to his
own modesty fled, leaving his garment behind him; Because he that delights to
hear, provokes another to speak: we are to understand likewise that what is
obscene brings much shame. But to observe, if any such thing falls out by
chance, how much horror distresseth? what therefore we dislike in others, can
we possible conceive a liking of in our selves? Nature it self teaches no
less, and has explicated perfectly all the parts of the body, that it might
serve both for necessity, and for ornament. But notwithstanding those, which
might be comely for sight, in which the top and excellency of the
workmanship placed as it were in a tower, both the sweetness of the form, and
the beauty of the countenance might shine forth, and the use of exercise might
be more ready, she has left obvious and open. But those in whom there must
be an yielding to natural necessity, that they might not exhibit their
deformed spectacle, she has partly corrected, and obscured in the body it
self, and has partly advised, and persuaded to cover. Is not therefore nature
it self the mistress of modesty? After whose example the modesty of men
(which Modestiae Etymologia est a modo scientiae ejus quod deceat.
I suppose to have been denominated from the manner of the knowledge of things
as might best beseem) what it has found hidden in this fabric of our body,
it has shadowed, and covered, as that door in the Arc made overthwart the
same commanded to just Noe Genes. 6.16.
in the pattern, in the which is signified either the type of the Church, or
proportion f our bodies, and therein that, by the which, as by a door, the
refuse of the meats are cast out. Therefore the Master builder of all things,
and Lady nature it self has so provided for our modest carriage, has so
preserved that comeliness, and honesty in our body, that he might remove
behind the back, as it were, the chanells of the scouring of the streets, the
emptying, and venting of our pipes, and might turn them out of the way from
the sight of our eyes, lest the purging thereof might offend, and annoy them,
whereof the Apostle worthily; 1 Cor. 12.23.
Those members of the body which seem to be most feeble, are most necessary,
and upon those members of the body, which we think most unhonest put we more
honesty on, and our uncomely parts have more comeliness on. For industry
imitating nature brought more grace. But it is not here to be pretermitted,
that we do not only hide from the eyes, but do not so much as once call the
uncomely parts by their names. Moreover, if they chance to be discovered, our
faces are covered with shame, and if any do it of purpose, it is accounted
impudency. Whence Cham the son of Noah is much blamed, he seeing his father
naked derided him: but his brethren much commended, he incurred a curse, and
that deservedly, they a benediction, because they cast a garment upon him. It
was an ancient custom both in the city of Rome, and in other cities, that
sons of ripe age, and sons in law should not presume to enter into bathes
or rivers, to wash with their parents, lest thereby the authority and reverence
due to them might be impaired: albeit the most part also, even in the washing
place, as far as they can, do cover themselves, and for this cause, when for
the rest it is not greatly material, that this portion might the rather be
kept secret; The Priests of old put on linen breeches Exodus 24.48.
reaching from the loins to the thighs to cover their nakedness. Aaron and
his sons were commanded of the Lord to have them when they entered into the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and when they came to the Altar to minister;
the reason withal and danger is added, if they neglected the same, that they
should commit iniquity, and so die. Which constitution some of our order are
reported at this day to observe: but the most expound it after a spiritual
manner, as a caution for modesty, and custody for chastity.

CHAPTER XIX. The fellowship of the intemperate, and the society of women to be
avoided.
MOdesty truly has her rocks, not which she her self brings in, but upon
which she runs, if we fall into the company of the intemperate, which under
the show of pleasantness pour poison into the good, these if they be daily
with us, especially at repast, play, and pastime, they weaken that manly
gravity. Let us take heed therefore, lest while we give relaxation to the
mind, we dissolve the harmony and comfort of good works. For use does easily
bring nature to her bent, whence I think it wisely to accord to
ecclesiastical affairs, especially to the offices of Ministers to decline the
banquets of strangers. Better it is that ye your selves of that rank be
hospital to them, that so by that cautelousnesse no place be left to reproach.
The repasts, and ordinaries of strangers are their places, and meetings where
they confer of business, where also it will appear how they stand affected
to their appetite, and where weakness, and want of moderation will soon
bewray, and discover it self. Tales creeping in of the world, and
voluptuousness, thou can not shut thy ears against them, to forbid them is
accounted pride. Cups also creeping in otherwise then thou would thou
runnest into scandal; Is it not better, and easier for thee to excuse thy
self once at thine own, then oftentimes at other men's tables? Howsoever thou
risest sober, yet thy presence ought to be condemned, by reason of another
man's fault. There is no need for the younger sort to repair to the houses of
widows, and virgins unless it be for visitation sake, and this when they do
they shall need to be accompanied with the Bishop, or if the cause be more
important with some of the ancients of the ministry, why should we give
occasion to secular men to speak evil of us? Those often visitations why
should they be of such great authority? what if any of those younger have
committed a slip? why should thou endure the blame of another fault? How
many strong, and worthy men have been deceived with the bait of sin? How
many have not given way to error, yet have given way to suspicion? Why do
not thou rather bestow thy times of vacancy from ecclesiastical employments
upon reading? why do thou not go to see, and visit Christ again, and
again? why do thou not hear him? we speak to him when we pray, we hear
him when we read the divine oracles. What have we to do with other folks
houses? There is one house which receives us all. If there be any that
requires ought of us, let them rather come to us then expect that we should
come to them, what have we to do with fables? our ministry belongs to the
altar of Christ, to be obsequious to men pertaines not to us, that we have
received, for this we have no warrant; It becomes us to be humble, meek,
courteous, grave, patient, to keep a measure, and moderation in all things;
that our silent countenance no less then our speech may evidence the
unblameablenesse of our conversation.

CHAP. XX. Of repressing anger in thy self, and mitigating it in others.
LET anger be taken heed of, or if it cannot be taken heed of and prevented,
let it be restrained and bridled. For anger Mala lex peccati indignatio,
Erasmi editio Romana vero, Mala illex peccati indignatio. Melius autem ut
videtur illix.
is an ill inveigler to sin, which so troubles the mind, that it leaves no
place to reason. The first thing therefore is if it may be done, that the
tranquillity of manners by a certain prefixed custom ruling over the
affections, may be turned into nature. Moreover because motion, and passion is
so infixed in nature and manners, that it cannot be pulled up, and utterly
abolished, if it may be foreseen, let it be opprimatur ratione.
oppressed by reason. But if thy mind be preoccupated, and forestalled of
indignation before it could be foreseen, and prevented by counsel, that is,
it might not be endangered, meditate how thou may overcome the motion of thy
mind, how thou may temper, and moderate thine anger. Ne vel ulcisci appetas,
saltem judicandi potestatem Deo permit, Calv. That is, suppress if thou
can the very appetite, if thou can not, leave the issue to God the
righteous judge.
Resist anger, if thou art able, if thou art not able, give Romans 12.19. tending
to revenge, commit it to God, to whom revenge belongs.
place to it. Jacob after a godly manner gave place to his Genes. 27.44.
brothers wrath, and being instructed by the counsel of his mother Rebecca
according to our author, signifies patience, but it seems to be derived
from Rabak pingue facere, and so by consequence, that which is here employed,
because where there is leannes, there lightly is pensivenes, and impatience,
where fatness and fullness, a contrary disposition.
Rebecca, that is, of patience, chose rather to absent himself, and be a
stranger, then to stir up his indignation, and then to return, when he
should think it to be assuaged. And therefore he found so great favor with
God. Further, by how much Genes. 33.3.
observance, and obeisance, by how many great gifts did he reconcile his
brother to him, insomuch that he remembered the satisfaction now tendered him,
and remembered not the benediction before taken from him? Therefore if anger
shall prevent, and forestall thy mind, and seize upon thee, leave not thy
place. Thy place is patience, thy place is reason, thy place is an abatement of
indignation. And if the contumacy of the answer shall move thee, and his
perverseness compel thee to indignation, if thou can not mitigate thy mind,
repress thy tongue. For so it is Psalm. 34.13. 1 Pet. 3.11.
written, keep thy tongue and thy lips, that they speak no guile; and
afterward, seek peace, and follow after it. See that peace of holy Genes.
31.44.
Jacob, with the which first appease thy mind: If thou shall not prevail, lay
thy raines upon thy tongue, afterward let not pass the desire of
reconciliation. These things used by us, the Orators of the world have put in
their books; But the credit of such moderation is his which first spoke it.
Let us therefore avoid, or moderate anger, lest from hence there be exception
taken against us in the matter of our praises, and an exaggerating of our
vices. It is a matter of no small importance to mitigate anger: yea of no less
then not to be moved at all. The one belongs to us, the other is of a natural
instinct. Those harmless motions are in children, who are more ready to show
kindness, then bitterness. And if children be soon moved to indignation
between themselves, yet they are easily pacified, and their love reflecteth
back back upon each other with greater sweetness. They are utterly to seek
how to deal subtily, and craftily one with another. By no means contemn not
ye these children of whom he says, Math. 18.3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Therefore also the Lord himself that is the virtue,
and power of God, as a child, when he was 1 Pet. 2.23.
reviled, he reviled not again; when he was smitten, smote not again. Set
down therefore before hand this resolution with thy self, that as a child
thou will forget injuries, thou will not exercise malice, that so all things
may proceed from thee in the greatest innocence. Consider not what is rendered
by others, keep thou thy place, preserve thou the simplicity, and purity of
thine own heart. Answer thou not the angry man according to his anger, nor the
unwise man according to his indiscretion; One fault quickly provokes another.
If thou strikest two flints together, does not fire break forth? The Gentiles
report as they are wont, in the highest style to commend their own virtues,
the saying of Architas the Tarentine Philosopher to his servant keeping his
farm, which was, O thou unhappy fellow, how would I punish thee were I not
angry? Abigael by her humble, and worthy deprecation pacified, and revoked
David, and his army (and how much harder a thing is it to forbear words then
blows) ready prepared, and exceedingly incensed to revenge the wrongs of
Nabal? Whence we observe, that we ought not only to yield to such
intercessions, as come in seasonably in the nicke of our attempts, but to be
delighted in them with gladness of heart. But for fear was he delighted with
her interposition, that he blessed it, and was forthwith called back from his
bloody design, he Psalm. 55.3.
said of his enemies, they have brought iniquity upon me, and furiously hated
me, yet being thus turmoiled will ye hear what he resolved, O Ibid. v. 6.
that I had wings like a dove, then would I fly away and rest. His enemies
provoked him to wrath, he sought to be at rest; when he came to advise in
this cause, be angry, Psalm. 4.4.
said he, and sin not. The master of morality, which well knew the natural
affections to be bowed rather by way of doctrine, then to be pulled up by the
roots gives natural precepts. Be Ephesians. 4.26. (...) Sept. ragan the Hebrew
root, signifies not only to tremble, but to be angry, as Prove. 29.
angry that is, where there is cause, with whom ye ought to be angry; For it
cannot possibly be, but that we should be moved with the indignity of
things; otherwise it is indeed no virtue, but too much slacknesse, and
remissness. Be angry therefore, so that ye abstain from sin, or so if ye
be angry, sin not, but overcome anger with reason: truly thus if ye be
angry, be angry with your selves, because ye have been moved, and ye shall
not sin. For he which is angry with himself, because he has been so
quickly stirred up to indignation, he desisteth to be angry with another. He
that would have it appear, and be approved of by the world, that his anger is
just, is the more inflamed therewith, and thereby through the heat of his
spirit falls the sooner to transgress. He is better therefore according to
Solomon, Prove. 16.32.
that contains his anger, then he that wins a city, because anger also
deceives the strong. Wherefore we ought to take heed, lest we first fall
into perturbations before reason compose our minds. For the most part, either
anger or grief, or the fear of death does discourage the mind, and appaleth
it with an unexpected stroke. Therefore the best way is by due consideration,
which may exercise the mind by well weighing of the consequents of things, to
prevent, that it be not disturbed with sudden motions, but being restrained,
and subdued with the raines, and yoke of reason, it may be made tractable and
gentle.

CHAP. XXI. Of the cogitations, the appetite, and comeliness of speech in
talking and arguing.
THere be double motions, that is, of the thoughts, and appetite, the one I
say of the thoughts, the other of the appetite, not confounded, but severed and
unlike. It is the part of cogitations to search, and Emolere.
and boult out the truth: the appetite stirs, drives forward to some
action. Therefore generally in their own nature it self, both the thoughts
do infuse the tranquillity of pacification, and the appetite does shake, and
shove forward the motion of doing. Let us therefore be so informed, that the
thought of good things may enter upon the mind, but the appetite let it obey
reason, if we would do our true intent to keep a decorum, lest our affection
set upon some thing averse thereunto do exclude reason, and do not permit it
to examine what belongs to honesty. And because for the preservation of that
which is comely we said before, this to be very requisite, to know what ought
to be the mean to be used in our words and deeds, and because the order of
speaking is before the order of doing, understand that speech is divided into
two parts; That is to say, into familiar colloquie, or into a tractable,
obvious to discourse and disceptation, as for example, when we argue of
fidelity and justice, the rule in both must be that there be no perturbation of
mind about this dispute, but that the speech be gentle, and calm, full of
benevolence, and grace, and free from all contumely. Let pertinacious, and
obstinate contention in familiar speech be far removed; for this, rather
stirs up vain questions then brings any profit. Let reasoning be without
anger, let there be pleasantness of discourse without bitterness, admonition
without roughness, exhortation without offense. And as in every action of our
life we ought to beware lest too much motion of the mind exclude not reason,
but let us give place to counsel: so also it is meet in speech to keep that
form that neither anger be stirred up, nor hatred, nor that we express any
token of our unlawful desire, or business. Let therefore such our speech be
specially of the Scriptures. For what ought we rather to speak of then of
good conversation, then of exhortation to the observation of divine precepts,
then of the keeping, and due care of discipline? Begin we it upon ground of
reason, and end we it in measure; For a tedious speech gets not favor but
indignation. But how unseemly is it, that when all conference should get grace,
it begets that blot of disgrace an offense? A discourse also of the doctrine
of faith, of the rule of continency, of the disquisition of justice, of an
exhortation concerning diligence, not one always, but such as shall be
occasioned upon our reading, is both readily to be taken hold of by us, and as
we are able, to be prosecuted: neither such as may be too prolix, neither such
as may be suddenly interrupted, lest so it might leave behind it
loathsomenesse, or should bewray slothfulness or negligence. Let the form of
the speech it self for the better expression and ornament of the matter be
simple, clear, and manifest, full of gravity and weight, not of affectate
elegancy, but yet not without all grace, and neatness.

CHAPTER XXII. Jests which Philosophers place among Offices, are wholly to be
removed from the Church.
SEcular men give many precepts concerning the manner, and form of speech,
which I judge rather to be better pretermitted, and passed by: as for example,
concerning the discipline of jesting. For Honesta ioco and suavia sint. Eras.
Edit. for joca Edit. Romans
though jests sometimes be honest and pleasant: notwithstanding they abhor,
and dissent very much from the rule of the Church. Because what we find not in
the Scriptures, how can we with credit, and good warrant use it? We must take
heed also in fables lest we slight so great authority, turn the gravity of a
more important end to sporting, toying, and trifling, to looseness and liberty
of style, Woe to you that laugh, for ye shall weep, says the Luke 6.2.
Lord: and do we require matter of laughter, that laughing here we may
Colligitur ex antithesi.
weep hereafter? I deem not only profuse and lavish, but all sorts of
sportings, and jestings in Christian speech to be declined: and yet the speech
not to be uncomely, being full of grace and sweetness. But concerning the
voice, I think that which is simple, natural, pure, of it self, not
borrowing any way to be sufficient, but that which is sounding and singing to
be inherent in nature, not to be obtained by industry. For the manner of
pronunciation therefore, as an help hereunto, let it be distinct, and full of
manly pith, that so it may not resemble a clownish and rusticall sound, nor
affect a scenicall kind of vain, but a mystical, and divine harmony.

CHAP. XXIII. Of three things which are necessarily observed in a practical
life, and that it is convenient for the appetite to give place to reason.
COncerning the form and manner of speaking, 1. The appetite ought to submit
it to reason.
I suppose I have treated sufficiently; now let us consider what belongs to a
well ordered life. Herein three things are to be observed, one that there be
not reluctance between the appetite and reason. For, in this alone our duties
are made answerable to that which is comely. For if our appetite do obey
reason, that which is seemly in all duties may be preserved. 2. 2. The
industry ought to be proportionable to the subject.
Another is, that we do not undertake any matter with greater, or less care
then is requisite, or being small we do not make much gains about it, or
being great, we do not intervalew it in our diligence. 3. 3. Moderation ought
to be used in labor with due respect to order and time.
The third is concerning the moderating of our studies and labors. Concerning
also the order of things, and opportunity of times, we must not lightly pass
by them, but deal therein effectually; But that is the first thing, and the
foundation of all, that the appetite obey reason. The second and the third
consisting of industry are the same, that is, moderation in both, in the one
respectively to the employment, in the other to the order and time. The place
of the bountiful dealing of God toward the form of the person of man, which
is accounted his beauty: and a contemplation of dignity lies vacant here with
us. The order of things, and opportunity of times now follows. In respect
whereof we are to discuss three questions all to this one head, whether we
may truly teach that in any of the Saints all things were consummate, and done
in that fullness and perfection as is required? First of all therefore Abraham
himself the father of the faithful being informed and instructed about the
mystery of future succession, and commanded to depart out of his own Genes.
12.1.
country and kindred; and from his fathers house, was he not bound in
affection through the multiplicity of his acquaintance, friends and affinity:
yet notwithstanding did he not bring his appetite under the obedience, and
command of reason? For whom would not the favor and affection of country,
kindred, and of his own house delight? Even him therefore did the sweetness of
these sometimes mollify, but so that the consideration of the heavenly power,
and remuneration eternal moved more, did he not consider his wife to be weak
for the undertaking of labor, tender for the bearing of injuries, comely to
provoke the insolent, and not to be conducted forth without great danger? and
yet did he not upon better consideration choose to prevent the Lords purpose
by such excuses, and pretenses? Moreover, when he went down into Egypt, he
admonished her that she should say that Genesis 12.13.
she was his sister, and not his wife. Mark of how great force his appetite
was? He feared his wives chastity, he feared his own safety, he suspected
the inordinate lusts of the Egyptians: yet reason led him out to do that
devotion. For he considered that he being under the favor of God, he might
be safer wheresoever he was: but the Lord being displeased, he would be in
safety no where, no not in his own house. Reason therefore overcame his
appetite, and made him obedient. His nephew being taken by the enemy he was
not terrified, neither was he troubled with the many armies of so many and
mighty Kings, but renewed the wars, and when he had enjoyed the Gen, 14.23.
victory refused part of the spoils, which he himself had recovered. In the
promised seed he respected not the deadness of his own body, nor of his
wives womb, and that he was now almost an hundred years old, yet beyond the
use, and help of nature he blessed God. Observe how all things do accord to
the point. His appetite was not defective, but strugled, and strived with him
for the dominion, but was suppressed. He was of a right judgment in the
managing of affairs, he was able to estimate things truly, and to discern
between those of importance, and of less consequence. In his business he
used moderation, and due order, took the opportunity of time for every action,
and in his words he kept weight and measure. For faith, he was the first, and
is for justice, the chiefest in battle, valiant in Genesis 15.22.23.
victory, not greedy of gain, in his house hospital, toward his Vxori
sedulus: sedulus vero is dicitur, qui test Donato and Nonnio, sine dolo and
instanter intentus.
spouse specially and truly respective. His holy nephew Jacob likewise
delighting himself in piety, liked to live at home in holy security under the
wings of his godly parents, but his mother was desirous he should sojourne
abroad thereby to give way to his brothers wrath. Her wholesome counsel
overcame his appetite of securing himself there, and made him try his hazard
elsewhere; And so became he an exul from his home, and place of birth, and an
alient from his parents; Yet wheresoever and whatsoever he was, he neglected
not convenient measure, and opportunity in his affairs, O bestiall baseness
when piety gives place to the appetite the spirit to the flesh, the soul to
the body, where heaven is sold for a little earthly content, eternity for that
is momentary.
he was received home to his parents. That the one draw thereunto by the
fullness of days might give him the blessing of obedience, the other might
hang over him in her pious affection; He was preferred before his brother,
even in his own judgment, when he yielded him food for the satisfaction of
his immoderate appetite, delighted was he with food according to nature, but
condescended according to piety to what was sought after. A faithful pastor
was this Jacob to his masters flock, a diligent sonne-in-law, to a
degenerating father-in-law, quick at labor, sparing in diet, forward in giving
satisfaction, large, and liberal in recompense and reward. To conclude by this
moderation he so mitigated his brothers displeasure, that whose anger he so
much feared at the first, in the end he procured his favor. What shall I say
of Joseph, who though he had a desire of liberty, yet was content to subject
himself to the necessity of servitude? Therein how did he humble himself,
how constant was he in a virtuous course, imprisonment how pliant and gentle,
how wise in interpretation, moderate in authority, provident in time of plenty,
just in time of famine, ordering and contriving all his affairs with
commendation? how in his wisdom did he dispense with the times until fittest
opportunity might be taken for the execution of his office of justice, and
until equity might have best entrance among the people? According to this
pattern Job also walked unblameably both in prosperity, and adversity, was a
man of admirable patience, carried a thankful heart to God, and was in great
acceptance with him: and yet was vexed and molested on every side outwardly:
howbeit inwardly not without special comfort. David likewise was a man of
war, and worth in fighting the Lords battles, in distress of singular
patience, ruling peaceably in Jerusalem, in victory merciful, so much grieved,
and cast down for his sins, as no man the like, in his old age provident for
his posterity, he observed so the moderation of things, the changes of times
according to the comely sounds of several ages, that he may seem to me no
idle in his kind of living, then in his suavity of singing excellently, sweetly
tohave poured out an immortal song of his own demerits, to the honor of Gods
great Name, and as a plat-forme of piety to us, was there any duty therefore
belonging to the principal virtues following wanting in these men? Prudence
has the first place, and confisteth in searching out of the truth, and
conteyneth in it this property to infuse a desire to attain daily a greater
measure of knowledge. The second place has justice, which renders to every
one his own, does not challenge that which pertains to another, neglects
its own proper profit to prefer common equity. The third, fortitude which
both in affairs of war for the greatness of an high and noble courage, and
also at home, and again in the strength of the body does bear away the
praise. The fourth, temperance, which serves for the disposing and moderating
of all things whatsoever are to be done or spoken.

CHAP. XXIIII. That the four Cardinal virtues were eminent in no mean, but in
an high degree toward perfection in our fathers.
TThese four virtues, may some man say, ought therefore to be put in the first
place, because all kind of duties do arise from them, and do therefore also
bear the name of the primarie, and chiefest. But this is the special work of
art, first to define what Office is, then afterward to divide, and distribute
into parts: the one we have observed, in the other we pass by art, and
propose to our selves the example of our ancestors, which neither bring
obscurity to the understanding, nor need subtletie in the handling of them. In
the lives therefore of our ancestors let there be a looking-glass of
discipline, not a commentary of craftiness, the reverence of imitation, not
the quilets of disputation. First of all therefore there was in holy Abraham
prudence; For of him the Genes. 15.6.
Scripture says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. For no man is prudent, that is ignorant of God. Psalm. 45.1.
Psalm. 111.10. Eccles. 1.15. Prove. 9.10.
The fool has said there is no God, not the wise man; For how is he a wise
man that inquireth not after his Maker, which says, to a stone, thou art my
Father; which says to the devil, as the Maniche does, thou art my Founder?
How can he be wise, that with the Arrian, had rather have an imperfect, and
degenerate author, then a true, and perfect? how can he be wise, that with
Marcion and Eunomius, striveth rather to have an evil god for his god, then a
good? How can he be wise that fears not his God? for the Prove. 1.7. Prove.
3.21. and 4.21.
beginning of wisdom is the fear of God; and elsewhere we read, the wise
depart not from the word of his mouth, but observe his divine wisdom and
counsel, according to the advertisement there given in the consultations of
their hearts. And concerning Abraham the father of the faithful, the Scripture
in saying, his faith was imputed to him for righteousness, does therewith all
bring the grace of another virtue for his relief. Our writers defining
wisdom, say that it consists in the knowledge of the truth, not of that
truth which humane brain produces, but of that which descends from above,
wherewith Abraham, David, Solomon, long before any Philosopher did beat his
head about it, were endued. Justice is a virtue that pertains to the society
of man. David places it in him that fears the Lord, who is much in
contribution and distribution of that he possesses, he has Psalm. 112.9. v.
5.
dispersed abroad, and given to the poor, his righteousness endures for
ever, the righteous is pitiful and lends. To the wise, and just, there is a
whole world of wealth. The just has all things in common as his own, his own
is common for all men. The just man accuses himself before he accuses
others. For he is just which neither spares himself, nor suffers his
secret sins to lie hid. See how just Abraham was, in hia old age, he
received a son by promise, Abraham had not been just, if when the Lord
required his son for a sacrifice he had denied him to him.
the Lord requiring him again, he denied him not for a sacrifice, though his
only son.

Observe here all the four Cardinal virtues, even in this one deed. It was
the part of wisdom to believe, neither to prefer the love of his son
before his precept that commanded him again for a sacrifice to himself. It
was justice to render again what he had received. It was fortitude to
restrain, and suppress his appetite, and affection, and to give place to
reason. His father brought him to God for a sacrifice, but appointed thereunto,
questioned how this might be, there being no oblation in sight, herein was his
fathers affection tried, but not overcome. The son repeated again and
again, the appellation of a father, and thereby did prick the bowels of his
fatherly compassion, but yet did not diminish his holy devotion. His temperance
is no less to be commended; For in this renowned action he kept himself
within the limit of piety, and due order, not casting off natural affection,
nor being distempered in himself, nor disturbed in his proceeding to
execution. While he carries things needful for sacrifice, provideth wood,
kindles the fire, binds his son, draws out his sword; by this See how
much our author attributes to order, proves withal, that he is a temperate
man that keeps it. Hoc immolandi ordine meruit (in a piercing phrase of
speech only, not that he had any meaning to build up merit) up filium
reservaret.
order of tendering his oblation observed, he reserveth his son, where was
more wisdom then in holy Jacob, who saw God face to face, and Here is meruit
again, but against this see Jacobs own confession.
obtained the blessing, and that honorable title of Israel? who more just then
he, who when he had gotten much riches, divided them with his brother by way
of voluntary donation, and gift? who more valiant, when he feared not to
combat with God himself? what greater argument of modesty and temperance,
then when he deferred the cause of his Genes. 34.30. and 49.5.6.7. To pass by
an injury living among enemies Jacobs wisdom.
daughter Dinah to due place, and time of hearing, and determining, arid chose
rather tocover her injury under the pretext of marriage, then to revenge it,
and for that cause deemed it better being amiddest his enemies to provide for
his peace, and safety by yielding, then to pull upon him their hatred and
malice, by refusing what was proposed? Noah with what wisdom was he endued,
who at the appointment of God, framed an Arc of so great capacity? How just,
which being reserved as the seed of all mankind, the founder and father of all
succeeding generations was the only surviver, and remainder of the ages past;
and borne rather for the good of all the world, and the preservation of all
things therein, then for himself and his own good? How full of fortitude and
valor was he, that he overcame the flood? how temperate was he that he
endured the flood, that he well discerned when he was to enter, with what
moderation he was to live there, when he was to send forth the Crow; when the
Dove, and when to receive them upon their return, and when he was to take fit
occasion to go Namely upon the Lords approbation neither until his express
warrant or mandate came. Genesis 8.19.
out?

CHAP. XXV. What is to be observed in searching out the truth.
THerefore they touch upon this in searching the truth, that comelines to be
kept, which is exactly to require what the truth is, and not to bring in
in-stead of it falsehood, and not to involve it in obscurity, neither to
possess the mind with superfluous, intricate, and doubtful matters. What is
so unseemly a thing as to worship wood, and stone, the workmanship of their
own hands? What is so wrapped up in darkness as some deep questions in
Astronomy, and Geometry, which they allow of, namely to measure the spaces of
the profound air, to number the heaven with the stars, the sea with the
lands thereof, to leave Isa. 8..20.
the cause of salvation, and seek occasion of error? Did not Moses, who was
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, make trial of the same? For he
judges it, whatsoever it was in the estimation of the world, mere folly and
madness, and the time spent about it utterly lost, and for that cause his mind
being averse from it, he sought God with a pure Hebr. 4.13.
affection, which made a way to the sight, conference, and audience that the
Lord afterward vouchsafed him. Who was, or could be more wise then he, whom
God taught, by whom as by a noble instrument, was made void all the wisdom of
the Egyptians, and all their sciences, the secret, but powerful virtue of the
finger of the Almighty working with him? He took not things unknown for
known, neither did rashly assent thereunto. Which two, those men who say that
even according to nature and honesty, they ought specially to be avoided; when
they adore stones, seek help of images, which understand not, do
notwithstanding in their judgment nothing either against nature, or against
honesty. Wherefore how much more noble, and eminent a virtue wisdom is: so
much the more earnestly ought we to strive to attain unto it. Therefore that
we may neither think, nor do any thing against nature, that we may commit
nothing unseemly, or undecent, we ought to bring these two to the
consideration of things for examination sake, that is to say, both time and
diligence. For there is nothing wherein man does more excel the rest of the
living creatures then that he is partaker of reason, searches into the causes
of things, seeks to know his Creator, in whose hands is the power of life,
and of death, which governs the world with his beck, and to whom we must
know that we are to render account of our actions. Neither is any thing more
available to the leading of an honest life, then to believe that he shall be
our Judge hereafter, whom nothing, be it never so secret, can deceive, nothing
unclean, uncomely, dishonestly, disorderly carried, can do other then offend,
nothing virtuous, decent, honest, put in due order, or place can do other but
please, and delight; wherefore it is ingrafted in all men by nature to search
out the truth, because this is as a loadstone to draw on the study of
knowledge, and as a whetstone to sharpen the desire. To excel this way is
acknowledged by all men to be a matter of the greatest worth, but such as few
atcheive, and they of that rank only which bestow no small labor in revolving
their thoughts, in examining their consultations, that they might approach by
their Tit. 2.12.
well-doing to that estate to live blessedly, and honestly. For, not every one
that says, Lord, Math. 7.21.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he which shall do the
things which I command. So teaches our best Master. For the study of knowledge
without following the same in our practice, I Luke 12.47. Timeamus, fratres;
Nam si is qui nihil scit dignus est plagis, quae excusatio liberabit eos qui
scienter delinquunt, maxim si doctores fuerint? Theodor.
know not whether they may not likewise more engage.

CHAP. XXVI. That the four Cardinal Virtues are so linked together in one
chain, that they cannot be divided the one from the other.
THe first fountain therefore of Office is Prudence. Tullius lib. 1. de
origin honesti ex quatuor fontibus.
For what is so complete in office and duty, as to bring and bear affection,
and reverence to the Fountain, and immediate author. The which Fountain
notwithstanding is derived into the residue of the virtues. For neither can
justice be without prudence, for to examine what thing is just, what unjust,
is no small prudence: A great error may arise in them both without due
examination, and the spirit of rightly discerning. For he that judges what is
just to be unjust, or what is unjust to be just, shall be Prove. 17.15.
execrable with God, Does Solomon say, the foolish Prove. 1.25. Vt quid
justiciae abundant imprudentis?
would none of my counsel? when yet their ways are right in their own eyes,
yea abound in Prove. 26.16. and 12.15. Eccles. 7.18.19.
justice. Neither again is prudence without justice: For piety toward God is
the Prove. 9.10. 1 Cor. 13.5.
beginning of understanding; whereby we observe that the knowledge of this
truth is rather borrowed, then invented by the wise men of this world, because
piety is the foundation of all virtues. But the piety of justice is first
toward God, secondly toward our country and parents, and moreover toward all,
being it self also according to the chief rule of nature; For from our
infancy when sense begins first to be infused, we love life as that gift of
God, we love our country, our parents, our equals; likewise to whom we desire
to be linked in society. Hence proceeds charity, which not seeking her own
things prefers others before her self, and this to do, is the principal
work of justice. It is a thing likewise ingrafted in all living creatures,
first to seek their own safety, to beware what may hurt, to desire what may
profit; As food, as their couches, whereby they may defend themselves from
dangers, showers, the Sun which is part of wisdom. Add hereunto that all
kinds of living creatures by a natural instinct flock together, first to
those of their own kind, then next to those of another kind, as we see kine
with their herds, horses with their droves, especially like with their like to
be delighted. Stagges also to be joined with Stagges, and for the most part
with men. Now concerning the desire of procreation, and offspring, as also the
love of generation, what shall I say? for in this there is a special form of
justice. It is manifest therefore both these, and other virtues to have a near
affinity between them. For both fortitude, which either in war does preserve
our country from the Barbarians, or at home does defend the weak, or our
fellows from robbers is full of justice; and to know with what counsel it may
defend and help, to take also the opportunity of time, and place, it is the
part of prudence, and modesty; and temperance it self without prudence cannot
understand what the mean is, cannot know what opportunity is; and to give
according to measure belongs to justice. And in all these magnanimity is
necessary and a certain fortitude of the mind, and for the most part of the
body, that every one may fulfill and accomplish that he desires.

CHAPTER XXVII. That which the Philosophers call the first Office of justice,
and that which they call the second Office to be excluded by us, but the third
to be borrowed from us.
Justice therefore is referred to the society, and comunity of mankind. The
form of society is divided into two parts, namely into justice, and
beneficence, which they call liberality, and benignity. Justice seems to me
to be of a higher nature, liberality of a more acceptable. That consists in
censure, this in goodness. But the very first office it self of justice in
the account of the Philosophers, is excluded with us. For they say, that to be
the first form of justice that no man hurt any unless provoked by injury,
which is made void by authority of the Gospel. For the Scripture wills that
the Spirit of the Son of man be in us, which came to confer grace, not to
infer injury. Moreover, they thought such to be the form of justice, that
every one should esteem of things common, that is, public, as public, and of
things private as his own. Neither is this according to nature; For nature
does pour out all things to all men in common. For so God commanded all things
to be engendered, that the feeding of earth might be common to all, and
therefore there might be a certain common possession of all. Nature therefore
has engendered a common usurpation, and possession a private right, wherein
they say it has pleased the Stoics to resolve all things begotten in the
earth to be created for the use of man, but men to be generated for the cause
of men, that they among themselves might profit each other; whence had they
this but from our Scriptures? For Moses has written from the mouth of God,
Genes. 1.26.
Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them rule
over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the heaven, and over the
beasts, and over all the earth, and over every thing that creeps, and moves
upon the earth. And Psalm. 8.6.
David says, thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, all sheep
and oxen, the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the fishes of the
sea. Therefore they have learned of our writers all things to be subject to
man, and for that cause thought they were created for man's sake; we find also
in the books of Moses, man to be created for the sake of man, as when the
Lord says Genesis 2.18.
it is not good for man to be alone, let us make him a helper like to
himself; wherefore a woman is given to a man for a help, that she might
bring forth children, that man might be an help to man. Moreover before the
woman was formed, it was said Genesis 2.20.
of Adam that there was found no help meet for him. For man could have no
help, but of man. For of all the living creatures there was none like man, and
that we may speak absolutely, there was no help found meet for him.
Therefore the womankind was expected to be an helper, wherefore according to
the will of God, or the conjunction of nature we ought mutually to be an help
one to another, to strive in duties, and as it were to place all commodities in
the midst, and that I may use the word of the Scripture to bring help one to
another; either by care or duty, or money, or labors, or some way that the
grace, and favor of society might be increased between us, neither either of
us might be revoked from his office, no not for the terror of danger, but
each of us might account all as his own, as well adversity, as prosperity.
Furthermore holy Moses feared not to undertake grievous wars for the people,
and offspring of his progenitors. Neither feared he the strength of that
potent King, neither fears he the fierceness of his barbarous cruelty, but
neglected his own safety, that he might bring liberty to the people. Great
therefore is the splendour of justice, which being borne rather for others, then
for her self does help our community, and society does hold her highness
that she may make all things subject to her, that she may bring aid to
others, may bestow money, may deny no duties, may undertake dangerous attempts
for others; who would not desire to hold this tower of virtue, unless avarice
as a chief obstacle did weaken, bend, and bring down the vigor of so great a
virtue? For while we desire to increase riches, heap together money, occupy
lands with their possessions, to be eminent in wealth, we put off the form
of justice, and loose the name of showing kindness, and bounty, to all without
respect. For how can he be just which studieth to deprive another that he may
enrich himself? The desire also of power does effeminate the manly form of
justice. For how can he intervene for others which does endeavor to make
others subject to himself, and how can he aid him that is weak against the
mighty, which does himself affect power that is grievous to liberty?

CHAP. XXVIII. Justice, and fidelity to be showed to enemies.
HOw great a thing justice is, we may understand hereby, because it is not to
be excepted against, either in respect of places or persons, or times, yea
which is kept with enemies: so that if a place, or day of battle be appointed
with the enemy, it is held to be against justice, to prevent, or intercept the
same. For there is a great difference, whether one be taken prisoner in some
sore fight, and conflict, or upon some former extended grace, or by some
accident, or chance. For a sharper revenge is repaid upon sharper, and more
bitter enemies, and upon truce breakers, and upon them which have more
grievously hurt: as for example upon the Numb. 31.3.17.
Midianites, who by their women had caused most of the people of the Jews to
sin whereby the anger of God was poured out against the Numb. 25.4.
fathers and elders of the people, and therefore it came to pass that Moses
overcomming them would suffer none of them to Numb. 21.7.8.17.
remain; But the Gibeonites, which by deceit, rather than by war, crept in
among the people, Joshua 9.23.
Joshua did not utterly destroy, but kept them as a punishment of their
subtilty, under servile, and base conditions. Elisha brought the Syrians whom
he had stricken with blindness momentany, as they were compassing Dothan,
where he was, into the city of Samaria, when they could not see whither they
were entering in: and the King of Israel being earnestly set to smite them,
denied him, saying, 2 Kings 6.22. Non percuties quos non captivasti lance and
gladio tuo.
thou shall not smite them whom thou have not taken with thy sword, and with
thy bow, but as for these, set bread, and water before them rather that they
may eat, and drink, and return to their master: that so being thus
courteously dealt withal, they may be provoked to the like kindness. And
this effect did it take indeed, for the bands of Aram came no Verse 23.
more into the land of Israel. If therefore justice prevail so much in war,
how much more ought it to be kept in peace? And this favor did the Prophet
show them that came to take him; For so we read, that the King of Syria had
sent his host to besiege him, because it was told him, that Elisha was he, that
disclosed all his counsel. Gehazi the servant of the Prophet seeing the army
began to fear danger, to whom the Prophet said, fear not, for there be more
with us then against us, and the Prophet praying that his eyes might be
opened, they were opened. Therefore Gehazi saw the whole mountain round about
Elisha filled wtth horses, and chariots. Wherefore to these going down the
mountain the Prophet says, Let the Lord strike the host of Syria with
blindness, which being obtained, he said to the Syrians, come after me, and
I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. And they saw Elisha whom they so
much desired to take, but when they saw him, they were not able to lay hold of
him. It is manifest therefore, that fidelity and justice ought to be kept even
in war, and that no decorum can possibly be found there where those are
violated. Furthermore the ancients did call adversaries by a word of
mitigation, by a mollified, and soft name strangers. For after an old rite and
custom, enemies were called Psalm. 18.45. Hebr. benei necar, filij extranei.
Sept. (...).
strangers. Which also we may truly say was taken from our profession. for the
Hebrews did call their adversaries (...). Act 2.10. (...) Ephesians. 2.12. 1. In the
Hebrew beside ajab the ordinary root for an enemy, there is tsar, which is not
much dissonant to gar peregrinari, from whence ger a stranger. 2. The Lords
special care for strangers, Deuteronomy. 10.18. and 14.29. Exodus 23.9. now within the
gates of Israel, though enemies before may be the reason hereof. 3. The love
that God enjoined to enemies, Math. 5.44
allophyli, that is in a Latin word alienigenae of another Tribe or nation. In
the first book of the Kings we read, And it came to pass in those days
that the people of other 1 Samuel 28.1. the translation used in our Fathers time
so read, but our vulgar Philistims of Phalas, Hebr. raising dust, and wrapping
themselves in it, because of their multitude in battle, and spreading over the
land as the only nation.
nations came to battle against Jsrael. Fidelity therefore is the foundation
of justice; For the hearts of the just meditate Psalm. 37.31. and 31.23.
fidelity. And when the just does accuse himself, he places justice above
fidelity. For then his justice appears if he confesses the truth. Besides
also the Lord witnesses by Es. 28.16.
Esaias, Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner
stone, a sure foundation, that is, Christ for a foundation to the Church. For
Christ is the foundation of the faith of all men. But the Church is a certain
form of Justice, the common right of all men. She prays in common, she
works in common, she is tried in common. To conclude, he which denies
himself he is just, he is worthy of Christ. And therefore Paul laid down
Christ as the 1 Cor. 3.12.
foundation that we might place our works of Justice upon him, because Faith
is the foundation. But in works being of two sorts, if they be evil there is
iniquity in them, they are out of Christ, and spring from another root, if
they be good, there is justice seated in them, and they are rooted in Christ.

Tullius lib. 1. quemadmodum ex beneficentia quae justitiae conjuncta est,
officia manant.
CHAP. XXIX. Of Beneficence.
BUT let us now speak of Beneficence, which it self also is divided into
benevolence, and liberality. Of these two therefore does beneficence consist,
that it may be perfect. For it is not sufficient be willing to'doe well, but
also it is required that it be put in execution; Neither again is it enough
to do well in outward performance, unless that do proceed out of a good
fountain that is out of a good will; For God loves a 2 Cor. 9.7.
cheerful giver. For if thou do it unwillingly what rewards is there?
Whence the Apostle speaking generally, If I do 1 Cor. 9.17.
it willingly I shall have my reward, if against my will the dispensation is
committed to me. In the Gospel likewise we have many instructions for just
liberality. It is a most commendable thing therefore to be willing to do
well, and to give with that mind to profit, not to hurt. For if thou think
thou ought to extend thy contribution to a luxurious person for the
maintenance of his riotousnesse, or to an adulterer to nourish him in his
sin, there can be no beneficence there, where there is no benevolence. For
that is not to profit, but to hurt another, if thou give to him that conspireth
against his country, that desires upon thy cost to gather together the
wicked, which may impugn the Church. This is not liberality to be allowed of,
if thou help him which decrees with heavy rebukes against the widow and the
fatherless, or does attempt to deprive them forcibly of their possessions.
That bounty is not to be approved, if what is given to one is wrested from
another, if thou get it unjustly, and think it ought justly to be dispensed:
unless perhaps, as Luke 19.
Zacheus did, thou restore to him fourefold whom thou have defrauded, and thou
recompense the faults of the days of thy Paganism with the study of true
religion, and work of a believer. Let thy liberality therefore have a good
foundation. This is first required that thou contribute to the cause of the
Gospel in faith, that thou use no imposture in thy oblations, that thou say
not, thou bestowest more With Ananias, and Sapphira. Acts 5.
when thou bestowest less. For what should need such reproof? there is fraud
in thy promise, it is in thy power to give what thou will. Deceit loses the
foundation, and the world falls, and comes to naught. Did Peter so burn
with indignation, that he was desirous to destroy Acts 5.
Ananias or his wife? But he would others to beware by their example, lest they
running into like offense might perish with them. Neither is it perfect
liberality if thou contribute rather for Prove. 25.14.
vainglory then for mercy sake, Thy affection imposes a name upon thy work,
look with what mind it proceeds from thee, so is it estimated. Thou see
what a moral judge thou have? He consulteth with thee in what sense he shall
take thy work, and he first inquireth how it stands with thy mind. Let not
thy Math. 6.3.
left hand know, says he, what thy right hand does. He speaks not of the
body, but let not thine unanimous friend, nor thy brother know what thou do,
lest while here thou seek to get a reward by boasting, thou there losest the
fruit of remuneration. But there is perfect liberality where one does cover his
works with silence, and does secretly come as an aid to every several
person, and whom the mouth of the poor praises, and not his own lips.
Moreover, perfect liberality is commended by the faith of them in whom it is,
the cause, place, and time, where, and when it is executed: insomuch that the
first and principal good work is that which is done toward them, that are of
the Gal. 6.10.
household of faith: It is an exceeding great fault, if in thy knowledge thou
suffer the faithful man to want, and such a one whom thou know to be
without money in his purse, to be pinched with famine, and to endure much
sorrow, especially when he is ashamed to make known his poverty: if he shall
speedily fall into captivity, or that in thy knowledge into reproach, and thou
help him not, if he being just suffer imprisonment, or be under vexation for
some debt (for although mercy is due to all, yet much to the just) if in the
time of his affliction he obtains nothing of thee, if lastly in the time of
his extreme peril, even then, when he is haled to death thy money prevails
more with thee, then the life of him about to die, it is an exceeding great
fault, I say, and justly condemned. Of this Job 29.13.
Job speaks worthily, the blessing of him that was about to perish came upon
me. The Lord truly is no accepter of persons, because he knows all things.
But we verily owe mercy to all: but because the most seek it by deceit, and
counterfeit grief, therefore where the cause is manifest, the person known,
the time urges, mercy ought more largely to open her bowels. For the Lord is
not covetous, that he should desire to receive much of thee, blessed truly is
he that Math. 19.27.29.
leaves all and follows him. But he is blessed also that does it in what he
has in his affection, and resolution, and this is to be habitually beneficent.
The Lord preferred the Luke 21.1.
widows two mites before the gifts of the rich, because she gave all that
she had, but they bestowed a small part of their abundance. We see therefore,
while we compare things together, that the 2 Cor. 8.10.
affection makes the gift either rich or poor, and sets a higher, or lower
prize upon the deeds of men. But God will not riches to be spent all at once,
and that we should be emptied of our whole substance, as it were at one lift,
and hazard: but to be dispensed, and disposed of upon each occasion in their
several portions, unless peradventure we will do as 1 Kings 19.21.
Elisha did, who slew his oxen, and fed the poor of that which he had, that
he might be deteyned by no household affairs, but leaving all addict himself
wholly to the study of prophecy. That liberality also is to be approved of,
that thou despise not the next of thy seed, if thou know them to want. For it
is better for thee, that thou thy self help thine, in whom shame covers
their faces when they ask aid at the hands of others, or seek to relieve
their necessity by strangers: albeit not with a desire, that they should be
enriched with that which otherwise might have been for the sustenance of the
needy. For the cause, not favor or affection must overruled. Neither have thou
therefore dedicated thy self to God, that thou might enrich thine own
stock, but that as a fruit of thy good works thou might attain to
eternal life, and by the Prove. 22.9.
blessing of commiseration thou might have more assurance of the Dan. 4.24.
juxta veterem transl. redime, but better abrumpe or as much as Exodus 21.8.
adjuvet redimere Veheperah The books of the Talmud are divided by perakim
fractions, it were absurd to say redemptions.
redemption of thy sins: They suppose they require a small matter of thee
being a kinsman, but they seek the prize of thy reward, and strive to deprive
thee of the fruit of eternal life. Does the next kinsman accuse thee for that
thou have not made him rich, when he would have defrauded thee of the reward
of everlasting life? Thou have our counsel before, thou requirest our
authority, first therefore no man ought to be ashamed, if of a rich man he be
made poor in giving to the poor, because Christ being rich was made 2 Cor.
8.9.
poor, that by his poverty he might enrich us. He has given us a rule to
follow, that if any man has removed the famine of the poor, and has relirved
their want, this may be a good ground for the wasting of his patrimony; Whence
the Apostle in this, says he, I speak not by 2 Cor. 8.10.
commandment, but it is my counsel, and advise to you. For this is profitable
that ye follow Christ. Counsel is given to the good, correction does curb
offenders. Moreover he speaks, as it were to the good, which not only to
do, but to Ibid. v. 10.
will, that is to say, to do with a willing mind, have begun a year ago.
Both these, not one part belongs to the perfect. Therefore he teaches both
liberality without benevolence, and benevolence without liberality not to be
perfect: Hereupon hoe exhorts to perfection, saying, Ibid. v. 11. (...)
Now therefore consummate the work also, that as there is a readiness to
will: so ye may perfect it of that which ye have. For if there be a willing
mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that a
man has not. Neither is it, that other men should be eased, and ye grieved:
but that, as at this time your abundance supplieth their want, likewise their
abundance may be for your want, that there may be an equality. As it is
written, Exodus 16.18.
and he that gathers much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had
nothing less. We observe how that herein he comprehends both benevolence,
and liberality likewise, the manner of doing, the fruits, and the persons.
Therefore the manner, because he gave good counsel, to the unperfect. For
none are straightened, but the unperfect. But and if any one, being not willing
to be grievous to the Church, set in some pastorship, or ministry, does not
bestow all that he has in benevolence, but does perform that which in
honesty may be thought sufficient for his place, such a one does not seem to
me to be unperfect. And I suppose the Apostle speaks not of the straightness
of affection, but of the straightness of allowance. But of their persons, I
think it to have been spoken, that your abundance may be for their want, and
their abundance for your want: that is to say, that the abundance of the people
may be of good operation to relieve their poverty by nourishing them, and
their abundance spiritual may be of like operation to supply among the people
the defect of spiritual merit, and may bring unto them grace. Whence very
singular is the president which he has set down out of Exodus 16.12. 2 Cor.
8.15.
Moses, he which had much had nothing over, and he which had little had
nothing less. This worthy example does well exhort all men to the duty of
mercy, because he which does possess much gold has nothing over, for that
whatsoever it in this world is nothing, and he which has little has nothing
less, because it is nothing which he loses. The matter is without loss,
which wholly is a loss in itself. so also is the sense good: otherwise he
which has overplus, although he give not has nothing over: because although
he be a getter, and gainer still, yet desiring more does need always. And
he which has little decaieth not, because it is not much which feeds, and
suffices a poor man. Likewise therefore, that poor man that bestows
spiritual alms in stead of moneys, though he has a great portion of grace,
yet has nothing over. For the mind is not burdened with grace, or gifts
divine, but succored, and supported. The sacred sentence may also be thus
understood: Thou have nothing over, O man. For how much is it, that thou have
received, albeit it may seem to be much in respect of thy self? Luke 7.18.
John, then whom no man was greater among the sons of men, yet was he less
then he, which was least in the kingdom of heaven. The sentence also may
carry this sense; The grace of God, because it is spiritual has nothing over
corporally, or to supply the wants of the body. For who can comprehend the
magnitude, or latitude which he discerns not? Faith if it shall be as a
grain of mustard seed shall be able to translate mountains out of their
places, and there is not given thee, whosoever thou art, beyond one grain of
mustard seed. If grace abound in thee, it is to be feared lest thy mind begin
to be lifted up with so great a gift. For that there be many that have more
grievously fallen through the height, and pride of their own heart, then if
they had no grace. And he which has little does not diminish it: because it
is not a bodily thing that it may be divided, and that which seems to be
little, is much to him that wants nothing. Age also, and debility of body is
to be considered in contribution, sometime also modesty, which shows an
ingenuous nature, and a generous stock: and that thou contribute more to such,
as are old, which are not now able to get their living by labor: The same
consideration likewise is to be had, where is feebleness of body, or want of
strength to perform travail, here our helping hand is to be lent more
readily. Again, if any one be fallen from a wealthy estate to a needy, and
especially, if by no fault of his own, but either by robbery, or banishment,
or by the false accusations, or calumnies of the malignant has lost what
sometime he had in possession. But peradventure some man may say; The blind
sits in one, and the same place with the young lusty Springall, the one is
neglected, the other respected.

It is true indeed, because he creeps and incrocheth through his importunity
nearer, and faster upon the well-disposed then the other. But that proceeds
not from want of judgment in him, but that he may be rid of a tedious and
troublesome beggar. And the Luke 11.8.
Lord also in the Gospel seems to give way to such an alms, when the gates
being shut, and himself that was desired in bed, yet upon the importunatenesse
of the craver could do no less then give, yea, give as much as was requested.

CHAP. XXX. Of recompencing a benefit.
IT is a fair, and commendable part in thee also to be of a ready, and
forward disposition to requite him which has bestowed upon thee either a
benefit, or a gift, if he himself has fallen into necessity. For what is so
contrary to duty, as not to render what thou have received? Neither do I
think it enough to be rendered again with the like, but in a more abundant
measure, the use of the benefit is to be cast up in thine account, that thereby
thou may relieve him with lo much, as may ease him of his trouble. For not to
exceed in requital of a benefit, is to be inferior, because he that
conferreth it, is before the receiver in time, before him in courtesy. The
nature therefore of the ground is to be imitated of us, which is wont to
rcturne the seed sown in a greater number, and more manifold increase.
Therefore it is written Prove. 24.30.31.
for thine instruction, I passed by the field of the slothful, and by the
vineyard of the man destitute of understanding. If thou shall leave this field,
it shall be desolate. A wise man therefore is also like a tilled field
restoring the seed committed to it, and the talent commended to his trust in
much more measure, and with greater advantage. The earth therefore buddeth
forth fruits, either of it own accord, or returns back those that she is
betrusted withal with a fuller hand. Thou owe both by a certain hereditary
right to thy parents, lest thou be left as an unfruitful field. Howbeit, let
it be, that some man may excuse himself in that he has not given, can any one
excuse himself in that he has not restored? It is scarce lawful for any one
not to give, but altogether unlawful not to restore. Therefore Solomon Prove
23.12.
has worthily spoken, when thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider
diligently what is set before thee, and put the knife to thy throat, for thou
must prepare the like. We being desirous to imitate him have written sentences.
To bestow a gratuity is good, but to be unmindfull of recompense is harsh. The
earth it self, as has been said, suggesteth an example of humanity; It
voluntarily ministers fruits, which thou have not sown, renders that
multiplied, which it has received. To deny to tell thee back thy money lent,
it is not lawful; how then can it be lawful not to recompense a favor
received? Thou have it also in the Prove. 25.21, 23.
Proverbs, that this retribution of good has prevailed so much with God, that
in the day of ruin, when the weight of thy sins has drawn down the
balance it has found grace in his sight. What shall I use other examples,
when the Lord himself in the Gospel does promise a more plentiful
remuneration of the Sea his 2 C. 2 B. de Voc. Gent. No more then a Christian
duty, Luke 11.10. a debt that we owe to God, Si totum tempus vitae hujus
occupant obsequia, non poteris pensare quod debes Chrysostom. Hom. 70. as salvation
to these, Romans 11.6. Tit. 3.5. of Gods gift. Ephesians. 6.8. Merita nostra Dei
munera, Aug. nothing in comparison of his benefits to us, howbeit these
petitions of ours call for mercy, Psalm. 5.7.
merits of the Saints, and does exhort to the performance of good Luke 6.37.38.
works: forgive, and it shall be forgiven you, give and it shall be given
you, a good measure pressed down, shaken together, running over shall men
heap into your bosom. Therefore also that Prove. 23.1.2. and 9.2.5.6.
banquet of Solomon is not of meats, but of good works. For how can the
minds of men better banquet, and feast themselves, then by good deeds? Or what
can more easily satiate the minds of the just, then the conscience of a good
work? What meat is more pleasant then to do the will of God? My John. 4.34.
meat is that J may do the will of my Father which is in heaven, and that I
may finish his work. Let us be delighted with this meat, as the Psalm. 37.4.
(...), Sept.
Psalmist advises, delight thou in the Lord. They are delighted with this
meat, which have comprehended the higher delights with a wonderful wit, which
are able to know not what is that impure, and sensual, but clean, and
intelligible delight of the mind. Let us therefore eat the bread of wisdom,
and be filled with the word of God: because Deuteronomy. 8.3.
man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God, does man made after Gods image live. To full food drink also is
required Deuteronomy. 8.3.
such likewise is the Word. Of this, holy John 4.14. and 7.37, 38. Rev. 22.17.
Job speaks expressly enough, Job 29.21, 22, 23.
as the earth waits for the rain: so men gave ear, and waited, and held
their tongue at my counsel.

CHAP. XXXI. Benevolence to be better then Liberality.
IT is good therefore that we be moistened with the oracles of the divine
Scriptures, and that the word of God do descend upon us as the dew. When thou
therefore shall sit at the Prove. 23.1.2.
table of the Mighty, understand who that Mighty one, and Ruler is, and placed
in the Paradise of pleasure, and banquet of wisdom consider what dishes are
set before thee. The divine Scripture is the banquet of wisdom; the several
books thereof, are the several dishes; understand first what dainties are in
the dishes, and then put in thy hand, that what thou gathered, or what thou
receivest from the Lord thy God, thou may practice, and may represent in
duties the grace bestowed upon thee, as did Peter, and as did Paul, which in
preaching the Gospeil have kept with the plentiful giver of the gifts of
grace, some reciprocal duty, that every one may be able to say with him: by
the 1 Cor. 15.10.
grace of God I am that I am, I labored more abundantly then they all. One
therefore has repaid the fruit of the received benefit, as gold with gold,
silver with silver, another labor, another (and I know not whether more richly
also) has restored his affection only: For what if there be no power yielded
to restore? In rendering a benefit the mind does more work, then the valuation,
the good will is more ponderous, then the possibility of returning, and
repaying the gift. For in that selfsame thing that thanks is returned,
requital is made. Good will therefore is a great matter, which though it
bestow nothing, it does exhibit, and show forth more: and when in the matter
of patrimony it has nothing, yet does it extend, and enlarge it self in
intention to more, and this it does without any its own loss, and with the
gain of all. The preeminency of benevolence above liberality, isno less
intended afterward in the consequences, then here.
And therefore does good will excel, and go beyond liberality it self: as
being richer in conversation, then that in contribution. For there be more
that stand in need of the benefit of benevolence then of liberality, because
all living in abundance; need not this: yet is this most needful also, the
poor being the greater number. But benevolence and liberality are yoked
together as companions; but so that liberality proceeds from it, when the use
of freedom in giving follows the affection of Omnino sunt duo genera largorum:
quorum alteri prodigi. alteri liberales, Cic. l. 2. Offic. Quae istaec subdita
est largitas? Ter. in Adelph. id est, largitio seu prodigalitas. Nonnunquam ita
est sed hic sumitur in bonam partem, nempe pro humanitatis effectu.
largess, the one is separated, and divided from the other. For when
liberality fails, benevolence remains, as the common mother of all,
coupling and knitting together friendship, faithful in counsel, pleasant in
prosperity, grieved in adversity: inasmuch that every one chooses rather to
commit himself to the counsel of him which is a well-willer, then of him that
is reputed wise. As David when he was wiser, yet had he his repose in the
Sam. 20.5.24.
counsel of Jonathan being his junior. Take away benevolence, and put it out
of course among men, and pull the Sun out of the firmament; right so shall it
be, because without it no use can be made of mankind, as to direct the
stronger in his passage, to call back the wanderer, to give entertainment, and
hospitality. It was therefore no mean virtue, wherein Job did so much rejoice
within himself, when he said, Job 31.32.
the stranger did not lodge in the street, but I opened my doors to him that
went by the way. Without this virtue common courtesy would be denied, even to
give water out of the well, fire and light out of the chimney. Good will
therefore in all those is as the fountain of water refreshing the thirsty, and
as a light, whereat many kindling their candle, reteyneth still the same virtue
in it self, and imparting to others, diminishes nothing of its own store.
There is also that liberality in benevolence, that if thou have any
handwriting of an unable debtor, when thou have cancelled the same thou
restorest it him, no payment at-all being made. This does holy Job admonish by
his example, as a duty that every man ought to perform: whose praise was in
Job 29.12.16.
giving what was his own, not in requiring his own. He which has of his
own does not borrow, he which has not wherewithal, cannot discharge the
obligation. But thou say that thou do not exact thine own. Is it not all
one when thou reservest the debt for covetous heirs? how much better might
thou represent with the praise of benevolence, and that without loss of thy
money? But that we may more fully discuss the point benevolence proceeding
forth first from those of our own family, that is, from our children, parents,
brethren, by degrees of conjunction came into walled cities, and going out of
Paradise filled the world.

To conclude, when in the man and woman, God placed a benevolent affection, he
said withal; they both shall be one Genes. 2.24. Erant ambo in una carne, and
in uno spiritu, meaning by this addition, that they ought to be one, and the
same, no less in affecction, then in nature. Adunitatem commendandam unitatis
dedit exemplum. Ambros. in C. 4. ad Ephesians. verse. 3. in quem locum, Calv. Ego
simplicius intelligo de animorum concordia. God created them both in his image,
Genes. 1.27. that they two might be one, and not of an outward, but of an
inward part of man, viz. of his ribbe, Genesis 2.21. which as a bond to tie to
unity of mind, and affection. Mulier fulget radijs mariti. In light they
conspiring in one: so ought they in delight.
flesh, and one spirit. Eav committed her self to the Serpents trust, because
she, who had received nothing but benevolence, could not think, that there
was any such thing as malevolence, and evil meaning.

CHAPTER XXXII. That Benevolence is specially permanent in the Church, and in
men adorned with Christian virtue.
BEnevolence is increased by the assembly of the Church, by fellowship of the
faith, by the company of such as are to be instructed in the principles by way
of acquaintance, for the participation of divine grace, and by the communion of
the mysteries, or Sacraments. For these do justly challenge to themselves the
appellation of acquaintance, and friendship, the reverence of sons, the
authority, and piety of fathers, the Germanitatem fratrum.
germanity, and nearest blood of brotherhood; For kindred in grace much avails
to the increase of good will. The studies of like virtues do also further, and
set forward the same. Good will likewise causes a similitude, and resemblance
of manners. Jonathan the Kings son did imitate the mansuetude, and
gentleness of holy David, and for this cause he entirely loved him. Hence is
that, Psalm. 18.25.26. (...). Sept.
with the holy thou shall be holy: for it seems that this ought not only to
be brought to conversation, but also to benevolence, as to the means.
Cohabitation of place is not the thing: but concordancy in affection brings
agreement in manners. As we may perceive in the sons of Noah who dwelt
together, but accorded not in disposition. Esau and Jacob inhabited together,
but how much every way did they dissent, and disagree? For there was not
betwixt them that benevolence, which teaches to prefer others before our
selves, but rather contention, who should first seize upon the blessing. The
one was very rough, the other soft, and of sweet condition: between them of
contrary conditions, between them of contrary studies, was it possible that
good will should harbor? Neither could holy Jacob prefer such a degenerating
person to the preeminency of the renowned virtues found in his godly fathers
house. But nothing has such conformity with true society, as justice
conjoined with equity, which being, as it were, the consort, and compeere to
benevolence works this effect, that as we believe them to be like us in
qualities of worth: so do we prefer them in our love, Benevolence likewise
is not without fortitude, and magnanimity: For friendship proceeding from the
fountain of benevolence, it fears not to undergo the greatest danger that
may befall this life for a true and trusty friend. And says he being thus
affected: whatsoever evil shall befall me, I shall be contented to sustain it
for his sake.

CHAP. XXXIII. The praise of Benevolence.
BEnevolence likewise has accustomed to wring away the sword from anger.
Benevolence makes the Prove. 27.6.
wounds of a friend, more profitable then the voluntary kisses of an enemy.
Benevolence causes that of many there is made one: because although there be
more in number, they are made one, in whom there is one mind, and one
judgment. We note further corrections themselves to be acceptable in
friendship, which prick indeed, yet grieve not. For we are nipped, and pinched
a while with censorious speeches: but yet so, that we are more delighted still
with the sedulity, and care of a mind wishing, and willing us all good. In a
word, the same duties are not always due to all men, neither always are the
persons to be preferred, but for the most part the causes, and the times.
Sometimes one is to help his neighbor before his brother, and that because of
the words of Prove. 27.10.
Solomon inspired by the holy Ghost, better is a neighbor that is near, then
a brother that is far off. And therefore every one for the most part
commits himself rather to the good will of a friend, or neighbor, then to
the friendship of a brother. So far does benevolence prevail, that it
overcommeth sometimes the pledges, and bonds of natural affection.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Fortitude, which without Justice to be no virtue is showed
by sundry instances.
WE have very copiously handled in the place of Justice the nature, and force
of honesty. Now let us treat of Fortitude, which carrying an higher sail then
the rest, is divided into the affairs of war, and domestical, or those of
peace; But the study of the affairs of war seems to be inconvenient to our
treatise of Office, because we intend to set out the duties of the mind, rather
then of the body, neither have we now to intermeddle with the noise of arms,
but with the conditions of peace. But our ancestors, such as were Ioshuah,
Gideon, Sampson, David, have had also great renown in affairs of war.
Fortitude therefore is reputed a virtue of an higher strain then the rest: yet
such as goes not alone, nor unaccompanied. For it commits not it self to it
self; for without justice it is the fuel, and matter of iniquity. Because by
how much more strong it is, by so much more ready is it to oppress an
inferior. And in respect of war it self, this is first to be looked into,
whether it be justly, or unjustly undertaken? David never waged it, but being
provoked. Therefore in all his wars he had prudence, as a companion.
Wherefore being to fight with Goliath, one of the breed of the Giants, and of
huge bigness, in a single combat, he refused such weapons, as might incomber
him. For his strength lay rather in his own arms, then in strange armor of
defense, wherewith he was not acquainted. Again, he chose rather to encounter
him a-farre off, that his stroke might make the deeper impression: and with a
stone out of a sling slew him. Afterward, never did he enterprise any wars,
but first consulted with the oracles of God. Therefore departed he in alll,
Master of the field, even unto his extreme old age continued he prompt in the
feats of arms, making war amiddest the fierce troops of the Giants, not for
the desire he had of his own, but of Gods glory in their confusion, and then
too, when careless of his life, was he, as a good soldier preserved. But this
fortitude of his, is not only of renown, but theirs also is most glorious, who
in the greatness of their mind through Heb. 11.33.
faith stopped the months of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the
edge of the sword, of weak were made strong. Strong were they, and courageous,
and yet not environed with legions, and an host of soldiers for their defense,
neither did they bear away such victory, as was common to many others, but by
the mere virtue of their heroical spirits inflamed by God, each of them did
give all these noble attempts, and attain to the honor of a single triumph
over the perfidious, to his never ending praise. Of what an invincible spirit
of fortitude was Daniel, who was nothing dismayed at the roaring about his sides
of gaping, and greedy Lions? The beasts fretted, and he feasted.

CHAP. XXXV. Fortitude to consist principally in the virtue of the mind, and
contempt of things that perish.
TThe glory therefore of Fortitude is not only in the strength of the body and
arms, bat in the strength of the mind, neither in bringing in, but in removing
injury is the law thereof. For he which does not repel from his fellow injury,
if he be able, is as much in fault, as he which does it. Hereupon Moses began
his first attempt of warlike fortitude; For when he saw an Hebrew suffer wrong
of an Egyptian, he so defended him, that he Exodus 2.12.
slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand. Solomon also says, deliver him
that is Prove. 24.11.
drawn to death. Whereby it is manifest from whence, either Tully, or else
Panaetius or Aristotle himself borrowed the same: albeit likewise Job more
ancient then His duobus, viz. Mose, and Salomone.
both these, has said, Job 29.12.13.
I delivered the poor that cried out of the hand of the mighty, and the
fatherless, and him that had none to help him, the blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me? Was not this man stronger, who so strongly
endured the violence of the devil, and overcame him in the power of his mind?
Neither is it to be doubted of his strength, to Joh 40.2.5.6.
whom the Lord says; Gird up mow thy loins like a man, deck thy self with
majesty and excellency, and behold every one that is proud and abase him. The
Apostle also mentions the strong consolation, which every Christian ought to
have, builded upon the stablenesse of Gods promise, and the unchangablenesse of
his word and oath. He is therefore strong, which is able to comfort himself
being under some affliction. And in truth, that is rightly called fortitude,
when every one overcommeth himself, contains anger, is mollified with no
pleasure, is cast down with adversity, is puffed up with no prosperity,
neither carried about with any light wind of vain rumor, concerning the Ephesians.
4.14. 1 Timothy 6.20. and 41.1. 2 Timothy 4.4. 1 Cor. 2.12. 2 These 2.2. Math. 24.6.
mutation of sundry things, but remains Ephesians. 6.10.
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, 1 Pet. 3.14. Acts 28.20.
See Saint Paul's fortitude rejoicing under bonds. The effects of Fortitude.
fearing nothing their fear, neither being troubled: And no marvel; For what
is more high and magnificent, then to captivate the understanding, macerate the
flesh, and bring it into bondage, that it may obey government, hearken to
counsel, and that in undertaking labors, it may speodily execute the purpose,
and will of the mind renewed, and sanctified by the Spirit of God? Here lies
the first, and greatest strength of fortitude, and it has a double work in
this exercise, or conflict. First, it has the outward things of the body in
least account, and does repute them as superfluous, and rather to be despised
then desired.

Secondly, those things which are chief, and all things in which honesty, and
comeliness is seen, does it seek after, and pursue with a notable intention
of mind, never desisting until it be effected. For what is of so great
commendation, as that thou so inform thy mind, that thou neither place riches,
nor pleasures, nor honors in the highest room, neither that thou spend all
thy studies in them? Because, when thou shall be so affected in mind, it must
needs be, that thou then wilt prefer that eminency of honesty, and Illud
(...).
comeliness, and wilt think so intentively upon it, whatsoever shall happen,
let it be either, the loss of patrimony, or impairing of honor, or
backbiting (every whereof is wont to break the heart of a worldly man) as
being superior, and above the reach of it, shall have no fear nor feeling
thereof. Again, that is an undoubted mark of fortitude, in the undertaking of
danger for the safety, and preservation of justice not to be moved. This is
true fortitudes trial, and ever found in a Christian champion, that unless
he strive lawfully, and with undaunted courage in case of greatest danger for
Christ's cause, he is not 1 Cor. 9.24, 25.
crowned. Does the precept of fortitude seem a smali matter to thee, when the
same Apostle opens the way, and lays out the steps with so great care, and
diligence, by which we must come to it? Affliction works patience, patience
experience, experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. Vide quot certamina
and una corona.
See how many combats, and but one crown; Which precept is given by no other
man, then by him, that is Romans 5.34.
comforted in Christ Jesus, and exceeding joyous in tribulation, whose flesh
had no rest, but was troubled on every side, fightings without, and terrors
within. And though hedged in with perils 2 Cor. 7.4. 2 Cor. 11.23. 24, 25, 26.
on every side, of waters, of robbers, of his own nation, and other without
number, put under many distresfull labors, imprisonments, stripes, tumults,
stonings, and many imminent 2 Cor. 1.9.10. We had the sentence of death in our
selves. Erepti de ipsa pressura praedicatores resusctatos se dicnut. Ambros. in
hunc locum.
deaths, notwithstanding was not daunted in mind, neither was courage broken,
but stoutly strove that he might not be brought under the captivity of sin,
nor drawn from his holy profession by these assaults. And hereby in the end
he became Master of the field against all his enemies, beat down his
infirmities, raised up in himself the impregnable fortress of virtue, and
bore away the prize. And therefore consider how he teaches such as bear
Offices in the Church to despise these worldly things; If therefore ye be dead
with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why as if ye lived still
therein, do you contend about the worldl? why Col. 2.21.22.
are ye burdened with traditions, as touch not, taste not, handle not, which
all perish with fising, and are all after the traditions, and doctrines of men?
and afterward, Chap. 3.1.
if ye be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above; and again, V. 5.
mortify your members, which are upon the earth. These things are spoken, and
belong still to all the faithful. But thee (O my son) he persuades to the
contempt of riches, the avoidance of profane, and old 1 Timothy 4.6.7.
wives tales, suffering nothing to affect thee, but what may exercise thee to
piety, because bodily exercise profits nothing, but godliness is profitable
to all things. Wherefore let godliness exercise thee to 1 Timothy 6.11.
justice, to continency, to gentleness, that thou may 2 Timothy 1.22. and 6.12
fly the lusts of youth, and being rooted, and grounded in grace, may fight
the good fight of faith, and not 2 Timothy 2.4.
entangle thy self in secular affairs, because thou being the Lords soldier
thou must war for him. For if he which goes to war under the Emperor is
forbidden suits of law, pleading at the bar, buying, and selling in the
market, and that under the penalty of the law: how much more ought he, which
does exercise spiritual warfare, abstain from the use of all worldly
negotiation, and rest himself content with the croppe of his own small
grounds, if he have any, if he have none, with the coming in of his salary,
and stipend? For he is a good witness of Gods special providence, and care
toward his servants, which says, Psalm. 37.25.
I have been young, and am old, yet never saw I the righteous forsaken, nor
his seed begging their bread. For that is true tranquillity, Tranquillity what.
and temperance of mind, which is neither affected with the desire of seeking,
nor perplexed with the fear of wanting.

CHAP. XXXVI. Evils of adversity to be endured with a contented mind, and
sometimes also to be declined.
THere is also that, which is called vacuity and freedom of mind from
vexations, which is, when we be neither crushed with grief, nor puffed up with
prosperity. If so be, that they, which do exhort some to take upon them the
government of the Commonweal, do give these precepts, how much more ought
we, which are called to the government of the Church, to do such things as may
please God, that the power of Christ may shine in us in a virtuous course, and
that so we may be approved soldiers to our Emperor, our Romans 6.13.
members being the weapons of righteousness, not fleshly weapons, in which
sin reigns; but the strong armor of God to the destroying of sin? Let
our flesh dye, that all sin may die in it, that of dead being made living,
there may be a resurrection begun in us, and a new birth of works, and
manners. These are the wages of fortitude in her fullness, and as she is
accompanied with honesty and comeliness. But because in all that we undertake,
we search out not only what is honest, but what is possible, for otherwise
peradventure we might enterprise somewhat, which we are not able to execute:
the Lord grants leave in time of persecution to go from city to city; which,
that I may use his own word, is to flee this, lest some might over-rashly
stirred up with the glorious desire of martyrdom, offer themselves to danger,
and yet, through the weakness of the flesh, and inconstancy of their mind,
want the strength of faith, and spiritual fortitude to support, he permits
them.

CHAP. XXXVIII. That providence is a great pillar of fortitude.
NEither is this remissness to creep in here in this sacred cause: but fear
of danger is a thing that must be cast out of a Christian heart: what a
baseness is it to forsake the faith for fear of a little business of
molestation? For this cause the mind is to be prepared, the heart to be
exercised, and established before hand, that it may hold out constantly in this
glorious profession. For then will no terrors affright, no molestations break
our hearts, no punishments make us yield. Very hardly indeed are these
sustained, but for that all punishments the heaviest, and hardest in this our
momentary race are overcome with the fear of greater hereafter, therefore, if
thou strengthenest thy self with wholesome counsel, hearkenest to sound and
well grounded reason, set before thine eyes the dread of the great
judgment to come, with the torments of the doom which never shall have end,
thou shall he able to bear with patience whatsoever shall be laid upon thee.
This therefore is the part of diligence, To set before thy eyes the dread of
the judgment to come.
if any one so arm himself: that To strengthen thy self with wholesome
counsel, and hearken to sound reason.
the part of wit, if any one by the vigor of his understanding be able to
foresee, what shall fall out heareafter, place before his sight what may
happen, and to be able to define what he ought to do, if it shall so happen.
to be able sometime to revolue, and cast up in his mind two or three things
together, which he conjectures may possibly either severally or jointly fall
out, and to dispose of them after the nature, and quality of each action for
his best profit, and advantage. Wherefore it is the part of a strong man not to
dissemble when any thing hangs over his head but to foresee, and epsy out of
the watch-towre of his mind, and to meet within his provident cogitations to
come, lest he say afterward: Therefore am I fallen into these extremities,
because I did not imagine that such things as these could come to pass.
Moreover unless the condition of adversity be narrowly looked into, it soon
seizes upon us. As in war a sudden enemy can hardly be sustained, and
resisted: and if he find us unprepared he easily oppresses us: so evil whereof
we have had no trial, nor experience, invading us, will more wast and break
us, then such as we have been inured unto: wherefore in these two things the
excellency of the mind does appear. The one, that thy mind exercised with good
thoughts may with a clean heart see what is good, and honest, For blessed are
the clean, and Mat. 5.8.
pure in heart, because they shall see God, and through the light and sight of
him, and his truth shall judge that only good which is honest. The other that
it be forestalled with no turmoiling worldly business, and again that no
fleshly lusts disquiet it, which for any man to perform is is no easy task.
For what is so difficult, as out of the high tower of wisdom to despise
riches, and all other things, which seem to the most part great and of high
esteem? Confirm thou thy judgment by stable, and strong reason, and what
thou shall judge light, and without weight contemn as unprofitable, and good
for nothing. If any adversity shall befall thee, and that such as shall be
thought grievous and bitter, so regard thou it, and no otherwise then as a
matter incident to nature, and belonging to man, especially seeing thou have
read, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither,
the Lord Job 1.22.
gives, and the Lord takes away yet not withstanding he lost all his
children, and his substance. And thou may learn of him in all extremities
to carry the person of a wise, and just man, which is evident in that which
follows As Vulgar translation.
it pleases the Lord, so comes it to pass, blessed be the Name of the Lord:
and afterward when that foolish wife of his spoke, and bid him bless God,
whatsoever befell him by way of derision, he replied, Which is as much as if
had said, we are before hand with God, in the long fruition of manifold
blessings proceeding from his mere mercy without our desert, he was behind
with us in rendering what we justly merited, let us therefore bear the wrath of
the Lord, for we have sinned against him, Micah 1.9.
Have we received good at the hands of God, Job. 2.10.
and shall we not receive evil.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Fortitude ought to be at war with all vices, principally with
avarice.
WHerefore fortitude, of the mind is no mean virtue separated from the rest,
as waging war with the other virtues, but that which only defends the
luster and beauty of them all, keeps judgment, and decrees against all
vices with an inexpiable hatred, and contention. Invincible is it in labors,
courageous in dangers, and contrariwise rigide and stiff against pleasures
that's hard and piously obstinate against allurements to evil, knowing no such,
nor can be brought to know how, or what it means to lend an ear to the
inticements of sinners: no not bedding such according to the prohibiton of the
Apostle 2 John 5.10. Romans 16.17.
once God speed. Finally it neglects the heaping together of moneys, as a
blot to the splendour of virtue, and drawing with it the contagious infection of
coveteousnesse. For there is nothing so contrary to fortitude as to be
overcome with lucre, while the warrier with his forces is too greedy upon the
spoils of the slain, oftentimes the enemies repulsed, and their whole army
inclining to flight miserably falls, and whiles occupied in rifling, the
legions remain dejected amiddest their triumphsrthey prick forward the
adversaries, who were fled before to return upon their backs. Let fortitude
therefore repel, and tread under foot so cruel a beast as is greedy avarice,
neither let it be ensnared with covetous desires nor disheartened with fear,
because virtue is of such stability in it self, that it pursues and puts to
flight all vices, as its poison, and bane. Above all it makes choice to enter
the lists of a devil, and single fight with anger, and to make her show her
back, because she it is that strippeth of counsel, corrupts, fouleth and
fills the blood with pernicious humors in such sort, that she would be
avoided, as a sickness, and noisome disease that most of all hurts. Let it
beware also of the hunting and gaping after glory, and honor, which often
destroys, when it is immoderately sought, but always undoubtedly when it is
usurped: were any of these parts of fortitude in virtue, defective in Job, did
any of these in viciousness creep upon him? how did he tolerate the anguish
of festering, and raging sores, scattered throughout his whole body, and beside
the pain, and pinching of sickness, cold, and famine, how despised he the
peril of his life? Was there any coacervation of riches by rapines found in
his so great abundance of contribution to the poor? Did his avarice stir him
up to the purchasing, and procuring of great rents, and revenues, did it incite
him to the following of his pleasures and delights? Did the injurious
contention of these three Job 2.7.
Kings his pretended friends, or the contumely of his servants move him to
anger? Did his honor lift him up to lightness, when he Job 33.33.
imprecated grievous things against himself, if at any time he had concealed
the least fault committed, though contray to his will, or feared to have it
Ibid. v. 36.
published in the face of all men, were he culpable of the smallest wrong
against the Verse 34. and 13.
meanest of the people? For virtues, and vices accord not, but virtues are
still the same, who therefore in fortitude did match him? Thou may give me a
second, but scarcely an equal to him among the worthies of all ages.

CHAPTER XXXIX. Warlike virtue not to be unusual in those of our profession.
BUT perhaps warlike glory does so much fasten the eyes of some upon her
reputation, that they think fortitude to be preliall, and to belong only to
the field: and for that cause my self have digressed, and turned aside to
by-discourses, because I had not therein matter of like praise to commend those
of our profession. How valiant was Joshua who in one battle Joshua 10.20.26.
took five Kings captive, and destroyed them with their armies? At what time
also, how in the greatness of his courage, and strength of faith did he cry
out, Ibid. v. 12.
sun stand thou still in Gibeon, and thou moon in the valley of Aialon, and
it immediately stood still? Gideon with Judge. 7.7.
three hundred men having nothing but empty pitchers, and lamps in their hands
crying only, not using at all, the sword of the Lord, and Gideon Verse 20.90.
blowing Verse 12.
the trumpets, and breaking the pitchers in pieces (which was a poor piece of
service) carried away the triumph over a mighty people, and bitter enemy:
Jonathan being of tender age 1 Samuel 14.6. and v. 14.
showed his valor in an hard, and unheard battle against the uncircumcised
Philistims. What shall I speak of the 1 Maccab. 2.30.34.36.
Maccabees? But first, of them, who when they were prepared to fight for the
temple of God, their possessions, and goods, being provoked by deceit of the
enemy to battle on the Sabbath, chose rather to offer their naked bodies to
the devouring sword, lest they should thereby break the Sabbath, then to
resist, and therefore they all to the number of one Verse 38.
thousand offered themselves joyfully to death. But Verse 39.
Mattathias considering that by this example the whole nation might perish,
when himself was provoked to fight, spared not even upon the Sabbath to avenge
the slaughter of his innocent brethren; whereby King Antiochus being incensed,
when afterward he sent his Captains, Lysias, Nicanor, and Gorgias, he with
his oriental, and Assyrian Armies was so consumed, that forty eight thousand
were overthrown in the midst of his camp by Judas with his three 1 Maccab.
4.6.
thousand. Consider ye also the virtue and noble courage of the valiant
Captain Judas Maccabeus in this one soldier of his; For Eleazar observing one
Elephant more eminent then the rest covered over with a royal brigandine, or
coat of maile, supposing that the King had been therein, ran fiercely into
the midst of the legion, where throwing away his buckler, made an entrance
under the beast, and with the force of both his hands pierced him through, and
slew him; But the beast falling, overwhelmed Eleazar with his mighty and
unsupportable weight, and so he died. How great therefore was his This is no
more then our authors private opinion. That of Razis 2 of Maccab. 14. is more
manifestly culpable of blame, but neither of both is blameless.
virtue, and magnanimous spirit? first in that he feared not death, next, that
being environed with the legions of his enemies, was carried with violence into
the midst of their throng, passed through the dint thereof; and because he
contemned death became yet more enraged, and casting aside his buckler, with
both his hands bore up the vast body, and burden of so great a beast now
wounded withal. His complementall carriage, afterward getting under him
further, that with invincible courage, he might give him more fully his fatal
stroke, was stifled rather with the opening of the corpse wherein he was
entangled, then oppressed as unable to sustain the same how heavy soever, for
he seemed not to feel it, and was buried before he was killed, killed and
not overcome, but made his grave his trophy, and place of triumph.

To conclude, King Antiochus who came armed with an hundred thousand footmen,
and two thousand horsemen, and thirty two 1 Maccab. 6.30.
Elephants, insomuch that at the Verse. 39.
Sun shining upon the armor, and golden shields throughout the several
beasts, the mountains glistered therewith, and gave light as lamps of fire,
was terrified with the valor of one, and brought to demand conditions of
peace. Therefore Eleazar left peace the heir of his prowess. These may give
them taste, if any make question of it, of the preliall virtue, and The
confidence they had in the Lord of hosts was their strength, bred courage in
them, and made them magnanimous. This also stirred them up to prayer
continually, as appears 1 Maccab. 2.7.3.44.50. and 4.10.30.40.55. and
7.37.41. 2 Maccab. 1.11.17.24. and 3.30.33. and 10.16.26. and 8.2.18.24.29. and
11.6. and 12.6.13.10. and 15.21. And so the prayer of faith wrought evermore
their victory.
victories of Gods people.

CHAP. XL. Fortitude is not seen only in subduing but much more in suffering.
But because fortitude is not only tried in prosperity, but in adversity, let
us see the end of Judas The prime revenger of the wrongs of his nation in the
matter of the service of God, and therefore from him have these books their
appellation.
Maccabeus. For he after he had overcome Nicanor the Captain of King
Demetrius, and more securely guarded with no more then eight hundred against
twenty thousand taking arms, his soldiers recoyling, that they might not have
bin oppressed with the multitude, he persuaded them to undergo a glorious
death, rather then the blot of an ignominious flight: lest we should bring a
scandal, says he, upon our honor. Therefore entering battle, and the fight
continuing from morning to night he setting upon them put easily the right
wing, wherein he perceived most strength of the enemy unto flight. But while he
pursues them in the chase he received from behind a wound Joseph. Antiq.
Iudaic. lib. 12. Cap. 19.
in his body. Thus But dyed not incontinently nor vnrevenged. For he cut off
the enemy on every side, with his strong arm till the night interupted him and
the dint of death caused his undaunted courage to cease, as is there testified.
while he sought, a glorious triumph he found, that which was more glorious
(for let us Mac 9.10.
dye manfully, says he, and not stain our honor) even that which himself
sought for in truth, in death the crown of martyredome, and with it immortal
life, and never dying praise. Ionathas his brother is of like desert in his
victorious enterprises, but beguiled by Tryphon at the last, which much
eclipsed his renown, and the rather for that he was a man of rare policy, but
so that he remained constant, and true hearted to his people, and to the
service of God. Two things among many are memorable in him, one, when assisted
with two Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. Cap. 10.
only, he put to flight the Kings army, and that upon his instant motive to
prayer, Cum duobus tantum relictus.
cry now to heaven that ye may be delivered from the power of your enemies,
said he, to his small handfuls of assistants, whereby he renewed the battle
made the enemy turn his back, and his company to return to his triumph: the
other resembling that of Abraham toward Lot, in his brother John Verse 38.
, for he, and his brother Simon lying in Joseph. Ant. Iudaic. Lib. 13. Cap. 1.
ambush, avenged his death with the slaughter of four hundred turning their
meeting, and melody at a marriage into mourning. Thou have warlike fortitude,
in which there is no mean form of honesty, and comlines, where death is
preferred before indecency, servitude, and dishonesty. But what shall I say of
the sufferings of the martyrs And that we may stay here, and take up an
example The young boys bare away no less triumph over the proud King Antiochus
then the parents. For they were overcome bearing arms, 2 Mac. 7.
these without weapons overcame. That band of seven boys stood invincible 2
Mac. 7.46.32.
when they were beset with the Kings guard, punishments failed, tormenters
ceased, Martyrs failed not. One of them when his tongue was commanded to be
Verse 4.
cut out, answered the tyrant, the Lord does not only hear such as have the
use of their tongues, but he heard Moses when he was silent, and he hears
more the secret thoughts of his children, then the loud voices of all others.
Do thou fear the scourg of the tongue, and do thou not fear the scourge
of blood? blood also has its voice whereby it cries to God, as it cried in
Abel. Another having his skin Ibid. ver. 7.
pulled over his ears, was changed in shape, and made deformed, but had a
better show, and hew of virtue cast upon him: neither was his courage, when he
denied to yield, taken down, but his tongue being at liberty, he together
with his last breath, breathed out this just reproof against the bloody
perseutor. Thou murderer, Ver. 8.9.
thou take this life from us, but the King of the world will raise us up
which die for his laws in the resurrection of life. What shall I speak of the
mother Ibid. v. 20, 21, 22, 23.
of these; She looked as cheerfully upon so many funerals of her own sons,
as upon so many trophies, and therefore was she a strange spectacle among
women, who are wont to be too indulgent, she was delighted with the voices of
her sons, as with the songs of the sweetest musicians, beholding in them the
most beautiful harp of her own womb, and the harmony of piety far above
it in what number, or measure soever delighting, and ravishing the heart. What
shall we spark of the innocents of two years old and under, slain by Herod
in Bethlehem, who received the palm of victory before they came to natural
understanding, or had the feeling wherefore they suffered. What shall I say of
This Martyr Agnes gave occasion of his three books of Virgins, Ex
praedicatione liber sumat exordium. Natalis est Sanctae Agnes mirentur viri,
non desperent parvuli, stupeant nuptae; immitentur innuptae. Again, in his 90.
Sermon he does nothing else, but dilate her passion, her rare virtues, and
constancy in abiding in a single life, especially in resisting of an Ethnicke
prince, that sought to obtain her good will. Her passion was, for that the
devil stifling him upon his violence offered her, and when being restored
again to life by her intercession to God, he was recovered, he brake out
against the idols of the Heathen, and said, Vnus Deus in coelo, and in terra,
and in mari, qui est Deus Christianorum. Nam omnia templa vana sunt. Dij qui
coluntur omnes vani sunt, and penitus nec sibi possunt, nec alijs aliquod
auxilium exhibere. For hereupon Aspasius the Roman Deputy, under the chief
Governor Sempronius, caused her first to be thrown into a great fire, out of
which she escaped by dividing of the flames into two parts, for the which
mercy she lifting up her hands in prayer to God, and moving the people to
pity her: He secondly commanded a sword to be thrust into her throat.
Hence Dionysius Carthusian, upon her feast day, prayseth her upon that ground
of Psalm 68.35. Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis suis, God is wonderful in his
Saints. The truth hereof rests upon the authority of this our godly Father.
S. Agnes, who being in danger of two of the greatest things, that is to say,
of her chastity, and mortal life, she defended her chastity, and changed her
mortal life into immortal? Let us not pass by St. Laurence, who when he saw
his Bishop Sixtus led unto his martyrdom, began to weep, not because of his
passion, but because of his own staying behind him. Therefore he began to
call upon him in these words, O father whither go thou without thy son? O
holy Pastor whither do thou hasten without thy Deacon? Thou never have
accustomed to offer sacrifice without thy minister. What therefore (my Father)
has displeased thee in me? have thou found me a degenerating child? Try
whether thou have not chosen a fit minister. To whom thou have committed the
consecration of the Lords blood, to whom the fellowship of consummating the
Sacraments, to him do thou deny the fellowship of thine own blood? See that
the commendation of this thy act be not in jeopardy of losing, when thy
fortitude is to be commended. The abjection of the disciple is a loss to the
master. What, that illustrious, and famous men do overcome rather by the
combats of their scholars then by their own? Abraham offered his son. Peter
sent Stephan before him. And thou, O father, show thy virtue in thy son,
offer him whom thou have instructed, that being secure of thy judgment thou
may come to the crown with thy noble train. Then answered Sixtus, Saint
Laurence with Sixtus the Bishop of Rome, whose Archdeacon he was, for that
they would not give the Church treasure to the Emperors Decius, and Valerius,
suffered martyrdom: his answer for the bestowing of the treasure, after he had
gathered together the poor, the lame, and the blind, and presented them to
Decius, was, Horum manus thesauros ecclesiae in coelum deportaverunt. The hands
of these have carried the treasures of the Church into heaven. He converted
Hippolitus a persecutor, who also became so constant in the cause of the
Gospel, that he also suffered death. One of those cruel Emperors cried out,
O Laurence, O Hippolitus, ye draw me with fiery chains. Expirarunt says the
story, that is to say, Decius and Valerius they died: one of them
incontinently, the other after three days, and in the mean time grievously
tormented, sent out his last breath.
I leave thee not my son, neither do I forsake thee, but greater conflicts
remain for thee. We being old do receive a lighter fight, for thee being a
young man remains a more glorious triumph over the tyrant. Straight way shall
thou come leave off to weep, after three days thou shall follow me. Between
the Priest and the Levite it is meet there should be this middle number. It
was not thy part to overcome under a master, as if thou soughtest a helper, why
do thou desire the fellowship of my passion? I demise the whole inheritance
thereof to thee. Why do thou require my presence? Weak disciples let them
go before their Master, such as are strong let them follow, that they may
overcome without a Master, which now need no instruction of a Master. So also 2
Kings 2.
Helias left Heliseus. Therefore I commend to thee the succession of our
virtue. Such a contention was worthy verily, about which the Pastor and
Minister might strive, who first should suffer for the name of Christ.

Tragedies report great applause to have been made upon the theater, when
Pilades called himself Orestes: Orestes as he was, did affirm himself to be
Orestes; He that he might dye for Orestes, Orestes, that he might not suffer
Pilades to dye for him. But it was not lawful for them to live, because both
of them were guilty of parricide, the one because he had committed it, the
other because he was an accessory. Here no man urged Saint Laurence to dye, but
the love of devotion, notwithstanding three days after, when he was laid upon
the gridiron by the scoffing tyrant (that he might more slowly, and to his
sorer pain be turned) little regarding, that side is roasted, says he; turn
the other, and feed upon it. So by the virtue of his undaunted courage, he
overcame the force, and fierceness of the fire.

CHAP. XLI. Powers not to be provoked, nor the ears to be opened to
flatterers.
BUT here this caveat is to be taken, lest while some be led with too great
desire of glory, they do more insolently abuse the powers, and do for the
most part stir up, and inflame to anger the minds of the Gentiles being
averse from us unto the study of persecution against us. For while those do
show their strength to persevere, To abuse the Gentile authority by their
ambition.
and overcome punishments, how many do they cause By following their examples.
to run into danger, and perish? This proviso also is here used, that we
open not the ear to flatterers. For to be mollified, and drawn away by
flattery, is no way the part of fortitude, but of a fearful, and slothful
disposition.

CHAP. XLII. Of Temperance, and the parts thereof.
WE having spoken hitherunto of three virtues, it remains that we now speak
of the fourth, which is called Temperance, and Modesty: wherein principally the
tranquillity of the mind, the study of gentleness, the grace of moderation,
the care of honesty, the consideration of comeliness is looked into, and
sought after. Wherefore a certain order of life is to be held of us, that
certain first foundations may be fetched from verecundy, or shamefastness,
which is an associate, and a familiar assistant for the quietness of the mind,
which flies perverseness, is far from all riotousnesse, loves sobriety,
cher sheth honesty, and requires that is comely. Let the choice of
conversation follow, that we may be joined in friendship to all the most
approved ancients. For as the use of equals is sweeter; so of ancients is it
safer, which as with a certain mastership, and guidance of life, does color,
and beautify the manners of young men, and does as it were dye them in the
Quasi murice probitatis inficit.
purple dye of probity and honesty. For if such as are ignorant of the coasts
of countries do delight to set upon their journey with such as are expert, and
skillful to find out the passages, how much more ought youths to enter a new
way of life with old men, whereby they may not err, nor deflect from the right
path of virtue. For nothing is better then to have the same both masters of our
life, and also witnesses. We must inquire likewise in every action what
agrees to the persons, times, and ages, what also is fit for the wits and
natures of every several wight. For oftentimes what beseems one, beseems
not another. One thing may be accommodated to youth, another to age, one to
danger, and distress, another to peace, and prosperity. David 2 Samuel 6.14.13.
danced before the ark of the Lord, Samuel danced not. Neither was he
therefore reprehended, but this more commended. He changed his 1 Samuel 21.13.
countenance before King Achish. But if he had not done this through fear,
lest otherwise he might have been discovered, he could not have wanted the
reprehension of lightness; Saul being in the company of the Prophets, did also
himself prophecy: and mention is made of him only, as unworthy, and of none
beside, is 1 Samuel 10.10.
Saul also among the Prophets?

CHAP. XLIII. Every one ought to addict himself to that in the matter of
Office, which may best accrue to him.
EVery one therefore being not unacquainted with his own strength and wit, let
him apply himself to that, which he makes choice of, as fittest for him, But
first let him well consider what is best for him to follow, neither let him so
much take notice of his towardnes, as of the vices, whereunto he is inclined:
and let him show himself an equal judge of himself, that avoiding evil he
may be bent to a virtuous course. One is fitter for distinct reading of the
Scriptures, another more careful to expel devils by Exorcisme and anointing
the sick had their expiration with the working of miracles. They were peculiar
gifts of the holy Ghost, serving for the primitive times, and exorcisme was
then used extra baptismum, as Tertul. witnesses in his Apolog. to use it
therein with the Papists is without warrant, and absurd, beca-by Christ in
baptism the devil is driven away. For as St. Cyprian Epist. ad Magn. well
observes, Sicut scorpij and serpents, etc. As scorpions and serpents prevail
in their poisoning on dry land but being thrown into the water prevail not:
so likewise evil spirits can remain no longer, neither any further annoy,
then until the holy Ghost begins to dwell in the baptized, and sanctified.
exorcisme, another of more regard in the quier, another can better apply
himself to the keeping of the vestry. He that is toward the Church, set him
have respect to all these, and let every one be deputed to that office, which
is most agreeable to his disposition. For to whatsoever office nature leads a
man, or does best become him, that does he execute with more grace. But as to
perform an office with grace, and credit, it is a hard thing in every calling:
so is it much more hard in ours. For every one loves to follow the life of his
parents. The most part whose parents have been soldiers, are drawn to lead
their lives in the wars, others accordingly in other professions, wherein
their fathers walked before them. But in the ecclesiastical function thou
may find nothing more rare then a son treading in his fathers steps, either
because the grave, and weighty employment therein does deter him, or because
in a slippery age abstinence, and forbearance of worldly pleasures is harder,
or because it seems a more obscure life to cheerful youth, and therefore
they convert their studies to those exercises, which they think more
plausible. For more prefer what is present, then what is to come hereafter.
But howsoever they are for their present welfare, our warfare is for ensuing
comfort. Whence it follows by how much our cause is better, by so much ought
our care to be greater, and more attentive.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of that which is comely, and that which is honest.
LEt us preserve therefore, and prefer verecundie, or shamefastness, and
that modesty comprehending, and commending comeliness, as the ornament and
honor of our whole life. For it is no small matter, to keep measure, and
observe order, in every thing, wherein does truly shine forth, that which is
called comely and is so joined with honesty, that it cannot be separated, For
what is comely is honest, and what is honest is comely, insomuch that there is
distinction rather in the speech, then a difference in the virtue, discerned
they may be in the understanding, no way well expressed in words, And that we
may endeavor to fetch out some distinction between them, honesty is, as it
were, the good health, and wholesome constitution of the body, comelines is, as
it were, the complement, and beauty thereof. As therefore beauty does seem to
excel health, and goodness of constitution, yet cannot be without these,
neither any way separated from them, because unless good health be, beauty and
well-fauorednesse cannot be: so honesty contains in it, that is comely in
such manner, that it may seem to have proceeded from it, and cannot be
without it. Honesty therefore is as the soundness of the work, and of our
whole fabric and comeliness is as the beauty or shape, and confounded with
it, as subsisting together in one mass, but distinguished from it in opinion.
For albeit it may seem to exceed in something, yet in the root it belongs
to honesty, but as a special flower thereof: so that without it, it may fade,
with it may flourish. For what is honesty, but that which avoideth turpitude,
or deformity of manners, even as death? What dishonesty, but that which draws
in the drought of good manners, and consequently death? Wherefore the substance
of this virtue of honesty being green, comeliness, because there is
soundness at the root, does budde out as a flower. But the root of our
purposed virtue being rotten, there appears no blossom, the plant of honesty
decaying, the fruit of comeliness must needs wither. Thou have this much
better expressed in our sacred books. For David says, (...) Psalm. 93.1.
(...). Sept. Hebr. genth of goath celsitudo, and sometimes excellentia, and
this excellency is comeliness. Is. 24.
the Lord has reigned, he has put on comeliness. And again the Apostle
says, Let us walk honestly, which in Greek is (...) (...) of (...). Romans
13.13.
properly signifying such as is of a good habit, of a good form, and
proportion. God therefore when he first made man, formed him in a good feature,
and in a good composition of his members, and parts, and gave him the best
portraiture of all his creatures, yet gave him not the remission of his sins:
but afterward renewed him by his Spirit, and infused into him grace: he that
came in the form of a servant, in the similitude of sinful flesh took upon
him the glory, and comeliness of humane redemption. In commemoration whereof,
as was before mentioned, the Prophet thus breaks out, The Lord has reigned,
and put on comeliness. And elsewhere Psalm. 65.60. (...), Sept. Tibi debetur
Tremel. ex officio ecclesiae Iun. which executed in comeliness.
praise, O God, beseems thee in Sion, imports thus much; It is both an
honest, and comely thing that we fear thee O Lord, that we love thee, pray
unto thee, honor thee. For concerning honesty in action, it is written, let
all things be done 1 Cor. 14.4. Transl. vulg. so Pagnin. Syriack cum modestia.
The reason is the neerenesse of these in sense, and signification.
honestly. We may fear, love, request, honor man, a hymn is sung specially
to God. We are to believe this to be comely in a more excellent manner, which
we bring, and present to God. It is meet a woman, no less then a man, should
pray in a comely habit, but it is a thing that best, and most properly
belongs to her to pray 1 Cor. 11.12.
covered, and to commence her petition under the promise of chastity, and good
conversation.

CHAP. XLV. That those things which are good and honest, are according to
nature; but those that are beastly, and vicious, are against nature.
WHerefore it is comeliness that bears the preeminence, the division whereof
is double. For there is a decorum which is general, spreading it self into
all the skirts of honesty, and apparent in the whole state of the body, and
there is that, which is special, which shows it self, and is more
conspicuous in some certain part. That general is such, as if the whole life
did accord, and had no disparity of actions, all things did proceed in an
equal form, and when the universe is uniforme in the individuals, and each
several part of the course of life without difference. The special, such,
that in its virtuous designs it has something more rare, and of special
note; Observe this withal, that it is a seemly thing to live, and converse,
according to the instinct of nature; and an unbeseeming, and James 3.15. non
naturae ductum sequutus, sed erassis concupiscentijs addictus. Sic enim vulgo
accipitur juxta, Calv. 1 Cor. 2.14. (...).
sensual to live contrary thereunto. For the Apostle speaks as if he were
to answer to some interrogatory made against it: Does it 1 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
Nullum vitium ita contra naturam, ut naturae deleat extrema vestigia. Aug. De
Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 13. editus a Leontorio.
become a woman to pray uncovered? Does not nature it self teach you, that if
a man have long hair it is a shame to him, because it is against nature? And
again he says, if a woman have long hair, it is a praise unto her: for her
hair is given to her for a covering. For it is according to nature. For hair
truly serves for a veil, and it is a veil which God in nature has ordained
for them. Nature therefore her self does dispense for us, and dispose what
each person, what his habit, and form of attire shall be, which we ought to
retain: and I would to God we might preserve her entire in that her innocence
Math. 17.23.24. Sicut parvulus non perseverat in iracundia, non laesus meminit,
non videns pulchram mulierem delectatur: non aliud cogitat, and aliud loquitur:
sic and nos, nisi talem habuerimus innocentiam, and animi puritatem regna
caelorum non poterimus intrare Hier. super banc locum.
whatsoever, and our maliciousness might not change her into a worse mould,
then which she received. Thou have this comeliness in the general, because
God made the beauty of this world Thou have it in special, and in the parts,
because when God made the light, when he distinguished the day and the night,
when he framed the heaven, when he separated the earth, and the seas, when he
appointed the Sun, the moon, Vitium consuetudine, nimiore progressu
roboratu^ Aug. De Civ. Dei l. 12. c. 3. in voluntate hominis est origo
vitiorum. Idem Quest. super Exodus lib. 2. Non quisquam de vitijs naturalibus,
sed de voluntarijs poenas dedit l. 12. cap. 3. ut supra. Ei si naturae que
su^ma est, qua faciente sunt, quaerunque sunt contraria natura non est nisi
quae non est Ib. c. 12.
and the stars to shine upon the earth, he approved each singular, and
several as an Genesis 1 13. Tob meod denoting as much by an implicit prolepsis,
as when doubled. Ex. 1.7.
exceeding good. Was this comeliness in the several, and distinct parts of
the world, and was not the luster thereof much more in the universe?

Yes surely, wisdom ratifying, and applauding the same with her Prove. 8.30,
31.
voice, when he rejoiced at the perfection of his work, I was there as giving
allowance, and commendation to his delight. In like manner the proportion of
every member in the framing of man's body, is goodly to behold, and being duly
considered of the greatest acceptance, and chiefest estimation. But the fit
composition of the parts in common, and in the integrall building, because they
so seemly; and sweetly meet, and conspire together in themselves, is much more
pleasing to the sight.

CHAP. XLVI. By restraint of what passions comeliness may be acquired.
IF any man therefore does keep good proportion in his whole life, and due
measure in every his several actions: and again if he hold a due order,
constancy, and moderation in his words, and works, comeliness in an excellent
manner appears in his life, and shows it self in a goodly sort, and as it
were in a crystal glass; Yet let savoury, and sweet speech come thereunto,
that it may withal wind in it self, and win the affections of the hearers,
and whereby he who uses it, may make himself ^ Cor. 13.5.
acceptable to his familiar friends, to the citizens, yea, if it may be to all
men: notwithstanding so, that he suffer not himself neither to flatter, nor to
be flattered. For the one of these is subtilty, the other vanity. Let no man
despise the judgment of any man, especially what the best affected conceive of
him. For by this means he learneth to bring due reverence to the good, whom to
neglect is arrogance, or dissoluteness: of which two one proceeds from pride,
the other from neglect. Let him also that will be of comely carriage take heed
to the motions of his mind. For he must be circumspect, and bear a watchful
eye over his own ways, both in shunning what evil may be against him, as
also in providing what may make for his own safety. For there be certain
motions, among the which there is that appetite, which breaks forth after a
violent manner, where in Greek it is called (...), because it suddenly flies
out with much force, fast, and far increases, and spreads abroad. In these
motions the powers of the mind, and of nature are not of mean strength, which
notwithstanding are double: some placed in the appetite, some in the reason,
which able part may bridle the appetite, and make it obsequious to her, may
lead it whither she will, and by an officious dominion may teach it what ought
to be done, what to be avoided, that thus obedience may be yielded to so good
a Mistress. For we ought to be sollicitous, and vigilant, that we do
nothing rashly, and without care, or ought at all, whereof we are not able to
render a profitable reason. For the cause of our action, howbeit it be not
rendered to of all men: yet it is examined of all men. Neither have we truly
wherein we may excuse our selves. For although there be a certain power of
nature in every appetite, notwithstanding in the law of nature it self, the
same appetite is subject to reason, and it does likewise obey the same.
Wherefore it is the part of a good watchman, so to forecast in his mind, that
appetite does neither run before, neither forsake reason: lest in running
before, it molest her, so that she be excluded, and again lest in forsaking
her, there be a failing. Molestation takes away constancy, failing discovers
idleness, accuses of laziness. For the mind being troubled the appetite
swells greater, spreads out longer and wider, and in its unbridled and
impetuous race receives not the rain of reason, neither feels any, either
hand, or curb of the rider to guide, and restrain it. Whence it commonly
happens, not only while the mind is troubled, and turmoiled, that reason is
shaken off, and lost, but also the countenance inflamed, either with anger or
lust, does wax pale with fear, does not contain it self within the bounds
of moderate pleasure, but is taken with so much delight, and solace, as is
incredible. These things being so, that censure, and gravitie of manners, that
follows, natural instinct is rejected, neither can that constancy take
place, which in managing affairs, and consultations, is able only to bear up
her authority, and maintain that is comely. But a worse, and more grievous
Appetitus concupiscibilis, irascibilis, and ex dolor injuriae acceptae
conceptus. At the resurrection of the just there shall be perfecta (...) of
all the faculties of the soul. Nam tunc Deus implebit animam rationalem piorum
luce sapientiae concupiscibilem justitia: irascibilem perfecta tranquillitate.
Bernard.
appetite does arise out of a too much indignation, and wrath, then for the
most part out of the grief which is kindled by injury received. Concerning
which argument the precepts of the Chapter 2. Psalm. 39.1.
Psalm placed in our Preface do sufficiently instruct us. But this also
falls out happily, that being about to write of Offices, we might use that
as a confirmation of our Preface, which likewise it self did belong, as a
chief rule, to the matter of Office.

CHAP. XLVII. Of three kinds of men receiving injuries.
But because we have before, as we ought, fearing least our preface might have
been too prolixe, briefly touched, how every one receiving injury, should be
able to avoid too much stirring up anger, I deem it expedient that the same
subject should now be more fully discussed. For it is a fit place under the
part of temperance to show how anger may be suppressed. We are desirous
therefore, as far as we shall be able, Three sorts of men receiving injury.
to demonstrate out of the sacred scriptures, that there be three kinds of men
receiving injury. One over whom the wicked insult, whom they daily rail upon,
vex, and disturb. These because they cannot have justice, are confounded with
shame, sorely perplexed with grief. Like to these are very many of my rank,
and of my coat. For if any offer me injury a weak and, silly man, though I be
weak, and unable to bear it: 1. Sort receiving injury render it in word, and
act but forgive it in heart.
yet peradventure, I may pardon the offense committed against me. If any crime
be laid to my charge, I am no such person, that I can content my self with
the satisfaction of mine own conscience, albeit I know my self free from the
crime objected, but I must, neither can I forbear, being a frail man, wash
away the spot of infamy cast upon my ingenuous, and honest disposition.
Therefore I require an Deuteronomy. 19.21.
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, and repay them home reproach for
reproach. But if I be but a proficient in holy religion, 2. Sort bear it with
silence.
though I be not grown to perfection, I retort not again, howsoever reviled,
the least contumely, and if they grow in upon me, and load me never so hard
with their taunts, weary, and overwhelme my tears, with their raylings, yet I
hold my peace, and reply nothing at all. But if I be perfect (that is to say,
if I may so speak, seeing in truth I am weak) then I bless them that curse
me, as Paul also did bless, when he says, being evil spoken 1 Cor. 4.13.
of, we bless. For he had heard Christ Mat. 5.44.
say, love your enemies, pray for them that revile you, and persecute you.
Therefore Paul suffered, and endured persecution, because he did mitigate, and
overcome humane affection, for the rewards sake set before him, that if he
loved his enemy, he might be made the son of God. Notwithstanding, we are
taught that in this kind of virtue holy David was not inferior to Paul, who
when Shemei first 1 Samuel 16.7. The resolution that David being dumb in this
case, is nothing inferior to Paul, opening his mouth with blessing.
cursed him, and objected his crimes, he held his peace, was humbled, and was
silent even from good words, that is, through the conscience of good works.
Moreover it grieved him not to be reviled, yea, when it befell him, he embraced
it with much desire because it moved him more earnestly to seek for mercy at
the hands of God. But see how he stored up humility, justice, and prudence in
his heart, thereby to get favor of God. First he says, Therefore he curses me
because the Lord Ibid. ver. 11.
bad him curse, Here thou have his humility, because those things, which were
commanded him of God, he thought he ought to bear, as it became an obedient
servant. Again he said, behold my son, that came from mine own bowels, does
seek my life, here thou have his justice. For if we can be contented to suffer
grievous things at the hands of our own, why do we take it in evil part,
when strangers bring them upon us? Thirdly he says, let him alone, let him
curse because the Lord it may be has therefore bidden him that he might see
mine affliction, and humiliation, and do me good for his cursing this day.
Neither did he suffer him only to rail, but to follow him by the side of the
mountain, and cast stones at him, Yea, which is more, after the victory
obtained, he willingly remitted the offense which I have therefore inserted,
that I might teach holy David being a man of an Evangelicall spirit not only to
have taken none offense at him, but his coming to him to have been welcome,
and to have brought him grace, and therefore to have been delighted, not
exasperated with these his malicious and mischievous despights: as being more
advantageous to him in the more certain expectation of a more ample reward of
the bountiful Recompencer of all patient forbearance. But howbeit he had now
proceeded far in the way of perfection, notwithstanding he sought to attain
to it in a higher degree. Through the grief of injury sustained, his heat of
blood was stirred up in him as a man, but by the efficacy of the spirit of
grace he overcame like a good soldier at the command of his great general. He
endured as a valiant champion, but the vpshot of his patience was the
expectation of the accomplishment of the Lords promises? And therefore he d
said, Lord let me know the number of my days what it is, that I may be
certified what I have not Psalm. 39.7.
attained unto. He seeks the end of heavenly promises, or that end when every
one shall rise in his own Sept. v. 6. (...). The eight verse considered may
help this sense, (...) etc. which is deliver me from all my transgressions. 1
Cor. 15.23.
order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming, then shall be the end. For the kingdom being delivered up to God, and
the Father, and all powers being abolished, as the Apostle speaks, perfection
begins. Here therefore is an impediment, Ver. 14.
here an infirmity even of those that be the best and perfect in their degree,
there is full perfection. Therefore for the state of perfection, the Apostle
points at those days of eternal life which are always in being, not at
those days which pass away That so here in this life, he may take notice of
his wants, and may grow up in knowledge to understand what the land of promise
bearing perpetual fruits is, what the first mansio^ seat with the father, what
the second, what the third is, in which every one according to his degree, and
measure of gifts, and graces divine shall rest eternally. Wherefore according
to his heavenly doctrine, not this life, which is full of want, and error, but
that in which is perfection, in which is truth, is to be sought after, evermore
to be desired, and aspired unto of us all. Here the shadow, there the
substance; here the Psalm. 39.6. and 73.20 1 Cor. 7.31. (...) and 13.12. (...).
image, and resemblance, there the truth. The shadow in the law, the image in
the Gospel, the truth in the heavens. Before a lamb was offered, a calfe was
offered, now Christ is offered, but he is offered as a man, and as it were
receiving his passion, and he offers himself as it were a Priest, that he
may take upon him our sins, and remit them to us. Here in an image, and
certain similitude, there in truth, where he interposeth himself as an
Advocate with the Father for us. Therefore here we walk in an image, we see
in an image: there face to 1 Cor. 13.12.
face, where is full perfection, because all perfection is in the truth.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of treading vanity under foot.
WHerefore while we are here, let us get, and keep the image, that there we
may come to the truth. Let there be in us the image of justice, let there be
the image of wisdom, because we shall come to that day, and according to the
image then found in us, shall we be judged. Let not the adversary find in thee
his own image; his image of raging, and fury. For in these maladyes harbors
mischief. For our 1 Pet. 5.8.
adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may
kill, and devour. Let him not find in thee the desire of gold, the heaps of
silver, John 14.30. Satan non habet quicquam in Christo, quoniam nullis erat
peccatis obnoxious, nec habet quicquam in illis, qui Christo sunt conjuncti, qui
licet peccatis sint obnoxij, ex hoc mundo corrupto, and perdito non sunt, sed
ex eo selecti super cap. 15.19. animadversio Musculi. Haec vera sunt in illis
qui non secundum spiritum ambulant; Idem Musculus in hunc locum.
the image, and shape of vices, let him not deprive thee of the voice of
liberty, for this is the voice of liberty, that thou may say; The prince of
this world shall come, and shall not find ought in me. Therefore if thou be
secure, that when he comes to make search, he may find nothing in thee, thou
shall say that which Jacob the Patriarch sometime said to Genes. 31.37.
Laban, what of all thy goods have thou found with me? Worthily blessed was
Jacob, with whom Laban could find nothing that was his. For Rachel had hidden
Verse 34.
the golden and silver images of his gods in the camels litter, and was sat
down upon them. Wherefore if thy wisdom, faith, contempt of the world, if thy
grace may cover all thy perfidiousnesse, and disloyalty thou shall be blessed,
and this may be a good means thereunto, if there be no respect to vanities,
and such unsound dotages, wherewith Laban was bewitched. Is it a matter of no
worth to frustrate the voice of the adversary, so that not only all authority,
and power, but even all pretense, and color to accuse thee shall be taken
away? Therefore he which has no regard to these, or any other vanities is not
at all troubled, but he which has respect unto them, is most vainly, and
idely, without any profit accruing to him thereby troubled, and molested. For
what is it to scrape together riches but a vain thing, and nothing furthering
the souls welfare? For he that shall dive into it shall he not find too much
vanity in it, so much so greedily with such an hungry and unsatiable appetite
to gape after this fading, soon vanishing, and perishing pelf? When thou have
with continual carking, and caring raked it together, how know thou,
whether God will suffer thee to possess it one moment? Is it not a vain thing
for the merchant, night and day to toil, and tugge upon the seas in a long
voyage, that by his traffic he might treasure up many rare, and precious
commodities? Especially for that when he has purchased them with his penny,
he is troubled about their price, lest peradventure he undervalew them to his
loss, such hunting and hearkening out places of Mart where he may best vent
them, and again while he makes such open inquiry, how is he frighted with
fear of Pirates, and robbers, that perhaps envying his so famous negotiation,
might be stirred up against him? Being out of hope of any better season to set
up sail, and make his return, how patient is he of delay, lest gaping for
gain he should make shipwreck? Is he not also vainly troubled, which
heapeth together with long hard labor a great deal of mucke, when he has no
heir at all to leave it unto? It oftentimes falls out, that what a covetous
man has gathered together with much care, a luxurious, and prodigal heir does
incontinently by a precipitious, and braine-sicke course make havocke of what
has been a long time in getting, being a foul devourer, blindly led to the
present benefit, and sweet repose, unprovident for the after good, swalloweth
up all with open mouth like a gulf even at one bit. Oftentimes likewise one
that is in great hope to be some successor, and is repined at, because he
has some of the inheritance imparted to him before, becomes surprised with
sudden death, and opens a compendious way for strangers to enter in, as whole
successors upon that, whereof he was many years before in undoubted
expectation. Why do thou therefore, O vain man, thus weave the spiders
web, which is empty, and without fruit? Why do thou hang up thy rich bags
by way of boasting, being in truth weak, and simple stuff, which although
they abound with thee, they benefit thee nothing: yea, though they may array
thee with costly attire, yet they do strippe thee of the image of God, and put
upon thee the image of clay, and dirt of the earth? If any one has the image
and shape of a tyrant, is he not under condemnation? Do thou lay down the
image of the King eternal, and do thou take up, and foster within thee the
image of death? Cast out rather out of the city of thy soul the image of the
devil, and take in the image of Christ. Let this shine forth in thee, in thy
city, that is, let it shine brightly in thy soul, that thereby the foul
shapes, and ugly deformity of vices may be blotted out, and done away. Of
these David speaks Sept. Psalm. 72.20. (...).
Lord in thy city thou will bring their images to nothing. When God shall have
painted Jerusalem according to his own Image: then will he abolish the image
of the adversary.

CHAP. XLIX. That the grace of Offices best becomes the Ministers of the altar,
and this is confirmed from the example of the Leviticall, comprehending withal
the priestly order.
FOrasmuch as in the Gospel the people instructed by our Savior was informed,
and trained up in such doctrine, and discipline, as wrought the despising, and
contemning of riches, how much more does it belong to you that are Levites, not
to be held under the power, and bondage of earthly lusts? For when the earthly
possession of the Fathers was divided to the people by Moses, the Lord excepted
the Levites, who were to have no portion among their brethren, because himself
was the line of their inheritance. Whence Psalm. 16.6.
David says, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup,
thou shall maintain my lot. Of the Levite himself he says, he is Number. 3.45.
Hebr. Hau-lierunt mihi Tremel. Iun. ut sint mei.
mine, or he is for me. Great is his Office that the Lord should say of him,
he is mine; Or as Christ said to Peter, of the piece of Math. 17.27.
twenty pence found in the mouth of the fish, thou shall give it to them for
me, and thee. Whence also the 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.
Apostle when he had said, a Bishop must be sober, modest, hospital, apt to
teach, not given to filthy lucre, no fighter, one that can rule his own house
well, he added withal, Verse 8, 9, 10.
likewise Deacons must be honest, not double tongued, not given to much wine,
neither to filthy lucre, having the mystery of the faith in pure conscience,
and these let them be first proved, and then let them minister if they be
found blameless. We may observe from hence how great things are required of
us, that the minister of the Lord abstain from wine, that he be upheld by
good testimony, and not only by that of the faithful, but by the witness of
them that are without. For it is meet that the witness of our deeds, and
works should be in a public esteem, and attestation, lest ought should be
derogated from our function, that he which sees the Minister of the altar
adorned with virtues suitable to his calling, might praise the author, and
reverence the Lord, which has ordained such persons to serve him in his house.
For the praise thereof belongs to the Lord, when his house is possessed with
pure doctrine, honest, and innocent discipline. But of chastity what shall I
say, when one copulation only, and not that which is repeated again, and
renewed, is permitted? And in wedlock it self therefore, the law not to
iterate the same, neither to fall to the conjunction of a second He means it
in the Deaconship, or Minestery, collecting it out of 1 Epist. ad Timoth. Cap.
3.2. otherwise he admits it. Si qua in secundas nuptias inciderit, quas
Apostolica praecepta non damnant, Lib. de viduis. Upon the place above
specified to Tim. he thus writes, Hi ad ministerium Dei eligantur qui non
sunt egressi constitutum Dei. Homini enim unam uxorem decrevit Deus cum qua
benedicatur. Nemo enim cum secunda benedicitur.
yoke fellow, which seems strange to most men, why also Marriage being
iterated before Baptism, impediments should grow upon the election, and
prerogative of the office, and ordination of the ministry, when with all
offenses, if they be remitted by the laver of Baptism, are not wont to be any
hurt or hinderance. But we ought to understand, that in baptism there may be
dimission of the fault, there cannot be an abolishing of the law. In Wedlock
there is not the fault, but the law therefore belongs to the fault, there is
a relaxation thereof in Baptism. What belongs to the Law cannot in wedlock
be dissolved. How can he exhort to According to Moses law a Priest is
forbidden to marry her repudiated, Lev. 21.7. any other might, Deuteronomy. 24.2. yet
the children of such as were begotten in second marriage by an ancient custom
were not to be admitted to the ministry being bigami.
widowhood, who himself frequenteth wedlock? But the ministry is to be
exhibited without offense, and spot, neither to be violated with any conjugal
combination; ye know it to be so, which have received in the integrity of
body, in incorrupted modesty, and in freedom from the society it self of
marriage, the grace of holy ministry. Which thing I have therefore not passed
by, because for the most part in more obscure places, when they executed their
ministry, or also their priesthood, they begat children, and defended the same
to be as it were of ancient use: whereas the sacrifice was deferred for a
certain space of days, and the people which were to come to the sacrifice for
their more pure access, were made to contain from their Exodus 19.15. for a
time only as the Ap. advises 1 Cor. 7.5.
wives as we read in the old Testament, and did wash their garments, as the
text Exodus 19.10.14.
says, wherefore if so great observance was used in the figure, how much more
then ought it to be in the exhibition of the truth? Learn O priest, and
Levite, what is to wash thy garments, that thou may bring a clean body, when
thou administrest the Sacraments. If the people must not offer sacrifice
without being first purified? neither so much as their garments must be
defiled, dare thou being unclean, both in body and soul, make supplication
for others? dare thou minister for others? The office of Levites was no mean
place. For of these the Lord testifies; Behold I Numb. 3.12.13.
have even taken the Levites from among the children of Israel, for all the
first borne that opens the matrice among the children of Israel, their
redemption shall be just, and the Levits shall be mine. For I have sanctified
to me the first borne in the land of Egypt. We know that the Levits are not
reckoned among others, but preferred before all which are elected out of all,
and sanctified, deputed for the first Number. 3.41. Exodus 13.12.
borne, for the first fruits, holy to the Lotd, in these there is payment of 1 Samuel 1.11.21. Levit. 12.7.
vows, Numb. 3.46.47. Luke 2.24.
redemption of the sins of the people. The Lord speaking to Numb. 1.49, 50, 51.
Moses, bid him not number the tribe of Levi among the children of Israel, but,
says he, appoint them over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all the
instruments thereof, and over all things that belong to it, to bear the
tabernacle and minister in it, and dwell round about it. And when the
tabernacle goes forth, the Levites shall take it down, and when the
tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levits shall set it up: whatsoever stranger,
thas is not of that tribe comes near, shall be slain. Thou therefore being
chosen out of the whole number of the children of Israel, and being deputed as
the first borne, and holiest among the holy fruits of the womb, and set over
the Tabernacle, the people in the camp of holiness, and faith, because thou
alone art ordained to Number. 4.15. It is to be understood of the Priests the
sons of Aaron, not properly of the Levites, for these must not meddle to shut
it, or open it, or touch it, no more then the people the mount, Exodus 19.21.
the Priests themselves must not without reverence. Vzza should have borne the
Arc upon his shoulder was therefore slain, because he carried it into a city
of the priests. 1 Samuel 6.13, For Bethshemesh was a city of the priests. Josh.
21.16 They that were slain were of the people, 1 Samuel 6.19. and their number
shows it, only certain were of the priests.
cover the Arc of the testimony to which what stranger soever shall come near
shall perish. For all see not the high mysteries, because they are covered from
the Levits themselves, lest they should see them who ought not to see them, and
lest they should take them who are not able to keep them. Moses saw spiritual
Romans 2.28. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
circumcision, but he covered it that he might prescribe it in the sign. He
saw also the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth, he saw the passion of
the Lord, he covered the unleavened bread of truth with corporal, he covered
the passions of the Lord with the immolation, or sacrifice of a lamb, or
calfe. And the good Levits have kept the mystery of their faith under this
cover, and do thou think it a small thing that is committed to thee? The
first is, that thou see the high things of God, which is wisdom, the next that
thou watch for the peoples salvation, which is justice, the third that thou
defend the camp, guard the Tabernacle, which is fortitude, the fourth that
thou keep thy self continent, and 1 Timothy 3.3. (...). Levit. 10.9. Tit. 1.7.
sober, which is temperance. These kind of virtues they which are without, have
maintained as the principalls, but they judged the order of or of justice. See
herein a difference between Christian, and Ethnic Philosophy.
co^munity superior to that of wisdom, when wisdom is the foundation, and
justice the work, neither can the work stand unless it have a foundation.

Now wisdom, which is the foundation is Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Faith therefore in him is the first and chiefest wisdom, Prove. 9.10.
as Solomon says following his Psalm. 11.1^.
Father, The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, and the law says,
thou shall love the Lord, thou shall love thy Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.
neighbor likewise. It is a comely thing therefore thou bestow thy gifts in
the performance of duties for the benefit of humane societies: but it is a
comely part in the first place, that what thou have in most precious account,
which is thy soul, then the which nothing is more noble, thou consecrate to
God, The fear of the loosing the jewel of the soul in any of his flock
ought to be great in the minister for he must see what is lost, Ezekiel. 34.10.
When thou shall first pay the debt Deuteronomy. 6.13. Mat. 6.33.
thou owe to the author of thy life, and liberty, it is lawful for thee to
spend thy labors for the releife, and help of men to supply their wants in
their necessities, either by money, office, or by whatsoever gift, which in
your function has no bounds. Releiving with money thou may cancel the
obligation of the debtor undertaking the matter by virtue of thy office, Deuteronomy.
22.2. and 24.13. Job 31.7.16. and 29.16.17.
thou may save what he feared would have been lost, that 1 Timothy 6.20.
committed it in (...) he to whom God has committed in deposito the heavenly
verity shall he fail in ordinary matters.
trust, And it is thy duty, believe it, whatsoever is deposed into thy hands to
preserve it and restore it. But sometimes there comes an alteration, either by
reason of time, or necessity, insomuch that it is not thy office, to restore
that which thou have received; As for example, If any strong professed enemy,
Ezekiel. 18.7.16.
whom thou art not able to resist, helping the Barbarians against this thy
country, require the money committed to thee, or if thou let it go from thee,
in the presence of one, who will extort it, if thou restore it to a harebraind
person that cannot use, nor keep it, if thou deny not a sword to a mad man
wherewith he kills himself, is it not against thy office, and charge thus to
pay what was put into thy hands? If thou receive wittingly stolen goods, is it
not against thine office to defraud him that lost it? It is sometimes likewise
against thine office to perform thy promise, to keep the sacrament or oath
thou have taken, as it was in Herod, who Mat. 14.7.
swear that he would give to Herodias daughter whatsoever she would ask, and
therefore cut off John the Baptists head that he might not break his promise.
Judge. 11.30.
Of Iephthes, what should I say who to fulfill his vow, that whatsoever should
first meet him, at his return after the victory, the same he would offer to
God, his daughter first meeting him he sacrificed her? It had bin better for
him to have promised no such thing, then by performing his promise to commit
parricide. You know well that it is a matter of great consultation, and
wisdom, to foresee such mischeifes. And therefore let a Levite be chosen, such
a one likewise that may stand in the holy place, Numb. 27.21.
consult the oracles of God, may not be deceived in his counsel, may not
forsake the faith, may not fear death in nothing may bear himself
intemperately, but in such sobriety, that his very presence may carry with it
gravity. Neither to avoid intemperancy is it enough to have a continent mind
only, but chaste eyes, also, lest a casual meeting upon the sudden of some
tempting object do crush the forehead of sobriety, for the want of this is the
violating unspotted chastity, because he which sees Mat. 5.28.
a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart. So we see, that adultery does not consist in the foulness of the fact
outwardly done, but in the intention of the sight, and inward motion of the
heart. These may seem too too heavy and hard impositions, but yet nothing
superfluous, but altogether necessary in so great a function both in looking
into themselves, and that first for the furnishing them for their high calling,
and then in seeking for a reformed life of their people. The special grace
that Deuteronomy. 33.8.9.
Moses in his benediction does bestow upon them should bring them reverence.
Give to Levi thy Vrim and Thummim, thy true ones, and manifest ones, light and
perfection, knowledge, and holiness, give to Levi, the lot of thine
inheritance, and thy law to thine holy Aaron
one and his posterity, whom they did prove by temptations in Massah, and
provoked by contradictions at the water of Meribah, who said, to his father,
and mother, I have not seen him, neither knew he his brethren, nor knew he
his own children, for they observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They
therefore are his true, and manifest ones, which have no deceit in their inward
parts, hide no guile there, but keep the Lords precepts, and lay them up in
their hearts, as Marie k did: which in fulfilling their office have no respect
to their parents above others, love the true worshippers, and godly livers,
hate the violaters of chastity, revenge the injuries of the modest, know the
times what they are, when more, when less good may be done, what is fit for
every season, that so they may follow that which only is honest, and may wait
their occasions, and opportunities thereunto. And if it happen that two sorts
of Honestum, and turpe, that which is honest, and that which is dishonest, or
turpitudine vitiosum, defiled with vice, to use the phrase of St. Augustine are
opposite l. 2. de Civit. Dei: so also our author takes it, offic. l. 2. Tantus
splendour honestatis est, ut vitam beatam efficiat tranquillitas conscientiae,
and securitas innocentiae, so Cicero l. 3. de offic. Nihil turpe faciendum bono
viro, etiamsi omnes Deosex omni part babitant, etiamsi hominesque caesare
possimus, so Seneca in Rhetor. Ecce torpent ingenia desidiosae iuventutis, nec
in unius honestae rei labor vigilatur, somnus, languorque and somno, and
languore turpior malarum rerum industria invasit animos, Thus commonly:
Sometimes it signifies fair, sometimes honorable, sometimes continent,
honest actions belonging both to their place, concur to be executed at the
same time, let them think that the more honest of the two is always to be
preferred. These may worthily be styled Psalm. 112.1. and 144.15. continent, but
here it may be put for that which is according to order, and discipline most
seemly, and convenient. Gloriam ingentem, divitias honestas volebant Salust.
de Conjurat. Catil. and is the same with pulchrum when it is used, as in
Tullies offices, for comely, not distinguished as there, but confounded with
it, and so also according to the Etymology thereof coming of polleo quod
polleat forma. Again, honestum, and utile are properly disparata, but here the
same, and so rather does our author mean it, as E duobus utilibus utilius
eligendum, Cicero de offic. lib. 1.
blessed whosoever they be. The Priests and Levites, O Lord, that make
manifest thy truth, that tender the sacrifice of prayer in the congregation
abundantly bless, and their substance, accept of the work of their hands,
that so the fruit of prophetical benediction, which has proceeded from thine
own sacred mouth may daily be exhibited to their unspeakable comfort, and
thine endless, and immortal praise, which live, and raignest with thy
Son, and the holy Spirit, three persons, and one God in Majesty, and
dominion, without beginning or limitation of time, incomprehensible, Amen.

CHAP. XIX. here put, because omitted in the impression. In all our actions we
must demean our selves like men, neither is any thing to be done by
affectation or effeminately.
I Am delighted to stay a little longer in the Erasm. edit. patribus pro
partibus.
parts of modesty while I speak to you, who either perceive of yourselves what
commodity, or else are not unacquainted what discommodity it brings. Which
being convenient to all ages, persons, times, places, notwithstanding it most
becomes youth, and youthful years. But it is in all ages to be kept, that,
that which thou do may be decent, and convenient, and that the order of every
ones course may be agreeable to his life. Whence Tullius, Lib. 1 de offic.
decori.
Tully thinks order ought to be observed in that comeliness, or decency, and
says, that to be seated in beautifulness, proportionable placing, attire fit
for action. Which he affirms hardly can be expressed, and therefore
sufficient if it be understood. But why he interposeth beautifulness I
thoroughly apprehend not. Although he may commend the strength of the body, we
surely place not the seat of virtue in the beauty of the body. Notwithstanding
we exclude not a Ingenium male habitat Galbae.
grace thence, because modesty, and comeliness were wont to cast over the
countenances themselves the tincture of shamefastness, and thereby make them
more acceptable. For as an Artificer in more profitable materials was wont
better to work: so modesty also in the natural comeliness of the body is
more eminent: notwithstanding, so that it be no affectation of comeliness in
the body, but natural, simple, neglected, and more desired, not adorned with
precious, and white garments, but common, that nothing be wanting to honesty,
and necessity; nothing come near to niceness, and gayness. As for the voice
it must not be remiss, broken, sounding at all effeminatly, by what a one
under show of gravity many have used to counterfeit, but such as reserves a
certain form, rule, and manlike pith. For this is to retain the beauty, to
live decently, to render things convenient to every sex, and person. This is
the best order in doing, this the fittest setting forth of every action. As I
do not approve of a soft, and unmanly, either sound of the voice, or gesture
of the body: so neither of unmannerly, and rusticke behavior. Let us imitate
nature: her image is the platform of discipline, and pattern of modesty.

Place this leaf between page 126. and 127.

Certain Additions out of this our Father comprehended in his other works,
not unpertinently annexed to some chapters of this first book, together with
the examining of two points therein, and according them with the truth, and
tenets of our Church. 1. What manner of person ought to be chosen Bishop, The
Contents of supply.
and with what indowments of graces he ought to be furnished. Which is
inferred here by way of supply to the first Chapter, and taken out of the same
our authors Epistle 82. being under the tenth book of his Epistles, and
bearing the inscription to the Church of Vercella.
IT was said to Nisi fixus stat sui cordis sententia.
Moses, the place whereon thou stand is holy ground; For no man stands,
but he that stands by Exodus 3.5.
faith. We read likewise elsewhere, but stand Deuteronomy. 5.31.
thou here with me. Both were spoken to Moses by the Lord, where thou stand
it is holy ground, and stand thou here with me, that is to say, if thou
stand in the Church thou stand with me. For the place it self is holy,
the ground it self is fruitful in holiness, and rich with the harvests of
virtues. Stand thou therefore in the Church, stand where he appeared to thee,
there I am with thee, that is holy ground, there thou stand with me, says
God. Where the Church is, there is the most firm station of the mind, and
understanding part for information, there is the foundation of thy Animus for
counsel properly used also for the soul. Quod si in hoc erro, quod animos
immortales credam, libenter erro Cic. in Caton. sometimes for the affection, Ita
semper imperium ad optimum quemque animo bono transfertur, Salust.
soul, heart, Instruction for Pastors, and especially for Bishops, to whom
belongs the chief preeminence, and government in the Church. Courage. Speech.
and affections for reformation where I appeared to thee in a flame of fire in
a bush; I am therefore the fire in the flesh, that I may shine to thee, that I
may consume thy thorns, and thy sins, and may show thee my grace: Standing
fast therefore in the noble courage of your minds, chase away the wolves from
the Church that seek to carry away the prey. Let there not be evil mouths
with bitter tongues, this is beside the text, this will not drive away
corporal, and will draw in Legion of spiritual wolves. Psalm. 26.4. Company.
Haunt not with vain persons, keep not company with dissemblers, hearken not
to them that detract from their neighbors, and traduce them, lest when ye
hear others, ye your selves be provoked also to derogate from them, and it
be justly said to every one of you, thou Psalm. 50.20. and 1.1. Sitting what it
imports.
sit, and speak thy brother. Sitting traduce their neighbors, and
detract from Gods praise, but standing they bless him. Behold now all ye
servants of the Lord Psalm. 135.1.2.
bless ye the Lord that stand in the house of the Lord. He that sits (that
I may speak of bodily use) is idle, is at ease in body, remitteth the
intention of his mind. But he which stands is intent upon his speculations,
Standing.
providently forecasteth what dangers may befall, searches carefully, and
nimbly keeps watch being set over the Camp. He is a wise soldier also,
waiting before hand to take his opportunity, and spying into the host of his
enemy, that so he may prevent his counsel. He which stands let him take
heed 1 Cor. 10.12.
lest he fall, is the counsel of the Apostle, he which stands knows, and
avoideth what belongs to obtrectation, and backbiting. For tales belong to idle
persons. Where obtrectation is sown, there malignity, and envy buddeth forth;
Whereupon the Prophet says, I have hated the congregation of the Psalm. 26.5.
Sept. (...). Tremel. Iun. maleficorum Hebr. Merehuim. Arias Montanus.
Malignantium. Malignantes, and sedentes synonima.
malignant, and J will not sit among the ungodly. And in the thirty seventh
Psalm which he has farced with moral precepts, fret not thy self because
of the malignant, Malignitas plus nocet quam malitiam, quia malignit as nec
puram simplicitatem habet, nec apertam malitiam, sed absconditam malevolentiam.
and be not emulous of the workers of iniquity. Because malignity has in it
neither pure simplicity, nor open malice, but hidden malevolence or evil will.
But things hidden are more hardly avoided then things known.

Whence our Savior wills to beware of false prophets. Why? Math. 7.15. Math.
27.18. The election of a Bishop in quo vita formatur omnium. Election.
but for that they bear malignant spirits, as did the Jews against him, and
his truth. Therefore as in every action, so especially in the election of a
Bishop malignity ought to be debarred, and the choice of all ought to
concur, not in a malignant, but in a peaceable manner. If he be chosen with a
general consent, there will peace ensue, otherwise faction. Being elected of
all, Mansuetus homo cordis medicus est. The consequence of election by a
general consent what?
he will labor to cure all. A mild man is the hearts physician, he that has
peace at home, can berter persuade to peace abroad. The Lord in the Math. 9.12.
Gospel styleth himself a physician in this sense; The whole have no need of
a physician, but the sick. This is the good physician that has borne our
infirmities, healed our sicknesses; Where no lawful election, there intrusion.
Notwithstanding he has not taken this honor of a chief priest upon
himself, but his father gave it him, as it is Hebr. 7.5.
written, thou art my Son, this day have J begotten thee; and again, thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Therefore God himself
also chose Aaron, that no humane desire might bear sway in the choice, but the
grace of God, not a voluntary oblation, nor a proper, and private assumption, or
intrusion, but a heavenly, lawful, and public calling, as it is written Heb.
5.4.
No man takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of God as was
Aaron. The succession derived from Aaron made such heirs, as were found in the
line, rather then such as were preferred after their Ab Aaron per genus ducta
successio, generis magis tenebat haeredes quam justitiae consortes.
Melchisedech wherein the type of Christ.
worth. Wherefore the true Melchisedech, the true King of peace, and
righteousness, according to the type of the old Testament, is our high Priest
offering up himself in sacrifice for us, Hebr. 4.15.
touched indeed, and thoroughly affected with the sense, and weight of our
sins. In that he was without father, and without mother, it is to be
referred to our example, as one elected not for his nobility of stock, but for
excellency of grace, and prerogative of virtues. David Psalm. 99.6.
proposes Aaron for our imitation, and he was a man worthy to be followed of
all. For when a cruel plague crept upon the people for their rebellion he
casts himself Numb. 16.48.
between the living, Somewhat in Aaron for the imitation of-Pastors somewhat
memorable.
and the dead, and making an atonement stayed the same. The rod of Aaron, what
else does it signify, but that the gifts of grace shall never wither in the
ministry? for that this was done in the end of his life, it shows, that in
the last times the study of faith, and devotion, seeming to be dead shall
revive, and spring forth. Why was he, and Eleazar Exodus 29.1. Levit. 8.2. Numb.
20.28.
consecrated only by Moses, but to declare, that one of that tribe ought to
consecrate another? he was chosen of God, approved of Moses, such a one against
whom the people might take no offense, because he was to supplicate to God for
them, and intercede for their sins. The virtue of his office being so great,
he must not be one of evil life, no, he must have no affinity with the
smallest sins. Works.
Flexible must he be, to every good work, and forwardest to that of
compassion and mercy, he must not bite in his word, nor break his promise.
Neither is it his duty alone to keep himself upright, but to raise up others
that are fallen in commiseration toward them. It is his part to be of a meek
and gentle carriage, to be a lover of godliness, to repel anger, to be a
trumpet to stir up the people to devotion, to mitigate their unquiet spirits,
and to draw them to tranquillity. It is an old saying, accustom thy self to
be always one, and the same: that whatsoever thy preferment be, thy life may
express a certain picture, and retaining always the same image, and form,
which it received at the first. The Apostle gives all in a 1 Timothy 3.2. (...).
word, a Bishop must be unreproveable. That which is spoken to every Christian
most of all concerns him, be ye holy in all 1 Pet. 1.15.
manner of conversation. It adds much grace to his ministry, if he 1 Cor.
9.27.
bind himself to the study of Quid pulchrius abstinentia, quae facit etiam
inventutis annos senescere, ut fiat morum senectus?
abstinency, which is a step to integrity. But O ye Pastors, pass the time
of your dwelling here not in remissness, not in haughtiness, but in 1 Pet.
1.17.
fear, put not your confidence in riches, ye must leave those here behind
you. Faith alone shall accompany you. Justice also shall be your companion, if
faith go before, and lead the way. Why do ye suffer riches so to stroke, and
flatter you? ye were not 1 Pet. 1.18.
redeemed by silver nor gold, nor costly array, nor by possessions from your
vain conversation, but by the precious blood of Christ. He therefore is rich
that is the Romans 8.17.
heir of God, the coheire of Christ. If money were so material, why then sent
our Savior his Apostles abroad to teach without Math. 10.9.
money? Why did the chief of them say, silver, and gold I have Acts 3.6.
none, but I have faith? He glories in his poverty, as if money would
contaminate his fingers, and stick to them like birdlime. Silver, and gold,
says he, I have not, but I have faith. I am rich enough in the name of the
Lord Jesus, which is above all men, even the wealthiest. I have not silver,
neither do I require it: I have not gold, neither do I desire it: but I have
that which ye rich men have not, I have that which even they themselves being
judges, esteem to be of more value. For I am able to say to the distressed in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and so in the word of assurance, be ye
strengthened ye weak Hebr. 12.12.13.
hands, and ye feeble knees. But would ye be rich indeed? be ye then poor:
For then shall ye be rich in all things, if ye be Math. 5.3.
poor in spirit. Because not the revenew makes rich but the mind. For there
be which in the multitude of riches bear themselves rightly, and wisely in
all lowliness; That place in the Prove. 10.15.
Proverbs, the possession of riches is a most strong city; is not meant of an
earthly city, but of Hjerusalem which is above, this is a good possession,
which brings perpetual profit. It is a good possession, Portion.
which is not left here, but possessed there, and if ye desire to know, who is
in possession hereof, the Psalmist will teach you. The Lord, says he, is my
Psalm. 119.57.
portion; he says not, my portion is in the meadows, the pastures, the
fields, the woods, he says not my portion is the Psalm. 33.17.
horse, or herdes of cattle, the droves of sheep, the fair, and stately
buildings, the goodly furniture, the bags of gold, but the Lord is my
portion. The Lord was Judas Master, but the John 13.29.
bag was his portion, and hereby the devil is his possession, a just portion
for unfaithfulness, Idleness inhibited.
and greediness. The like shall be their portion, that being set upon a
charge waste their time in idleness, and sleep. There is no small detriment
of one hour misspent, because one hour that is to say, a little, and short
portion of time is the space of our whole life. By idleness, and sleep, is
made no purchase. As by these no work is done, so there comes no wages, yea no
small wrack, and woe to the present, and future estate. By idleness, Esau
Hebr. 12.^6.
lost the blessing of the first borne, because he had rather receive meat,
then seek it by labor. Contrariwise, Jacob by his labor, and vigilance over
the flocks, got a Genesis 29.18, 29. Prayer. Bonum scutum est oration, qua
contumelia excluditur, maledictum repellitur, and in ipsos qui maledixerunt,
frequenter retorquetur, ut suo telo vulnerentur.
double portion. Prayer is a good sense to ward off the blows of much evil
from your own heads, and the heads of your people, and a good bait to draw in
many fishes into your net, for the Lords table. The upper Heb, 12.1.2.
not the nether Jerusalem is your city of habitation, and the upshot of your
charge. Conversation.
Let your own conversation be there, and then you shall the better persuade
your flock to feed in the same pastures. The guide carries all the herd with
him, the leere where he likes, thither will they follow, there will they feed.
Therefore Jesus our Captain went Hebr. 13.11, 12, 13.
out of the city to be crucified, that ye might go out of the world, and
might be above it. Moses, who only saw God, had his Exodus 33.7. Cum Deo nullum
adhuc erectum fuerat. Iun.
Tabernacle without the camp, when he spoke with him. The Hebr. 13.11. (...).
blood of the sacrifices, which were made for sin, But at the door Hebr.
pethach Tremei, ad portam Genev. without the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation. Exodus 40.29.
was brought unto the Altar which stood within the temple, because no man
placed within the verge of the vices of this world does lay down his sins,
neither is his blood acceptable to God, unless he depart out of the filthy
stie of this his defiled body. Love ye hospitality; 2 Cor. 13.3.
for by it Genesis 18.10. Hebr. 13.2. Math. 25.35. Hospitality.
Abraham, and Sarah, received a son, and by it as a good 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit.
1.8. (...).
invitation you may receive many sons into the fold of Christ. By it Lot
escaped the Genesis 19.3.10.12 16
fire of Sodom, which consumed the wicked Being unhospitall verse. 5.24. and
unmercifull. Ezech. 16.29.
Sodomites, and the like judgment shall consume all the James 2.13.
unmercifull. By it Ioh. 2.1.6.27. Heb. 11.31. Captivity
Rahab saved her self, and her household. Romans 12.16.
Suffer ye together with them that are bound, as if ye your selves were under
the chains of bondage, Es. 61.1. and 40.1, 2.
comfort those that mourn. For, it is better to go into the house of Eccles.
7.4. Visiting sick.
mourning then into the house of banqueting, thence you may learn to take
your end to heart; hence what may make your soul to smart: entering in there,
and upon all necessary occasions, (and your occasions are manifold,) let your
tongues be the Psalm. 45.1.
pens of ready writers for due, and fit instructions. Summarily being your
selves converted to the Lord Jesus, strive to Luke 22.32. Direction to the
right using of spiritual graces.
convert your people, let the delight of your life be the joy of a good Prove.
15.15. Acts 23.1. 1 Timothy 1.19.
conscience, the grace of your doctrine truth with Ephesians. 4.13. Romans 16.17.18. 1
Cor. 5.8. 2 Cor. 4.2. and 11.3.
simplicity, the persuasion of the argument of faith with confidence in your
selves, and the Romans 8.38.
consolation of assurance in others, your abstinency Ibid. ver. 39.
in holiness, your industry in the Acts 13.2.1. Cor. 7.
work of the ministry in sobriety, your erudition without vanity, your
moderation of true propositions without the drunkenness 5. Mat. 17.22. Acts
20.34. 2 Cor. 11.9. and 12.13. Col. 2.3. Romans 12.3.
of hheresie, your bearing 1 Cor. 17.12. and ver. 15.
of reproach, whatsoever affliction, and death it self, with patience, and
hope of immortality. Tit. 3.10.11.2. John 5.10.2. Tim. 2.24.25. Romans 12.12.2.
Tim. 4.7.


The example of David's patience, together with the matter of taciturnity,
Supply 2.
enlarged from our authors 49. Sermon, which answers to the argument of
Chapter 6.
DAvid was herein a type of Christ. For he when he was accused by Mat.
27.12.13.14. Ibid. 26.63.
Pilat the Mark 14.60.
priests, and elders of the Jews, and questioned by Herod opened not his
mouth. It may seem to be wondered at that he confuteth not such reproaches,
Luke 23.9.
and false accusations. A just apology makes all whole whatsoever can be
spoken to impeach our credit, taciturnity is taken for a consent, because it
seems to confirm what is objected, when that is not answered which is sought
after. Does the Lord therefore confirm by his silence the accusation, or does
he not rather in not refelling it, despise it? For he does well to hold his
peace, who needs no defense. Let him labor for a defense who fears to be
overcome let him hasten to speak, who stands in awe of the victory. But
Christ is condemned, and yet does overcome, is judged, and yet not brought
under by the power thereof: as the Prophet witnesses, that thou might be
justified in thy sayings, Psalm. 51.4.
and clear when thou art judged. The cause therefore is better, which is not
defended, and yet is approved, that justice is fuller, and firmer, which is not
held up with words, but supported with the truth. The tongue must needs be
silent, when equity it self is present to succor it. The force whereof was
so prevalent with Pilat, Mat. 27.24.
that it made him cry out, I am innocent from the blood of this just man. A bad
cause is helped forward by the tongue, a good needs it not, men had accustomed
that course, Christ would none of it. Should justice so be patronaged as is
iniquity? Color, and excuse must of necessity thrust in here, otherwise there
is no handing out, whereas there the naked truth is enough. Wherefore in that
Christ gained the cause against Pilate, it was not out of his oratory, though
never man spoke as this man spoke, but out of his virtue. Can we think the
Savior of the world, who is sapience it self, knew not the way to overcome?
Not answering again he knew to be it, and therefore he had rather his cause to
approve it self, then to speak in it. And what should move him to speak,
when as his silence was sufficient to stop the mouths of his adversaries?
But peradventure the fear of losing the opportunity of saving mankind, unless
we shall make that the whole cause of glorious triumph, brought him to it. For
he neglected his own salvation that he might save us, he spared not his own
so precious a person, that the benefit thereof might spread to all his people,
he chose to be overcome himself, that he might overcome in whatsoever stood
against us.

The same argument from his 53. Sermon further amplified.
ALL we that are Christians, are the 1 Cor. 12.27.
body and members of Christ, Christ therefore rising, all we that be his bowels
do necessarily rise with him. He passed from death to life, that there might
be a passage in us from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness. He
has bid thee take up thy cross and Mat. 16.24.
follow him. It is his caution, unless ye shall be converted as little Mat.
18.3.
children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. He himself is the
child which he proposes to be followed, witness the Prophet, unto us a Esaias.
9.6.
child is borne. He is plainly the child who was of 1 Pet. 2.23.
innocent life, and in his passion prayed for them that Luke 23.34. A petition
of so much compassion as never was the like.
crucified him thus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. So
that simplicity which nature gives to infants, does our Lord here, in the
riches of his mercy heap upon the heads of his enemies.

Forcible persuasions against Intemperancy, and to avoyde the company of evil
women, Supply 3.
and of all loose and lewd livers intising unto it, taken out of our fathers
first Book, and 4. Chapter of Cain, and Abel, and delivered by him upon
occasion offered to speak of the history of the hateful, and wife beloved
Deuteronomy. 21.15.16. which answers to the argument of chapter 20. and may serve as
a means of restraint to the unbridled lusts of this age.
TWo women dwell together in the house of the soul of every one of us being
ever at variance, and hatred, and filling the same with the contentions, and
convulsions of jealousy. The one of them being the procuring of amiable grace
serves us for sweet, and amorous solace, which is called Pleasure. This we
suppose to be an associate, and domesticke to us: the other churlish, rough,
feirce, which is cleeped Virtue. The former therefore is malepert in her
meretricious motion, in her minsing gate, through much delicacy, wandering and
wanton looks, catching even with the very casting of her eye-liddes, Prove.
6.25. and 7.13. and 9.13. The drunkard looks after her, and there Chap.
5.3.4.5. The danger coming by her with the remedy to prevent the same is
opened. Solomon in mulieris illius specie corruptelam seculihujus exponit, and
^eretricias arts declinandas docet, our father de fuga seculi, Cap. 6.
as with snares the precious souls of youth. For the eye of the harlot is the
snare of the sinner.

Now what is so harlot-like as worldly voluptuousness? because she has not
the sweet odours of Christ, spreads abroad her own odours, shows her
treasures, promises kingdoms, continual delights, secret imbracements,
discipline with out correction, liberty of speech without admonition, a life
without solicitude, the sleep of security, insatiable luxury. In her is
heard the tumult of gluttons, the clamor of gamesters, the slaughter of
fensers, the music of prodigals, the noise of dancers, Nahum 1.10. Mal. 2.2.
These former places show the haynousnes Hab. 2.15.16. Hag. 1.5. of this sin,
the latter that as all other vices to be considered of and avoided.
the scorns of deriders, the shouting of the lascivious, all in confusion,
nothing in due order. In her is seen tricked up minions skipping, and cappring
with their companions, Cupids yonkers with their crisped, powdered, and perfumed
locks, the belching and vomiting of the bellie-gods, the vndrainable draught
of the gousling drunkards, so unsavory with the sent of their breath, that no
fragrancie availes against it. Dame pleasure her self stands in the midst,
and proclaim. O ye my noble copesmates, drink your fill, and be drunken that
every one of you may fall and rise no more, he shall be first, which is most
desperately wicked above all others. He is mine which is not his own he is for
my money, which can lest manage himself, he which is most ungracious is most
gracious to me. Ier. 51.7.
The golden cup of Babel is in mine hand, and therewith I make drunken the
whole earth. Wisd. 2.6.7.8.9.
Isa. 22.33.
Come let us enjoy the good things which are present, let us satiate our selves
with precious wine, and ointment: let not the flower of our time slip without
some monument of our mirth, Let us eat and drink our fill while we are here,
for tomorrow we shall die.

An enlargement against the same vice from the 5. Chapter of the said book,
wherein ye have dame pleasures lovers, heedfully hearkening to her lure.
HErewith are her companions so wounded, as when a stag is peirced with an
arrow in the liver, whom when Lady Virtue sees about to fall, then suddenly
she strikes in, takes pity, sends them her succor of verity forthwith, lest
through detraction of time, those sugared baits of fleshly allurements might
engage too far. I came forth to meet thee, says the harlot, that Prove. 7.15.
I might seek thy face. Let her not circumvent thee being uncircumspect. She is
impudent, and void of shame, hearken not to the words of her mouth, Prove. 9.16.
she will hunt Prove. 9.14.15.
for the precious life of a man, Prove. 7.33.
such as are destitute of understanding run after her, he that companieth
with her, destroys his own c soul. Prove. 5.5.
All beauty is vanity, hers balefull for both her face, Luke 4.3.4.5.6.7.
and feet d tend to death, and take hold of destruction. All pleasures factors
are in like manner Satan's instruments, the Lord Jesus has taught thee how to
avoyde their baits. That of gluttony, gave the first attempt against our
Savior, couched in this temptation, if thou be the son of God command that
these stones be made bread: vain boasting the second, which next follows,
cast thy self down from the pinnacle; the third, which put in the last place,
as the last refuge, covetousness and ambition, all these (the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them) will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and
worship me. Learn thou the Lord Jesus reply to each of them, so shall thou
be able to repulse, and overcome likewise these assaults.

A further enlargement from the fourth, sixth, and other Chapters of his book
de fuga seculi of flying the world, the Tit. 2.12. (...) is opposed to (...)
there also is (...) specified.
lusts whereof cause to surfeit upon them, which to do, what is it, but
intemperancie.
When the Lord says, they persecuting Math. 10.23.
you in one city fly into another, although for thine infirmity he seems to
persuade thee to flight, notwithstanding he better flies, which flies worldly
inticement, that he be not entangled with that care of his riches, with the
sight of his treasure, with a desire of this life, but that with a direct
intention of mind he hasten to the place of glory; be not called back upon
the beholding of earthly things, from suffering in body, but make speed for the
crown. There is no doubt, but that he, which abstaineth from sin, flies
from it. And that he, which flies from it, is framed according to the
similitude, and image of God, and so the crown of glory belongs to him The
Apostle cries out, fly 1 Cor. 6.18.
fornication. For the allurements of sins pursue, and lust provokes. But fly
thou her, as a furious mistress, if she shall once lay hold of thee, she
vexes, burns, inflameth, disquieteth night and day. Fly covetousness, that
it get not thine affections to the damage of thy soul. Fly envy, lest it
consume no less thine own heart, when it possesses it, then thy neighbors
estate. Fly treachery, lest it involve thy self in the perdition thou
plottest against another. Think it no shame to fly; For it is a glorious
flight to fly from the face of sin. So fled Genesis 07.43.
Jacob at the motion of his mother to remove the occasion of hatred. So fled
Moses from the Exodus 2.15.
Court of King Pharaoh, for that he esteemed more the Hebr. 11.26.
rebuke of Christ then all the riches of Egypt, and corruption follows the
Court, and tyranny authority. So also fled David from 1 Samuel 20.31. 2 Samuel
15.14.
Saul and Exodus 14.5.
Absalom that he might avoid all opportunity to revenge and effusion of blood.
So the 2 Cor. 11.32.
Israelites out of Egypt, that they might shake off idolatry; so Paul being
let down through a Genes. 9.
window in a basket, that his mouth might not be stopped from preaching the
Gospel throughout the world. The end of flight is to be observed, which is
remarkable, together with the residence in Lot, who though he lived in Sodom,
yet feared more the consumption of the soul, through the lethargy of sin,
by contagion there, then of his body by fire, and brimstone; He therefore
flies with Lot, that vexes his righteous soul, because of the evil
conversation of men, that renounceth the beastly manners of Sodom, and looks
not back, after his Christian calling, toward worldly lusts. He takes a good
flight that flies from the wrath of God, that comes by impenitency. The Baptist
shows in that his reprehension, O Math. 3.7.8.
generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to fly from the anger to come?
bring forth therefore fruits worthy amendment of life. He takes good flight,
that flies from public, and worldly molestations, and withal betakes himself
to holy meditations, as did 1 Kings 19.
Helias, 2 Kings 6.
Heliseus, the said Math. 3.11.
Baptist, and our blessed Math. 5.3.
Savior himself of whom David was a type in that his testimony, Psalm. 55.6.
O that J had wings like a dove then would J fly away, and be at rest, behold
I would take my flight a far off, and remain in the wilderness. Let us fly
this world, being all set upon John 5.
wickedness, and that speedily, for the time is 1 Cor. 7.29.31. Genesis 27.20.
short, the fashion thereof passes away. Be like the Hebrew women, that staid
not for the Midwife, be like Exodus 1.19.
Jacob, whom his father admired, that he brought him so quickly, such
comfortable meat, as he liked. The watchword of our Savior, let it be a
fit warning for us against the world, Math. 26.4.
arise, let us go hence, and it was high time to be stirring, when his
enemies were up in arms. His imposition, let those in Judea Luke 21.21.
fly to the mountains, necessary more then ever for dispatch the day drawing
nearer, and the Lord now mustering his innumerable, and invincible host for
final judgment. Sion the Lords own resting place shall be no longer an
harbor for such as imagine wickedness upon their beds, and when the light
comes Mich. 2.1.
practice it. Arise therefore tarry not: For here is not your Verse 10.
rest; because it is polluted it shall destroy you, even with a sore
destruction.

An addition to Chapter 41. taken out of his third Book de Virginibus, Maccab.
7.
fitting the story of the seven children done to death, by Antiochus the tyrant.
EVery age fit for God is made perfect in Christ: we call not virtue the
appurtenance of age, but age the appurtenance of virtue. Marvel not at the
profession of religion in youth, when thou read of these sufferings in
infants. For it is written Psalm. 8.^
out of the mouths of babes, and sucklings have thou ordained strength.
Exclude Math. 19.14.
not these therefore from Christ, because these for the name of Christ have
undergone martyrdom; For of such is the kingdom of heaven.

CHRISTIAN OFFICES CRYSTAL GLASS. OR, THE TRANSLATION OF the second book, of
the godly, learned, and one of the chiefest ancient Fathers of the Latin
Church, S. Ambrose that famous B. of Millan, his Offices. WHICH WORK IS
CAREFVLLY, and clearly, considering the excellent mystery of style in much
obscurity, performed, and that with due observation likewise of the places of
Scripture therein frequently mentioned, and others thereunto pertinent. With
some reconcilement eftsoons, where there may seem to be disagreement, of the
Septuagints, and the original of the old Testament. And the same is done
accordingly in the first, and third book.

JOHN 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment. Admonuit quidem Dominus Iudaeos: sed monuit and nos. Illos
convincit, and nos instruxit. Illos redarguit, and nos exacuit. Aug. in hunc
locum. LONDON, Printed for John Dawson. 1637.

Operis emolumentum.
ECce liber novus, ex veteri, qui sacra recludit
Ethica, pectoribus mystica digna pijs.
Patribus an nobis similis congressus eburnis?
Auratis seclis moribus anne pares?
Sat mihi si minus implicitus, magis obvius exit,
Caecus lectori fucus ademptus, abit.
Laudum qui veterum fons, quae virtutis origo,
Quae vis, sit speculum fortibus iste viris.
Surrigat hinc animi nervos quicunque morantes,
Errores contra strenuus hostis eat.
Consilij justi, recti moderamine praestet,
Aequa judicij singula sort ferat.
Hinc iram rabidam, vinum, veneremque retundat.
Quod foedum, volupe est, exuperatque modum.
Martius hinc clamor resonet, trepidantia corda
Intrepide Domini bella potentis agant.
O speciose decor, facies pulcherrima rerum,
Hic meriti pretium, dona leporis habes.
O venerabile corpus, amabile pectus honesti:
Hic tibi cum charo nomine numen inest.
H. R.

The Preface.
TO remove away scandal from the mind of some, whom the very name of
Philosophy does offend, because of the cautell of the Coloss. 2.8.
Apostle, it shall be necessary to clear his doctrine from such sinister
suspicion. We are to understand therefore, that there be certain natural
notions, which St. Paul terms the truth of God, and the law written in the
heart, ingrafted still, notwithstanding the fall, in the minds of men: as of
numeration, writing, reading, Exodus 31.3.
architecture, Syrac. 38.1.
Physic, gift of tongues, all which with the like are good things, and the
gifts of God, and do testify his wisdom. Hence Solomon, Prove. 20.12.
That the eye does see, and ear does hear, God is the author of them both:
and another says well, the renown, that is spread abroad of God in the Grata
de Deo fama in artibus sparsa est. Plato.
sciences, is acceptable. Neither do the arts, among which is Philosophy,
draw us to acknowledge God to be the fountain of wisdom only, but the guider
of our whole bodily life, namely in their principles, and demonstrations:
insomuch, that such as cast the least aspersion upon them, are abrept with fury
to the hurt of mankind, and contumely of the Almighty. We must know this
beside, that Sciences fetched from the light of nature have their limitations,
and extend no further then to what is within humane capacity, not reaching to
what in the Gospel is given by special revelation, as to that, which is
therein manifested of Gods own essence, will, and promise of grace,
transforming of the Gospel into philosophy, as the Pelagians, and Monks of
old have grossly done, transgressing the due bounds thereof, and confounding
them together without discretion, is that which the Apostle would have
Christians to beware of. It is to be observed also, that he wills not to take
heed of Philosophy only, but of many other kinds of wiles no less perilous
to pull away from the truth, and sincerity of the Gospel, adding withal
vain deceit through the Worshipping of Angels, and other beggarly worldly
ordinances, v. 18. and 20.
traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not according
to Christ. A third sort likewise there was, when the Colossians made a
commixture of Verse 11.16.
Christianisme, and Iudaisme: of baptism, and circumcision: of the law, and
the Gospel, which was the common error together with this Church, of that of
Romans 2.27.10.5.
Rome, and Gal. 4.10.
Galatia. The name of Philosophy is here used not properly, but improperly
(...), for ostentation of wit vented in painted speech, with a purpose to
beguile the simple.
And from this ground did Pelagius himself, the Semi-pelagians, and some of
the Schoolmen build up their doctrine of humane merits. Another exposition.
All these impostures are signified by (...), which is to carry away the minds
of the world as a prey: and to captivate them under Satan. It follows not
therefore from hence the study of Philosophy in the school of Christ to be
forborne. Yea rather, if we truly weigh the matter, there be among sundry
other, three singular commodities, why it ought to be specially fostered in
the Church. First it is an ample witness of God, and his attributes. Next,
when it, and the Gospel be compared together, it brings in much light to
the comprehending of the several doctrines contained in them both. Lastly, the
sundry parts thereof thoroughly learned, yield no small advantage above such as
want them, no less for more facility in opening, then for solidity in
defending the divine tenets. Notwithstanding we confess, that not the wisdom
of the Romans 8.6. Pbilosophie to be (...)
flesh, but that of the spirit is it alone, which is life, and peace. For might
that be admitted for a good kind of arguing, Philosophy, because it is the
wisdom of the flesh, is death, and therefore utterly to be rejected: With the
like reason might we conclude against the sacred books, for that without
faith, and the holy Spirit they bring not life, and peace. Wherefore this
takes not away the good that may be reaped by the use of Philosophy, though
in an infinite inferior degree to that received from the divine Oracles. The
very name of Virtue likewise, how glorious soever, seems to some not to sort
with Divivinity, and the appellation of good Works to be much more proper to
it, and therefore frequently used, and that of virtue rarely, and not above
once 2 Pet. 1.5. Phil. 4.8.
or twice in the Scriptures. The rarity of it is partly, because the
Scriptures, especially of the new Testament have little to do with wars,
from which it (...) of (...) Mars.
is derived, and those of the old Testament are styled the 1 Samuel 25.18.
wars of God, as his work: and partly because it imports an heroical spirit
extraordinarily inflamed to the enterprizing great adventures, and that with a
forcible, And therefore termed by the Philosophers habites (...).
and constant inclination which is seldom found. S. Peter putting it down
does evidence the same, noting thereby in general the efficacy of the
doctrine of the Gospel, and that it passes not away without fruit, but
stirs up a fiery affection, and firm purpose of performance in the hearers.
I cannot say that those special motions in the Ethnicks, Alexander, Scipio,
Augustus, and the rest were merely natural: but rather the work Nemo sibi
quicquam sumere potest, nisi fit datum ei desuper. Nullus fuit vir magnus fine
afflaru divino, Cic.
of God to manifest his powerful presence in ordering of the state Political.
Hence were those noble spirits called the children of the Gods, and in that any
excelled in goodness, he did seem to be not of mortal, but of (...), etc.
Homer. and (...), etc. Plato.
immortal, generation, and where God has not the dominion there to be no
Genes. 10.9. We must discern between the thing, that is, political order,
which is of God, and vitia rei, the vices incident thereunto, which are from
the devil. Deus transfert. and stabilit regna. Dan. 4.22. Psalm. 18.32. Psalm.
144.1.2. St. Augustine striving that (...) in the Septuagints signifies as well
contra, as coram, and thereby collects that Nimrod was an oppressor, makes
nothing against this, that the hand of God set him up to rule: yea, himself
confesses the same, credibilius est quod seorsum de illo Scriptura propter ejus
emenantiam locuta sit, de Civit. Dei. Lib. 19. cap. 3.
evasion of evil, and calamity. The sacred Scripture confirms this giving to
That they be voluntary, and of right judgment.
Nimroth, not only the dignity of a strong hunter, but adding withal before
the Lord, that is, the bestowing upon him strength, victory, and happy success
for the erecting of an Empire to proceed from divine ordinance. In these
regards therefore the word of God has good works, and not virtue in common
use being much more perspicuous, and expressing better the Psalmista heroicos
viros comparat sagittis Valida manu contortis, quae omnia prosiernunt, Psalm.
18.32.
properties of humane actions well managed. Some works are of external
discipline, and not raised from x magnanimity, and from divine instinct, as
the efficient: these latter are as gemmes, and pearls of highest price; those
common to many, as their subject; in the one does appear nothing, but what is
of ordinary form; in the other, sundry parts of admiration; here no
undertaking, but what is trivial; there such effects, and happy success, as
is beyond all expectation. Howbeit what is heroical, is not in like manner in
Joseph, and Alexander; David and Scipio. For the one sort were moved by the
Spirit of sanctification; the other not so: the one sought the honor of God,
as the final cause; the other shot at pomp, and policy, greatness of
government together with their own praise, as the upshot of all their hopes.

CHRISTIAN OFFICES CRYSTAL GLASS. OR St. Ambrose Bishop of Millan his Offices,
Book II.
CHAPTER. I. By honesty a blessed life to be acquired.
IN our former book we have treated of offices, and duties which belong to
honesty, wherein we doubt not but that a blessed life, which the the Scripture
calls life eternal, does consist. For so great is the splendour and beauty of
honesty, that the tranquillity of conscience, and the security of innocence
found therein, do make it a blessed and happy estate. And therefore as the
sun when it arises, hides the globe of the moon, and the other lights of
the stars, so the brightness of honesty, when it shines and glistereth in its
true, and perfect comeliness, shadoweth, and obscureth the other good things
which according to the estimate of bodily pleasure in the worlds account, are
deemed famous, and renowned. She is clearly blessed which receives not her
verdict from other men's judgment, but perceiving, and understanding from her
own domestic senses, as bosom witnesses, what in truth she is, becomes
her own judge. Neither does she require popular opinions as any reward,
neither does she stand in awe of them as a punishment. By how much less
therefore she follows after glory, by so much the more is she eminent, and
conspicuous above it. For they which seek glory here, to them now is there a
reward, for the time present, which is but a shadow of what is to come, and
such as may be an hinderance to eternal life, as the gospel Mat. 6.2.^.
has, Verily I say unto you they have their reward, being spoken of those that
much insult, and solace themselves in sounding forth a trumpet, that the world
may take notice of their great devotion, and bounty to the poor. Likewise of
their Ver. 16.
fasting, which under the counterfeit vizard of disguising their faces, they
do in vain ostentation, they have also says our savior, their reward.
Wherefore it is the part of honesty, either to do thy work of mercy, or to
observe thy fast in in secret, that so thou may reap thy reward at the hands
of God only, without the least regard to the praise, and applause of men. For
he which seeks it of men is possessed of his reward here, but he which is in
expectation thereof from the Lord has stored up with him eternal life, which
he only is able to restore to him, who is the author thereof. Which that his
donation Luke 23.43.
of indulgence, and free gift to the good theife, does clearly evidence:
Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Whence it is
manifest that the divine scripture has given eternal life, such high style,
and title, whereby it is made so blessed, that it is not left to be prized, and
valewed by man, but reserved to the divine judgment of God.

CHAP. II. The Philosophers to have been of manifold, and great variety of
judgment concerning beatitude, but the same according to Christian Philosophy
to consist only in the knowledge of God, and good works.
THerefore some Philosophers have placed an happy life in the susteining of no
grief, nor sorrow, as Hieronymus, Some in the knowledge of things as Herillus,
who hearing science wonderfully commended by Aristotle, and Theophrast, made it
only the chief good, when they commended the same for a principal among
others not for the sole good. Others have pointed at pleasure to be it, as
Epicurus. Others as Calipho, and after him Diodorus have so interpreted him,
that the one has joined to pleasure, the vacuity of grief the commerce and
fellowship of honesty, because without this adjunct a blessed life could not
subsist Zeno the Stoicke has affirmed honesty it self to be the sole, and
chief good: but Aristotle and Theophrast, and other Peripateticks to be in
virtue, that is nothing else but in honesty, but to be made complete by
addition of bodily and outward delights. But the sacred scripture has placed
it in the knowledge of the Divinity, and in the fruit of actions. And for both
these the gospel does give evident testimony. For of knowledge, so says the
Lord John 17.3.
Jesus, This is everlasting life to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom thou have sent. And of works thus Mat. 19.29.
he answered, whosoever has forsaken houses, or brethren; or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife or children, or feilds, for my names sake, he shall
receive an hundred fold more, and shall possess eternal life, for his (...)
hereditatis iure possidebit. Beza.
rightful inheritance. But lest perhaps this assertion should be suspected,
and misdeemed as some novelty, the question being on foot long before among
the Philosophers, before it was handled in the gospel, because the
Philosophers, that is, Aristotle, Theophrast, or Zeno, and Hieronimus, were
before the Evangelists, but after the Prophets, let them hear, how long before
the name it self of a philosopher was spoken of, both these parts of our
affection were by the mouth of David clearly, and expressly avouched. For it is
written: Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, and teach Psalm. 94.12.
(...). asher teiassrennu quem erudieris eum Arias Mont. the root is Iasar
properly corripere chastisement and erudition commonly go together, and
therefore the one is used for the other.
in thy law: And we have the same else where, Blessed Psalm. 112.4.
is the man that fears the Lord he has great delight in his commandments.
We have showed it concerning knowledge, the reward whereof this our prophet
mentions to be the fruit of eternity, and adds withal what be the rewards
of them, who remain in the house of him that fears the Lord, or are
instructed in the law, and greatly delight in the holy commandments of God.
Glory and riches, says he, are in his house, and his righteousness endures
for ever. In the same Psalm also he subioynes for works, Psalm. 112.7, 8.
that the good man shall never be removed, shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, and his horn shall be exalted with honor, namely for his mercy,
lending freely, discretion in speech, just dealing, dispersing to the poor.
Wherefore faith, because it is the good foundation of all these, and is
thereafter likewise specified g therein, has the blessing of eternal life,
and in like sort good works. For the just man being approved of God in word
and deed cannot but be in an happy estate. To be expert and too much exercised
in good words, and to be desidious, and defective in pious works, is to give
the prudence of the tongue by the practice of the hand, the repulse with
opprobrie, is by thy knowledge to aggravate the offense, and considering thy
solid apprehension unworthily to acquit thy self to make thy sin more
capital. Contrariwise to be strenuous, and strong in the operation of good
but in affection disloyal, and unfaithful, is as if thou would eleuate,
and raise from a vicious and rotten foundation, a fair and stately roof with
goodly galleries in the top thereof. Whereupon the more thou buildest, the
more it is subject to ruin, the more thou crowdest in, the higher thou sorest,
the more unstable it stands, the thicker, and faster it falls, because
without the muniment of faith, the monument of good works cannot subsist. A
deceitful station in the haven decays, and demolisheth the ship, a sandy
soil soon yields, neither is it able to sustain the weight of the
structure, and edifice imposed. There is therefore plenitude of reward, where
is perfection of virtue, and a certain golden sobriety, a sweetly consorting
of moderation of deeds and words, in the whole current of thy conversation,
and that according to the sacred Canon equally poised.

CHAP. III. All the arguments of the Philosophers, through the heavenly light
of the Gospel professed among us to vanish away: namely of such as have placed
beatitude in the sole knowledge of things, or in pleasure, or in the commodity
of the body, and what is external.
AND because the sole science of things, either as a vain, or as an half
perfect, and lame opinion, according to the superfluous disputes of
Philosophy, is exploded: let us consider Quam enodem de eo divina Scriptura
absolvat sententiam. Enodes trunci Virg. Statimque ipse quaestionem enodem
reddidit, Ambr. lib. 1. Offic.
how plain a verdict the divine Scripture does pass upon it, whereupon we
see so manifold, so implicate, so confused questions of Philosophy to depend.
For the Scripture ratifieth nothing as good, but what is honest, and does judge
virtue in every estate of men to be blessed: such a virtue namely, which
neither is increased with the outward prosperity of the body, nor diminished
with adversity, and again gives warrant for nothing as blessed, but what is
alienated from sin, what is replete with innocence, what abounds with divine
grace. For it is Psalm. 1.1.
written, Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the
scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord. And in another place
Psalm. 119.1. (...) Sept. themimei Hebr. upright, both tend to innocence. The
root is thamam, and that derived of maijm, waters, which in their element is
immaculate, and without mixture, as is innocence.
Blessed are they that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the law of the
Lord. Therefore innocence, and knowledge make blessed, and we have observed
before, the seed of well-doing sown abroad to reap the blessing of eternal
life. Wherefore it remains that the defense of pleasure, and fear of grief
being rejected (whereof the one as Infractum.
unmanly, and effeminate, the other as Eviratum.
drouping, and at despair is condemned) I may show an happy life to cast forth
the reyes of her luster, even in the darkness of dolor, and grief. Which may
easily appear to every one that in the reading of the Gospel shall make but a
little entrance. Math. 5.11.12.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of
evil against you for my sake falsely. Rejoice, and be glad: For great is your
reward in heaven, and in another place, Math. 16.24.
If any man will follow me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and
follow me.

CHAP. IIII. Blessedness to be obtained by the undergoing of sorrows, and
necessities. For the confirmation whereof the examples of the Fathers are
produced.
BEatitude therefore is also in sorrows which virtue replenished with
sweetness does mitigate, and assuage, when it has enough at home in it self
of its own store, either for satisfaction of the conscience, or procuring
grace, and favor abroad. For neither was Moses a little blessed, when pursued,
compassed by the Egyptians, and closed in by the Sea had found out a way for
him, and the people through the swelling waves. But when was he stronger then
at that time, when being in extreme danger he despaired not of deliverance,
but required according to Gods promise a day of Exodus 14.4. For are not these
words of right noble courage, fear not, stand still, and behold the salvation
of the Lord, which he will show to you this day?
triumph? For the Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see
them any more. Neither did a small portion of happiness befall Aaron, and so
he reputed it, then when he Objectu sui.
standing in the midst to the hazard of his life between the living, and the
dead, with the censor of incense in his hand, whereby he made an atonement
between God, and the people, and so staid the Numb. 16.48.
plague that it spread no further. How worthy of honorable mention is Dan.
6.16.
Daniel, who was of that rare wisdom, that among the affamished, and hungry
Lions, he was touched with no fear of their bestiall, and savage cruelty: yea
so far from the least thought of anxious passion, that he might have fed,
and banquetted in their sight, neither dreaded that in so doing they would have
been provoked the more to have seized upon him? Wherefore in grief likewise,
there is Virtue exhibiting within the sweetness of a good conscience, which is
a signification that grief diminishes not the pleasures thereof. As
therefore, by grief Nulla virtuti decessio beatitudinis per dolorem.
virtue suffers no loss of beatitude: so by the pleasure of the body, or
commodities of this life, there is no increase of it. Of these the Phil. 3.7.8.
Apostle speaks well; The things that were vantage to me, the same J counted
loss for Christ's sake; and to give more weight to it he adds, I account all
things as loss, and esteem them as doung that I may win Christ. Hebr.
11.25.26.
Moses preferred the reproach of Christ above the treasures of Egypt, and chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season. Neither did he esteem himself then rich, when he
abounded with money, neither afterward poor, when he needed nourishment;
unless peradventure he may then seem to some man less happy, when in the
wilderness his daily food to him, and his people was failing. But Psalm.
78.25.27:28.
Manna, which no man dare deny, to have been a chief good, being the bread of
Angels was ministered from heaven, flesh also fell from heaven upon them, and
was made their daily banqueting dish. Bread was wanting also to holy 1 Kings
17.4.6.10.
Eliah, and he would have found it so in so great famine, had he sought after
it: but indeed he seemed not to need it, because he sought it not. For in
such sort in the time of dearth had the Lord provided for him, that the ravens
brought him food both in the morning, and in the evening. Was he for that
cause poor, because he was poor to himself? No: yea rather he was blessed,
because he was rich to God. It is better to be rich to others, then to thy
self, as was this Prophet, who in the time of famine desired food of a widow,
that thereby he might take occasion to 1 King. 17.14.16.
increase her meal, and oil, and though she made continual use of it, it
might not fail her, but might supply her necessity for the space of three
years and six months. Good reason had Peter to desire to be there, where he
saw these. Math. 17.3.
For good causes appeared these two with Christ in glory, because he himself
likewise being rich was made 2 Cor. 8.9. and 6.10.
poor. Wherefore riches yield no help nor furtherance to a blessed life.
Which the Lord evidently shows in the Luke 6.20, 21.
Gospel saying, Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven;
blessed are they that hunger now, and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled; Blessed are they that weep now, for they shall laugh.
Therefore it is clearly proved, poverty, hunger, grief, which are thought to
be evils, not only to be no impediments, but special adjuments to a blessed
life.

CHAP. V. What things are thought good to be for the most part an hinderance
to a blessed, Seculi homines infaeliciter faelices sunt, Martyrs autem
faeliciter infaelices erant. Christian felicity consists in suffering.
and eternal life, what are thought evil to be certain matter, and means
of virtue, and everlasting felicity.
BUT it is manifest by the Lords judgment those things which seem good as
riches, saciety, joy without grief to be a detriment to the enjoying of
blessedness. Luke 6.25. See here the difference between Ethnic, and
Christian Philosophy. For few of the Ethnicks thought to be exercised under
losses, and crosses to be the way to happiness, but these to be endured,
because of necessity, not because God disposes them partly for subduing of the
party, and partly for trial of patience, as does the Christian.
Woe unto you, says he, that are rich, for you have your consolation, woe
unto you which are full, for ye shall hunger, woe unto you that laugh, for ye
shall wail, and weep. So therefore the external goods of the body are not
only no aid, to a blessed life but a loss. Thence is it that 1 Kings 21.
Naboth was blessed, even when he was stoned by him that was rich, because
being poor, and infirm, he was rich only in affection, and religion, which
made him stand out against the riches of a King: insomuch, that he would not
make an exchange of the inheritance of his Fathers vineyard, nor be bought out
of it by the kings money. Wherein hence grew his rare perfection in this kind,
that he would rather maintain the right of his ancestors with the spilling of
his own blood, then yield to the covetous, and unjust desire of a tyrant.
Thence also Achab became miserable, and wretched, and that in his own
judgment, when he would kill a poor innocent subject to possess his
vineyard. Certain it is, virtue to be the sole, and chiefest good, and it
alone abundantly to suffice without the external goods of the body, for the
acquiring the fruit of a blessed life: and a blessed life, which is that
accumulated, and beautified with all manner of virtue, to be a sure, and near
step to that which is eternal. For a blessed life is the enjoying the inward
fruit, and com^ortable possession of the good things, or gifts of grace
present, but eternal life is the full, and final accomplishment of the hope,
and assured expectation of the good things to come. Notwithstanding there be
some which suppose it Yet is it found by experience in every true Christian by
how much more, as his mind is contracted together under the cross by a
natural feelng of a^^i^^^y, by so much (...) diffused abroad by a spiritual
alacri^^^ c^n^urring therein, Ca^^. Iustit. lib. 8. cap. 8. (...). 11
imposible a blessed life to be in this weak, and frail body of ours, in
which of necessity vexation, grief, lamentation, sickness remains: at if
we now understood it of bodily delights, and not of the height of wisdom,
solace of conscience, sovereignty of virtue. For it is not a blessed thing to
be in passion, but to overcome it, neither to be broken with the consideration
of temporal grief, as living always in dreadful, and deadly fear of
blindness, banishment, famine, defilement of daughters, loss of children, and
the like sad accidents, which are thought very grievous and do aggravate the
common calamities of this life, but to bear them James 1.2.
chearefully, and patiently, as proceeding from the hand of God who knows
what is best for us. Who can deny but that Jsaac, who in his old age was taken
with Genesis 27.1.
blindness, was blessed? For must he not needs Hebr. 11.20. Fide praditus.
be blessed, that as a father bestowed Genesis 27.28, 29, 39.
benedictions? Was not Jacob blessed, who albeit as one Genesis 27.42.
chased from his fathers house, and an alient in a strange country, and there
living as a poor Chapt. 29.
mercenary shepherd Gen 31 41.
endured twenty years banishment, and at his return had such cause of
mourning, and lamentation for the Chapt. 34.2.
rape of his daughter, the rash, and bloody enterprise of his sons, and
likewise sustained such a biting, and grievous Chap. 41.57. and 42.1
famine of so large extent, and long continuance as has hardly befallen the
worst of the sons of Adam in any age. Are they not therefore blessed from
whose faith God himself takes witness, saying, Exodus 3.6. Math. 22.32.
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Servitude in
it self is a miserable estate, yet living under it Genesis 39.1.
Joseph was miserable, yea, rather he was altogether blessed, when in bondage
he shook off the bonds of sinful lust, and in the linkes of captivity, Verse
9.
listened not to his wanton mistresses Verse 7.
lure. What shall I say of holy David, who was brought beyond measure to
deplore the untimely deaths of his three sons, 2 Samuel 13.28, 29.
Amnon, 2 Samuel 18.33.
Absalom, and that 2 Samuel 12.16, 17.
illegitimate infant, which he had by the wife of Vriah: and which is worse,
the 2 Samuel 13.14.
unherd of incest, even almost among the heathen, of his daughter Thamar? How
could it be, that he should not be blessed out of whose succession the author
of blessedness himself, who makes very many Luke 1.48.
hlessed, descended? For John 20.29.
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. Thomas, and the
other disciples had now a sensible feeling of their infirmity of faith, but by
our saviors showing them the print of the nails in his hands, and side,
together with the Verse 20.
inspiration of the holy Spirit they recovered from their weakness, and grew
strong. Who was ever more molested with Job 2.7.13.
sores of body, and Chap. 6.4.
sorrows of soul, then holy Job? Witness the Job 1.16.14.15.17. the harsh
opposition of his friends, chap. 6.14, 15.21. and 15.34. and 19.3. The strange
disposition, and desperate advise of the wife of his bosom, chap. 2.9. the
scorns, and scoffs of his villans, and vassals chap. 30.1.10. the terrors of
sin, the horrors of death chapt. 7.3.19. the anguish of spirit chapt. 7.15.
and 27.21. the wounds of conscience cbapt. 6, 4. the arrows of the Almighty
mustered themselves, and brake in suddenly upon him, making him a spectacle to
men, and Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9.
burning of his house, the loss of his cattle, the sudden death of his ten
children, the swelling, and raging ulcers, the burning and angry blaines, and
botches of his whole body. In all these was he less blessed, then if he had
not suffered them? nay, was he not much more approved by his rare, and
admirable patience showed therein? Let it be granted that there was exceeding
much bitterness in them, what grief is there so great, that the virtue of the
mind does not cover, and overcome; I cannot deny the sea to be deep, because
in the shore there be many shallow foordes, neither the haven to be bright,
because it is sometimes obscured with clouds neither the earth fruitful, q^^a
jejuna glarcaest.
because the drift sand, pible stones, and gravel lying on the shore makes it
so in some places, or the standing corn, toward the time of harvest to be
fair, goodly to the sight, because it has some small sprinkling of wild
oats intermist. In like sort deem thou of the harvest of an happy conscience,
that is never so clear, so calm, but the clouds of sorrow, and vexation
infest and interupt the tranquillity thereof. If any cross, or bitter
incombrance happen, is it not shrouded, under the sheaves of a blessed estate,
as the wild and worklesse oats, the bitter, and distasteful darnell, under the
sweet and pleasantly savoring wheat? But now let us proceed to the things
proposed in our former book.

CHAP. VI. Of profit, not that, which raked together by unjust lucre, but of
that which is just and honest.
IN our former book we have so made our division, that honesty, and
comeliness from the which duties might well be drawn, and were to go before
in the first place, what belonged to utility were to follow after in the
second. And as in the former we have noted a certain distinction, and
difference between that which is honest, and that which is comely, but yet
such as might better be understood then expressed: so now when we handle that
is profitable, this seems to be a chief, and prime thing to be considered
of, what is more profitable. But we value not profit according to the estimate
of pecuniary commodity, but according to the gain of piety. The Apostles rule
1 Timothy 4.8.
must be our derection, godliness is profitable unto all things, having the
promise of this life, and that which is to come. Therefore when we do
diligently search the divine scriptures, we often find therein, that what is
honest is also called 1 Cor. 6.12. (...) for (...)
profitable. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not profitable.
He spoke before of vices now therefore he says, it is la full, that his sins
are in our power, but unseemly is it, and dishonest, to fall into them.
Freewill we have to run into evil, but not to be honest, ready and easy is
the way to grow loose and riotous, but not righteous, and just. For thereby
meat is made to serve the belly, not to Non vivendum est vt edamus, sed
edendum vt vivamus, vivendum vero vt dei gloriae promovendae studeamus, 1 Cor.
10.31. Cum bona sit omnis creatura, and been potest amari male, been scilicet
ordine custodito, male atuem perturbato. Aug. de civit. Dei Lib. 15 Cap. 22.
serve the Lord Wherefore whatsoever is profitable, that also is just, it is
just that we should serve Christ, who has redeeemed us. Therefore they are
just, who for his names saks have offered themselves to death, unjust who have
refused or sought to avoid it. In the person of these latter the Psalmist Psalm.
30.9.
breaks out, what profit is there in my blood, when I go down to
corruption? or at least his phrase may well fit this construction, what profit
do I reap by my righteousness? and if it may accord, with theirs in the
book of Wisdom, Let us Wisd 2.12. (...) of (...) which of (...) and
signifies let us sit or lie in wait.
circumvent the just for he is not for our profit, that is, he is unjust,
because he reprooveth, condemns chastises us. Howbeit this also may be used
against the covetousness of the wicked, which is near to perfidiousnesse,
according to that we read of Judas the traitor, who through the study of
avarice, and desire of money fell into the snare of treason, and desperate
strangling of his own body, of this we are to speak, as of that which is
replete with honesty, and as the Apostle defines it in the same form of
words, This I say for your profit, not that I may take you in a snare, but that
ye may follow that which Psalm. 119.36. (...)
is honest. 1 Cor. 7.35. (...) Participium nominis vim obtinens. (...) of
(...), so signifies not improperly.
It is manifest therefore what is honest to be profitable, and just: and what
is profitable, to be honest, and just: and what is just to be profitable and
honest. For neither is my discourse to merchants covetous after the desire of
gain, but to sons, and of offices, which greatly rejoice to inculcate, and
am very desirous likewise to infuse into you, whom I have chosen into the Lords
ministry, that those things which have grown up, and been imprinted in your
minds, and manners by long use and institution may appear in your speech, and
discipline. Wherefore addressing my self to speak of vtility, I call to mind
that prophetical bat sah, co^cupiscere Aria^ Montanus renders it
concupiscentia, Tremel. and Iun. neque sinas deflecti ad quaestum.
ve^^^le, Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness,
Lest the sound of vtility should stir up to the desire of money. Beside some
read, incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to h vtility, to that
vtility, to those faires of game, to that hunting after lucre in ure with men
fully bent upon profit, wholly set and fixed upon such cares, as derive
commodities to them. For vulgarly they call that only profitable which is
gainful. But our tractat is of that utility, which is acquired by losses,
that we might gain Christ, which gain is piety with all sufficiency.

Great certainly is the gain whereby we get piety, which is a rich purchase,
and an invaluable price with God, not consisting Not consisting of good works.
(...)? Iam. 2.14.16. but in works of mercy
of fading, and vanishing, but of eternal, and never perishing substance, in
which there is no slipperie temptation, no subtle, and hurtful attempt, but
constancy, and perpetuity of divine grace subsisting. Wherefore there is some
vtility corporal, and belonging to the body, some belonging to piety. For so
has the Apostle Tim. 4.8.
himself made his division, Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness
is profitable to all things. But what so honest as integrity, what so comely as
to keep the body immaculate, and chastity inviolate, and incontaminate. What
also is so comely, as that a wife being now a widow keep still her faith
entire to her husband departed? Likewise what may be of more profit, of more
benefit then this, when hereby the Kingdom of God is much rather attained? For
there be some which have made them chaste Mat. 19.12.
for the kingdom of heavens sake.

CHAP. VII. Vtility chiefly to be measured by faith, and love, and equity. The
examples of Moses, and David, whieh were therefore greatly beloved of the
people, because for their sakes they did oftentimes willingly cast themselves
into dangers, brought in for confirmation.
THere is therefore not only fellowship of honesty, Est igitur non folum
familiare contubernium honestatis, et vtilitatis, sed eadem quoque vtilitas,
quae honestas.
and vtility, as it were together, in one tent or family, but they are both
evermore in being, and subsisting the self same. And for that cause he who
would open the kingdom of heaven to all, did not seek what was profitable for
himself, but what was profitable for all men. Therefore we must likewise
derive a certain order, and degree from things usual, and common to those
that are most eminent, and of excellent note, that out of more specialties we
may the better collect, what is the progress, and proceeding of this one of
vtility. And first we shall know that there is nothing so profitable as to be
loved, nothing so unprofitable as not to be loved. For to be hated, I hold to
be a deadly and capital evil, and much worse then death it self. Wherefore
let us do this, that we seek with all sedulity to maintain our credit, and
good opinion, and first that upon the meeknes of our disposition, and
gentleness of mind, we wisely wind our selves into the affections of men. For
goodness is popular, and acceptable to all, and there is nothing that does
more easily slip, and in a pious manner more readily insinuato it self into
humane senses. This if it be helped with mansuetude of manners, facility of
mind, moderation of commands, affability of speech, with the due weight of
words, and a patient commutation of them, where there seems any harshnesse
together with the grace of modesty interposed, it is incredible how much it
advantageth to the accumulating of love. For we read not only in private
persons, but also in Kings themselves, how much the facility of fair
affability has profited, and the pride, and swelling tumor of boisterous words
has hindered, yea, has demolished their kingdoms themselves, dissolved, and
dissipated utterly their whole power, and regal authority. Now if any one by
his counsel, by his necessary use, and service, by his officious, yet
faithful performance of needful duties get popular grace, if any one make
offer to undergo danger in his own person for all the peoples good, there is
no doubt to be made of it, but that such love will be rendered him back again
at their hands, that they will prefer his welfare, and credit before their
own. How many contumelies, Exodus 15.24. and 16.23. and 17.2.
cast upon him, by the people did Moses swallow, that no man else would have
brooked, Exodus 32.32.
and when the Lord would have avenged his wrongs upon the insolent, how was he
ready to expose his own person to the revenging hand of the Almighty to
withdraw his Number. 12.3.13.
indignation from them? In what mildnes of speech did he call upon the people,
and how earnestly Deuteronomy. 5.1.2. and 6.2.18.25.
did he solicit, and supplicate the Lord for them after injuries received, in
what kind sort did he comfort them in their labors, appease them consulting
the oracles of God, and cheer them up in their affairs. And whereas he
continually spoke with God, yet did he speak to men with a lowly and
acceptable voice.
He was worthily esteemed, a man above the ordinary rank, and of rare
indowment justly reported to be such a one the beauty of whose countenance for
the exceeding glory thereof could not Number. 11.11. and 14.5.13.19. and 16.22. and
20.3.6. and 21.7. Deuteronomy. 9.18.
be beheld, Exodus 34.30. Deuteronomy. 34.6. 2 Samuel 13.14. 1 Samuel 15.28. 1 Kings.
14.8.15.5.
and whose sepulture could nowher, as exempted from the common destiny of
mortal race, be Exodus 14.13.15. Number. 15.34 Levit. 24.12.
found, for that he had so won the hearts of the people, so tied them to him,
that they loved him more for his meekenes then admired him for his acts. What
shall we say of his imitator and emulator holy David selected out of the whole
nation in a special choice, of him that could best choose, as a cheifetaine to
go in, and out before the people, how humble in spirit, careful in heart to
manage affairs, easy to be entreated, mild, kind, and amiable in his carriage
was he rightly reputed. Before his advancement to the kingdom, he often in the
most dangerous 1 Samuel 17.37. and 18.27, and 27.8.9. and. 30.17.
attempts adventured his person: holding the scepter he made himself equal in
his wars to them of 2 Samuel 21.15.
the lowest rank, and though more skillfull, and valiant at arms then any of
his followers, yet was contented to impart with them in the service of the
field, as his companions, 2 Samuel 18.2.
in his government in the time of peace he was not rigorous, but courteous,
and compassionate, patient in 1 Chronicles. 21.17.
reproach, more prompt to 2 Samuel 16.10.13. and 19.23.
bear then to repay injuries. Therefore so dear was he to all, that being a
young man, and Psalm. 89.20. I have found David my servant. 1 Samuel 16.11. Send
and fetch him vaebi Ehu of bo rendered by Ar. Mont. venire fecit eum, v. 12. 2 Samuel 7.8. I took thee, Psalm. 78.71. brought he him.
unwilling, was much desired for the kingdom, and when it was pressed upon him
was against it, that being old was dealt withal by his people to be present
thereat no longer, because they so much tendered in the greatness of their love
his royal person, that they 2 Samuel 21.17.
would in no wise suffer any further, that he should sustain any the least
peril for them, but that they all rather should thrust forward themselves into
whatsoever danger for his safeguard, and security. Thus he not thinking upon the
quenching of the light of Israel, sought to bind the subject to him, in laying
open his own precious body to the dint of the sword for his deliverance. He
sought to bind him to him likewise when the twelve Tribes could not accord
about his establishment, and 2 Samuel 7.8.31.
chose rather then there should arise any discord among them, to endure
banishment as it were in Hebron, then to reign in Jerusalem. Such as took up
arms against him, found justice 2 Samuel 2.3.13.21.
at his hands, no less then the house of Judah; Abner the strong antagonist of
the adverse part, tendering conditions of peace he embraced, honored with a
Verse 20.
banquet, trecherously slain lamented, Verse 31.
mourning before the corpse: which he laid also in a sepulcher at Hebron among
the honorable, for there also was Ishbosheth the King 2 Samuel 4.12.
interred; afterward revenging his death, he showed the integrity of his
conscience, and his guiltlesnesse in the spilling of innocent blood: this in
trust among other hereditary rights he committed to his son, taking greater
care, that he might not leave the death of the innocent unrecompenced upon the
head of the 1 Kings 2.6.
murderer, then that he might mourn for him after his Or provide for burial
of his body, a Prince of matchless puissance, and piety due solemnities,
departure. That was no small matter, especially in a King to submit himself
to so low a step of humiliation to make himself of equal degree with the
meanest, not to seek 2 Samuel 23.16.
relief, to refuse drink at the peril of others: to confess his Chap. 24.17.
sin, and to offer himself to death for the preservation of his people, that
so the indignation of God might be turned from the guiltless sheep upon the
guilty shepherd, that had transgressed. Behold, says he, to the Angel
offering to smite, I am he which have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but
what has this flock done? Let thy hand I pray thee be against me, and
against my fathers house. What can be here more spoken of him, though there be
many other things that make much for his praise? For to such as did meditate
deceit, and mischief against him, he tPsal. 38.12, 13, 14. and 62.1.5.
opened not his mouth, and as one deaf, and that heard not, answered nothing
again. He answered not in railing terms whatsoever befell him. When he was
traduced, when much was derogated by the malicious from him, and not a little
wounded in his good name he prayed for them, when they execrated, he blessed,
walking in Psalm. 101.2. (...): Sept. innocentia betham lebabi in integritate
cordis mei, the root thamam. Hebr. v. 4.
simplicity, and avoiding the arrogance of the (...) Ibid. ver. 5. which loves
to be seen above others.
proud, he was a follower of them that were undefiled in their ways, when he
deplored his sins, he Psalm. 102.9.
mingled ashes with his food, and tears with his drink. This was his piety,
this his course usage, this his hard measure toward himself in his devotions.
Now his desert is of no less regard. For it was such that being desired of the
whole kingdom, all the 2 Samuel 5.1, 2.
Tribes of Israel came to him with a joint consent, acknowledging him to be
their bone, and flesh, and that it was he even while Saul lived, who went in
and out before them in battle, and of whom the Lord himself had testified;
Thou shall feed my people Israel, and shall be a captain over them. But
seeing God himself has sealed with his own sacred mouth, concerning the
whole passage of his life, such a record, as never the like was given of any
man, I have found David my servant according to my own 1 Samuel 13.14. 1 King.
14.8. and 15.3.5.
heart, what need we any further confirmation? For who walked like him in
holiness, and justice, to the fulfilling of the will of God? how for his sake
were the offenses of his posterity pardoned? and how great prerogatives were
reserved, and that solely for his sake to his heirs, and successors? No man
ever more worthy of love. For who would not love him, whom he saw so ready to
recompense with the dearest pledges of love? he loving faithfully and 1 Samuel
18.3. and 20.41. higedil of gadal adangeret, Ar. Mont.
fervently his friends, he made himself a pattern, and president of fidelity
to others, and expected at the hands of his well-willers the like obligation.

Hence it came to pass, that the 1 Samuel 18.3. and 21.17.
parents preferred him before their children, the 1 Samuel 20.13.30.23 2 Samuel
19.28.
children before their parents, the 1 Samuel 19.11. and 25.25. and 18.7.
wives before their husbands, the 2 Samuel 1.26.
husbands before their wives. Saul was so incensed against his son Jonathan
for this cause that he would have 1 Samuel 20.33.
killed him with his spear, disdaining that the friendship of another should
prevail in his affection before the piety which he ought to bear, and
authority toward a father, and before the obedience of a subject toward his
sovereign. But so potent was religious piety, divine authority, and obedience,
that it bare down whatsoever was natural, and was predominate in good
Jonathan. When there is a mutual reciprocation, and vicissitude of good
offices between lovers, and a striving of both sides to exceed, this alone is
a great provocation to kindle love, though there be no other tie, nor bond to
move forward the same: which also is manifest by the examples of faithful
friendship. For what is so popular, and pleasing as grace? is not favor gained
by diligence, and heedfull respect? What so ingrafted in nature, as to love
sedulity, and correspondence in duties, and doing like pleasures? What so
implanted, and of so deep impression in humane affections, as to be induced
to love him again of whom thou art desirous to be loved? The Ecclus. 29.13.
(...) Genevenses translate (...) neighbor,
Wiseman speaks well to this purpose, Loose thy money for thy friend, and
brothers sake; and in another place, I will not be ashamed to Ecclus. 22.30.
(...). Ar. Mon. protegere to defend, but (...) whence it comes is tegere, and
he that salutes a friend may seem to cover him with the mantle of love.
salute a friend, neither will I hide my face from him, though he should do
me harm. He witnesses hereby the medicine of life, and immortality to be in
a friend, and no man doubts, because of the testimony of the 1 Cor. 13.7.8.
Apostle a chief fortress of succor, and comfort to be in love. Charity or
love suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things, indureth
all things, never falls away; David fell not, much less fell (...).
not he into utter ruin, because he was dear to all, and chose rather to be
loved, then to be feared of his subjects. For fear is but a temporal defense
and never lasts long. Therefore where fear departs, boldness creepes in:
because it is not fear that can compel fidelity, but is the affection that
causes, and declares it. Love then is the prime thing that makes for our
commendation. It is good therefore to have the testimony of many men's love.

Hence comes the trust that even strangers repose in thee, when they observe
thee to be dear to many, and in high esteem with them. In like sort also
fidelity is the way to procure love, in so much that he, who has made in some
certain affairs faithful performance to one, or two, may issue in thereby by
little, and little into the hearts of many, and grow, and flow in further
until with full sea, at the last it does get the grace, and countenance of all.

CHAPTER VIII. The counsel of many to prevail to the procurement, and drawing
on of others to our party in what we desire, which clearly appeared in
Solomon.
WWherefore these two things do make very much for our commendation, namely
love and fidelity, and this third also, if some thing be found in thee worthy
of admiration, and justly to deserve honor, and renown. And because the use
of counsels does most of all win men's affections, therefore wisdom, and
justice are required in every one that would be in authority, and very many do
expect these from them, that in whomsoever these are found, trust, and credit
may he given to him, whereby he may impart profitable, and faithful counsel
to such as shall de re the same at his hands. For who will commit himself to
him, whom he thinks not to be wiser then he, who seeks counsel of him?

Wherefore it mu t needs be, that he is a better man of whom counsel is
sought, then he who craveth it. For who does ask counsel of that man, whom
he persuades himself to be able to find out something better in his behalf,
then he himself can comprehend in the compass of his own judgment, or out
of his own experience? But if thou shall find a man which in the nimblenesse
of his wit, in the vigor of his mind, and authority does excel, and grows
to that degree of perfection, that by his example, and exercise, he is better
prepared, freeth from dangers present, and foreseeth those to come, shows
which are imminent, and at hand, resolves doubts, administreth remedy in
time, is ready always not only to give counsel, but also to help at need: to
this man is credit given, and he is in that request, and esteem, that
whosoever seeks his counsel says, and if in my behalf ought shall fall out
amiss, yet because by his advise, I will abide the hazard. To this man
therefore we commit our safety and estimation (who as we said before) is both
just and prudent. His justice is a means that there is no fear of fraud, his
prudence, that there is no suspicion of error conceived against him.
Notwithstanding we do more easily commend our selves to the care, and trust of
a just man then of a wise. I speak herein according as vulgarly the word just
is used. But in the definition of wisdom though it appear to be the
principal, and solely eminent among the rest of the virtues, yet is there such
a concatenation of them, that one cannot subsist without the other, and so do
these two specially concur, and conspire, that prudence cannot be without
justice. Thus is it according to the Ethnicks, which also we find so in our
sacred Psalm. 37.26. Iustus miseretur and faenerat, Sept. (...) Hebr. Vinalvch
of lavah mutuari.
books, the just man is merciful, and lends, what he lends he shows
elsewhere, Psalm. 112.5. Where the Greek word being changed, viz. (...) into
(...), of the root (...) De commodato Yet our Author renders it likewise
faenerat. We must take it in the best part. As St. Aug. does, Audi scripturam
quomodo Dom. faeneres. Faenerat Domino qui miseretur pauperis. Ex. Prove. 19.17.
Tremel. Iun. moderatur res suas.
the good man is merciful, and lends, and will guide his words with
discretion, that is to say, therefore he lends which disposes his 1 Kings
3.23.24.27 What is there, and accordingly in our Author at large, is here
abridged, and not amiss, though not verbatim, being in our English Bibles.
words, and his affairs to the profit of others with judgment and wisdom,
and in such a one justice, and prudence convene, and meet together. That noble
judgment of Solomon was it not full of wisdom, and justice, when two women
having two children, and one of them now dead came before him, striving for the
living child, he adjudged the child to her that would not have it divided,
geve it to her, said he, for her bowels of compassion are moved toward it?
Whereupon followed his high commendation at the hands of all Israel being a
wise people, and fearing God at this time, if ever having been so well
instructed before by David, that sweet singer, which is laid down in the
shutting up of the story, Verse 28.
and all Israel heard the jud ement which the King had judged, and they feared
the king: For they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do justice. And
not unworthily was the wisdom of God adjudged to be in him in whom were the
secret, and hidden things of God. But what is more secret then the testimony of
the inward bowels into which the understanding of the wise does descend, and
there sit as a judge of piety, and thence fetches forth, as it were, a
certain voice of the natural womb, whereby was made manifest the motherly
affection, which chose rather that the fruit of her womb should hang upon the
breast of a stranger, and should be deemed none of hers though she bare it with
sore travel, then that it should be slain. It was the part therefore of
wisdom, to be able to distinguish, how it stood in their hidden consciences to
bring the truth out of the secret corners thereof, and with a certain sword,
as it were of the spirit, so to pierce into the bowels not only of the womb,
but of the soul, and mind. It was the part of ju tice likewise so to give
sentence, that she which had killed her own child should not carry away
another, but that the true mother should have her own restored to her.

To conclude, Solomon's own 1 Kings 3.^.
petition entreated for wisdom, namely that a prudent heart to hear, and
judge with justice might be given him.

CHAP. IX. It is intimated by the Philosophers, but much more by our Divines
all the virtues to be individual, and unseparable: and howbeit in the opinion
of the vulgar to be severed, and divided each from other, yet their
approbation not to be given to such parties for virtuous persons, where they
stand separated and conspire not.
IT is manifest therefore according to the divine Scriptures, which are more
ancient then Philosophy, wisdom not to be without justice, because where one
of them is, there are both in like manner. In the Story of Susanna.
Daniel by a deep, and wise Of chapt. v. 54.58.
interrogatorie, put upon the wicked Judges that accused Susanna, found out the
untruth of their false crime laid to her charge. For when their testimonies
accorded not, their fraudulent calumny was soon unmasked. Wherefore it was
the part of wisdom in him to find out their fraud, to lay it open, and her
innocence, and by the witness of his voice to absolve her, and to denounce
them guilty: And of justice to deliver over the nocent to deserved punishment,
and to free the innocent. The combination therefore of wisdom, and justice is
individual, but in the use of the vulgar in one certain form, or property,
they tand divided. For temperance is seen properly in despising pleasures,
fortitude in sustaining labors, and perils, prudence in the choice of that is
good, knowing to discern between what is profitable, and what unprofitable,
justice is the good keeper of the right to another man, the recoverer of our
propriety, the preserver of his own to every one. Wherefore for the common
opinion sake let this division of virtue be fourefold, that drawing back our
foot from the subtle disputation of Philosophical wisdom, which for the
cause of refining the truth, in a more curious manner, is drawn out, as it
were, of some abstruse and secret place, let us follow the foreign use, and
popular sense. Therefore this division being observed, let us return again to
our purpose.

To every of the wisest men do we commit our cause, and we are more ready,
and forward to seek counsel from him, then from others. Notwithstanding the
faithful counsel of a just man does go before, and being put in the
balance, does most an end overprise the wit of the wisest. For the Prove. 27.6.
As Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so does the sweetness of a man's
friend by hearty counsel. A just man's counsel though it be not always the
safest, yet proceeds it from the surest ground, viz. from a good heart, and
so becomes the sweetest.
wounds of a lover are more profitable, then the kisses of a stranger.

CHAP. X. A mystical interpretation of that of Solomon, and the Queen of
Sheba.
MOreover, because in the just there is judgment, in the wise the force of
argument; therefore in the one, is the censure of disceptation, and debating of
doubts, in the other, the subtilty of invention; which two if thou connect,
there shall be great wholsomnesse of counsel, which all expect to the
admiration of wisdom, and love of justice, that every one may seek after the
wisdom of that man in whom both these are coupled together: Even as all the
Kings of the earth sought, and desired to see the face of Solomon, and to hear
his wisdom; insomuch that the 1 Kings 10.1.
Queen of Saba, came to him, proved him with hard questions. She came to him,
says the Scripture, and communed with him in all that was in her heart, and
he declared to her all her hard questions, The thing typified, which the
Messiah answers to it, Job. 4.25 and 14.26. Act. 20.27.
nothing was hid from him, that he expounded not to her. What By this woman
the Queen of Saba he understands the Church of God, and by the true Solomon
Christ, Col. 2.3.9.
woman was this, that she passed by nothing unquestioned, and to whom the true
Solomon omitted nothing unresolved? She upon his rare answers, and service in
this acclamation does import; It was a true word, says she, which I Ibid. v.
6.7.8.
heard in mine own land of thy sayings, and of thy wisdom, howbeit I believed
not this report, till I had seen it with mine own eyes. For lo the one half
was not told me. For thou have more wisdom, and prosperity, then I have heard
by report; happy are thy men, happy thy Beatae mulieres tuae.
women, happy these thy servants which stand before thee; and hear all thy
wisdom. Understand here the banquet of the true Luke 11.31.
Solomon, and what dishes are set before thee in that banquet; consider wisely,
and understand in what land the gathering together of the nations, has heard
of the fame of the true wisdom, and justice, and with what eyes it has seen
him, seen the things not to be seen with the eyes of the body: for the things
that are 2 Cor. 4.18.
seen are temporal, the things that are not seen are eternal. What are the
blessed women, but those of whom it is said Mark 4.20. Acts 17.12. Luke 8.3.
many hear the word, receive it, and bring forth fruit? and in another place,
Math. 12.50.
whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, he is my father,
sister, and mother.

Who are these blessed servants that stand before him, but those of whom Paul
Acts 26.22.
speaks, I continue unto this day, protesting to small and great? and Simeon
which waited in the Luke 2.27.
temple, that he might see the consolation 25.
of Israel. Therefore how did he desire to 29.
depart in peace, but standing before the Lord he could not have leave to Verse
26.
depart unless he had obtained the Lords leave? Solomon was proposed for an
example whose wisdom required that with all Much more therefore ought the
kingdom of our true Solomon, whereof the other but a type to suffer violence.
contention and striving of spirit it should be heard.

CHAP. XI. That we ought to seek counsel at the hands of the just, and
righteous men. The example of the Fathers produced for the proof thereof,
NEither was Joseph in his very imprisonment let rest, but that his advice was
required concerning things uncertain, and unknown. And his divine counsel
which he had there revealed was such a benefit to the whole land of Egypt, that
it felt not the grievous extremity, Joseph quoque nec in carcere feriatus erat.
which otherwise it would of the seven years famine, neither to Egypt alone,
but so that it eased other nations also of wretched famines constrained Genesis
40. and 41. and 42. which is the vnwelcomest guest that can come to a kingdom,
and the Lords sore arrow of indignation for the abuse of plenty
fast. Daniel from a child of the captivity, being preferred to be a president
over the whole counsel of the King of Babylon, by his wholesome advice
amended, Dan. 6.4. and 2.48.49.
and much bettered the present state of things, and pointing at the Chron. 3.
and 4. and 5.
evils to come, sought to prevent them. When he had by his often and much
opening of things doubtful and difficult, showed himself a true interpreter
afterward, in whatsoever hard matter brought before him, in whatsoever high,
and hidden cause he was called upon for counsel, that he spoke and determined
was accepted. What shall I speak of Moses, whose counsel all Israel did daily
wait for and attend, whose life brought reputation to his wisdom, and did
increase his further admiration. Who would not commit himself to his
judgment, to whose Exodus 18.19. Number. 11.16.
determination the rest of the elders did reserve, whatsoever controversies
were above their strength and capacity? Who would refuse the counsel of
Daniel, of whom God himself has said, who is wiser then Daniel? Or how could
any one doubt of the minds of them, upon whom God bestowed so much grace?
Isreal's victory followed upon Moses Or as Exodus 17.11. Upon co^mencing his
humble, and watchful suite, so much does the prayer of the righteous prevail
for a kingdom.
counsel, for at his supplication waters Ibid 17.4.6.
were given out of the rock, at his powerful Moysi meritis de caelo effluebat
alimonia.
intercession quails and Manna were sent from heaven. Daniels pure mind, and
Ibid. 16.4
meekness mitigated the barbarous manners of the heathenish Babilonians, and
the cruelty of the fierce lions themselves. How great was his temperance? How
great the continency of his mind, and body? Neither without just cause was he
made a mirror to all men, Dan. 6. Ibid. 1.8.
when having the countenance of so many mighty Monarchs, which men are much
amazed at, he rated gold, and honor, as counters, and feathers, Chap. 5.17.
as flattering baits, and bumbast, and no better in comparison of fidelity and
trustiness, he crouched not with bowed, and bended knee, to gain fondly the
favor of great ones, but chose rather to come into danger for the maintenance
of the law of God. I must run back again, though his name was first specified
upon Joseph's Genesis 29.8.10.
chastity, and justice, neither pass it over being a principal piece of
piety, and to the purpose of this part, who threw off allurements, rejected all
rewards, whose chastity overcame immodesty, whose fear Ver. 9.
of God, chased away the fear of death, whose pure, and undefiled mind, whose
undaunted courage, and resolution, to retain the same inviolable for ever,
made choice of the bodies Ver. 20.
imprisonment, rather then that out of prison his soul should be held under
the chains of the anguish, and torture, which is as the horror of hell, it
self, of a guilty, and distressed conscience; would any one judge or him
otherwise then the fittest man to be consulted withal, whose fruitful
understanding, Cuius ferax animus, and men's fertilis temporum sterilitatem,
quodam consiliorum, et cordis vbere faecundavit:
and mind abounding with the foreknowledge of things, out of a certain rich
breast of the counsels of the heart, made the barrenness of the times
plentiful?

CHAP. XII. That wicked men though they seem wise, ought to be avoided in
matter of counsel.
WHerefore we do observe, that in acquiring counsel, honesty of life, the
prerogative of virtue, the use of goodwill, the grace of frugality does much
avail. For who looks for a fountain of pure water in a pond of mud? who
fetches water to drink out of a troubled spring? Therefore where luxury is,
where intemperance, where confusion of vices, who of any judgment will think
that any thing that ought, or any good thing that can be drawn out from
thence? Who despises not the puddle, and the draught of evil manners? who is
so unwise to judge him good for another, whom he finds unprofitable for
himself? who avoideth not a wicked, malevolent, contumelious person, and ever
ready to do mischeife? who declines him not with his whole endeavor? But who
would sue to a man, though never so skillfull, to assist with counsel, if he
be one so hard to have access unto with whom it is, as if one should shut up
the mouth of the river? For what is it to have wisdom in thy self, if thou
deny counsel to thy brother? If thou do debar leave to consult with thee,
then have thou shut up the fountain that it may not flow in to do others
good, nor profit thy self. But Pulchre autemet de illo convenit, qui habens
prudentiam, commaculat eam vitiorum sordibus, eo quod aquae exitum contaminet
this in like manner does well meet with him, who having wisdom defiles it
therefore with the filth of sin, because Mat. 15.18.19. and 12.35.
he corrupts the outlet of the water. The life argues degenerate minds. For
how can thou judge him superior in counsel, whom thou see inferior in
manners? he ought to be above me to whom I shall be ready to commit my self.
Shall I think him fit to give me, which cannot give himself counsel? and
shall I believe that he has leisure to pleasure me, that has no leisure to
do good to himself, but has his mind carried away wih pleasure, bound up
under lust, overwhelmed with covetousness, turmoiled with vain desires,
shaken in pieces with fear? how can there be place here to counsel, where
there is no place, to peace and tranquillity? there I do admire, and reverence
that Moses, Act 7.20. or Samuel 1 Samuel 1.10.
counselor, whom the Lord in his mercy gave to the fathers, and being Moses
Number. 20.12. Deuteronomy. 3.26.
offended took him Samuel 1 Samuel 1.10.^9. and chap. 12.3.
away. He which will undertake to give good counsel, let him imitate him, and
keep his wisdom free from the taunt of vice, because no pollution does enter
where prudence does harbor.

CHAP. XIII. That prudence ought not to vendicate it self to vicious men, as
being such as has no fellowship with vices.
WHo Quis igitur tantam vultu speciem proe se ferat pulchritudinis, et
belluinis posterioribus, ac ferinis vnguibus forma superioris de honestet
gratiam cum tam admirabilis etc.
therefore is he, that does carry a great show of beauty, in his countenance,
and with his beastly lower parts and savage claws, does dishonest the grace of
his upper shape, especially since according to the order of scripture, the
form of all virtues is so specious, and excellent as nothing more, and chiefly
of wisdom? For wisdom is more glorious then the sun, and being compared
to the light it self it is pure above all the goodly order of the stars, For
the night follows the light, and interrupteth it, but neither malice, nor any
evil whatsoever is able at any time to darken, or dim prudence. We have
spoken of the pulchritude thereof, and have confirmed the same by the testimony
of the scripture, it remains that we teach by the authority of that divine
testimony that Wisdom, or prudence described, which our author, as we may
see in this, and the next chapter, compared together, uses indifferently.
it has no fellowship with vices, but an inseparable conjunction with other
virtues in which is the grace of spiritual eloquence, pure without humane
mixture, full of certainty, sanctity, sharpness, and sublimity, loving
goodness, inhibiting nothing that tends to well-doing, gentle, stable,
secure comprehending all virtue, foreseeing all things.

CHAP. XIIII. That Prudence is an associate, and companion of all virtues, and
a principal assistant of theirs in the suppressing of cupidity, and lustful
desire.
WHerefore Prudence works all things, has comfort, and commerce with
whatsoever is good. For how can it give good counsel unless it have justice,
unless it put on constancy, fear not death, be called back from it by no
terror, be turned from the way of truth by no flattery, be terrified by no
banishment, but knows the whole world to be a wise man's country, stands
not in awe of poverty, is persuaded that nothing can be wanting to him, in whom
in contentation there is a whole world of riches? For what can be more
honorable, then that man which cannot be moved with gold, which has money in
contempt, and which does look down as from a certain high tower upon the
concupiscences, and lusts of men without any tainture in himself? He that
shall be able thus to do, shall be thought no ordinary man, but one far
above the common rank. Such a one is pronounced Ecclus. 31.8.9.
blessed, which being rich, is found without blemish, and has not gone after
gold, who is he, says the text, and we will commend him? for wonderful
things has he done among his people. And indeed how should it be otherwise,
but that he should be much admired who despises riches, which the most part
of men prefer before their own safety, and many before their own lives? The
censure therefore of frugality, and the authority of Continentiae autori^^^.
continency does become all men: especially him that excels in Deuteronomy. 17.17.
honor, lest his own treasures should possess his heart, who is in eminent
place, Et pecunijs serviat, qui praeest liberis.
and lest he should make his money his master, who has children under his
subjection. That better becomes him that he be in mind above his treasure,
and in due observance beneath his friend. For humility increases favor. This
is most commendable, and worthy a primarie man, and of chief place not to have
a common desire of filthy lucre with the Tyrian Factors, and Galatian
Merchants, neither to place all good in money, neither in a mercenarie manner
daily to calculate his gains what they may be, and to cast them over, and
briefly to sum them up.

CHAP. XV. Of liberality, which does consist, not only in the distribution, and
well bestowing of goods, but in the due care of benevolencie toward the poor,
and in the imparting of counsel, and good advise for the benefit of all men.
IF so be that it be a laudable thing to carry a sober mind in respect of
riches: how much better is it to get the love of the people by liberality?
neither by that which is superfluous, where is importuni y, neither by that
which is too straight where is indigency, and want. But there be many kinds of
liberality, neither only toward them who in the disposing, and dispensing of
alms for the sustentation of life need daily relief: but also toward the
sustenance of those, and providing for them, who are ashamed to make their need
publicly known, that is to say, so far forth as the common provision for
the poor be not thereby exhausted. For I speak of the necessity, which may
fall upon him, that bears rule in some office, as in the office of the
ministry, all dispensatorship, that intimation be given to the Bishop, and
not concealed, but that it being made known, provision be appointed for such
as are in necessity: especially if it come not by effusion, and riotous
wastfulnesse in the time of youth, but by some oppression, or loss, poverty,
or otherwise cast upon him by the hand of God, so that he is not able to
sustain the ordinary charges that must needs be had for himself, and family.
It is great liberality likewise to redeem the captives, and deliver them out
of the hands of their enemies, to preserve from death, and especially women
from defilement, to restore children to their parents being stolen, or
otherwise taken from them; and again, parents to their children being under
imprisonment, and citizens to their country. These things are too well known
in the spoiling of Sclavonie.
Illyrium, and Thracia, for Quanti in the Latin Fathers is the same which
quot, as here quanti venales erant toto captivi orb.
how many were there captives in all places of the world set to sale, and what
price was made of them, being no more in number then would fill one province?
There were some notwithstanding, that would call them back again into
captivity, that were redeemed by the Churches, these were more grievous to the
poor bondmen, then the bondage, and thraldom it self; as who did envy the
very mercy extended toward them by others. Themselves if they had fallen into
captivity, would stand upon this, that they ought to serve not as slaves, but
as freemen; if they had been sold, then not to deny the ministry of
servitude: and will they cut off power from others to set them free, who have
no power in themselves to take off their own servitude, unless perhaps it
might please the buyer to receive a boon, whereby notwithstanding servitude is
not taken off, but redemption accepted. Therefore it is a chief part of
liberality to redeem captives, especially out of the hands of a barbarous
enemy, which is devoide of all mercy, and humanity, unless what the price of
redemption has wrought upon his greedy covetousness: to undergo the payment
of another man's debt, if the borrower be not able: to nourish young infants
destitute of food: to defend poor orphans deprived of their parents. There be
some also, which for the cause of preservation of the chastity of virgins
bereft of their parents, do place them in Matrimony, neither do help them
forward alone with their care, and endeavor, but are contented also to be at
cost with them, in the disbursing moneys for their preferment. There is a kind
of liberality likewise taught by the Apostle 1 Timothy 5.16.
If any faithful man, or faithful woman has widows, let him minister unto
them, and let not the Church be charged, that there may be sufficient for
those that are widows indeed. Therefore such liberality is profitable, but not
common to all. There be also very many good men, which have a thin revenew,
and are contented with a little for their use, but not enough to administer to
others to ease them of the burden of their poverty. Notwithstanding there is
another kind of beneficence, which may serve for these to help their
inferiors; For there is a double liberality, there is one kind, which yields
aid by the supply of money; another, which is bestowed in administering helps
of assistance, which oftentimes is of much more fame and regard. With how much
more reputation did Abraham receive again his See Genesis chap. 21.
nephew recovering him by victorious arms, then if he had redeemed him? How
much more acceptably did holy Joseph gratify Pharaoh the king by his provident
counsel, then if he had presented him with a wedge of gold? The sale of one of
his best cities, nay of many of them, would not have procured the supply of
victuals for one year, when the foresight of Joseph did all Egypt for the
space of five years. Money may be easily consumed, counsel can never be
drawn dry. Counsel is increased by use, money is diminished, quickly
fails, leaves destitute the bountiful minded: so that by how much more thy
affection is to bestow upon many, by so much less shall thy power be to help
a lesser Which are in extreme necessity.
number, and often stand in need of that, which thou thoughtest to contribute
to others. But the collation of counsel, and labor, the further it is
extended, and diffused, the more largely does it abound, and in such manner,
that overflowing, it returns back again to his own fountain whence it
sprang forth. For the plenty of prudence flows back upon it own self, and
in that it has copiously flowne out to many, all that remains is kept in
much more ure, and exercise.

CHAP. XVI. Of sobriety, which is likewise styled temperancie to be observed
in liberality. Ratified by the example of Joseph, and his most wise counsel,
occasioned by the interpretation of a dream.
WHerefore it is evident that there ought to be a measure in liberality, lest
the largess and bounty bestowed be unprofitable: the sober mean whereof is
principally to be kept by the ministry, that they of that calling dispense
not, nor distribute by way of ostentation, but of justice. No where shall one
find more eagerness in their over-greedy desires, then here among this sort of
Prove. 28.3.
people. The stout, and sturdy impudently intrude themselves, having no other
cause to crave an alms, then that they may wander from place to place, in a
lawless, loose, and licentious kind of liberty; and what is that they so much
seek, and labor for, but to deprive the poor of their appointed food, to
suck away by subtilty, and violence, that provision ordained only for them?
neither contented with a little they covet for more, hold out still the round
skirts of their garments, Et natalium simulatione licitantes incrementa
quoestuum.
and under color of some birth-dayes solemnities, they make sale of their
vailes at the highest rate. He which is easily induced to give credit to
these, shall easily exhaust at once the poor man's box, and through his scant
measure of allowance, leave him nothing for his relief hereafter. Let a
moderation be kept in giving, that those strong vagrants be not sent away
altogether empty, and that the livelihood of the poor be not turned over to
the spoil of the fraudulent. Let that therefore be the measure, that humanity
be not forgotten, nor necessity left destitute. Many pretend themselves to be
in debt, let the case be thoroughly examined; Many complain they were robbed by
thieves. Either let the injury done to them, or some knowledge of their person
be made appear to us, that so we may more readily yield them our help. We
are to disburse, if they have not to maintain themselves, what is fit toward
them, that are banished from the Church. Wherefore when moderation is observed,
the dealer abroad of alms, cannot be said to be avariciously given, and hard
laced to any, but large, and open-handed to all. For we ought not to lay open
our ears only to all complaints, but our eyes also to the consideration of
their necessities, for thereafter are they to be regarded, that seek
benevolence. Debility, and weakness cries louder to the well disposed, and
willing to do a work of charity, then the voice. Neither can it be avoided,
but that sometimes an importunate outcrie must needs extort more, but place
must not be yielded always to such imprudencie. He is to be sought for, that
sees thee not, he is to be called forth, that blusheth to come abroad to beg
in public. He that is shut up in close prison, let him be remembered of thee in
thy compassion, let him that is diseased smite thy mind, and affections, with
grief toward him whose cry cannot come to thine ears, the low dungeon, and
depth of his misery, though it swallow up his clamor, yet let it not bury thy
devotion. The people the more they see thee devoted to charity, more chary will
they be of thy credit, more charitable, and loving in their affections. I know
many of the ministry, who the more charitable they have been, the more has
their store overflowed: because whosoever sees one of them this way well
addicted, he is beneficial to him, that he in his office may have to dispense,
nothing doubting, but that hereby his own mercy so extended may come to the
poor. For no man in whatsoever collation, and contribution intends
otherwise, but that what he does may be profitable to the poor. If he shall
perceive any one to be too immoderate, or too tenacious a dispenser, that is
dissipating, and making havocke by erogations, and distributions, unnecessary
and superfluous, or pocketing, and pursing up to his own proper and peculiar
use, the fruits of other men's labors, he much disdaineth, and despises him.
As therefore a mediocrity is to be kept in liberality: so for the most part a
But this spur is to be used, as the horseman does, namely, as occasion shall
be offered.
spur is to be put to it. A mediocrity therefore to be kept, that whereas
thou do good, thou may be able to do it daily, and lest by that thou have
wasted in effusion, thou withdraw from what is of necessity to be done. The
spur therefore to be put to it, because money has better operation toward
the poor man's diet, then in the rich man's bags. The spur is to be used, and
to be set fast to the ribs of the rich, that hoordeth up in his bags, what
should be for bread for the poor.
Beware then that thou shut not up the welfare of the poor within thy bags,
and that thou bury not his life in these tombs, and graves.

Joseph could not at once have bestowed all the riches of Egypt, and effused
together all the Kings treasure; but he would not be profuse, and prodigal of
another man's goods, much less of his Leiges, to whom he owed all loyalty: he
chose rather to sell the corn, that it might be dispersed to the sustentation
of more diversity of people, and countries, then to give it away in the lump
to the hungry there present, because if he had fed a few, he had been
defective to many. That liberality therefore he approved, which might abound
toward all: he set open the barnes, that all might buy a supply of grain,
lest receiving it freely, they might leave the care of tillage: because he
which may use what is another, neglects what is his own. First, he
gathered in their money into the Kings treasury, next their Instrumenta
caetera. Genesis 47.18.
cattle, then afterward the right of their inheritance, not to dispossess
them all of their own, but to confirm them therein more strongly, to set a
public tribute upon it that they might hold it more securely. Which was so
acceptable to all from whom he had taken away their lands, that they thought it
not a selling of their right, but a redeeming of their estate. Their own words
do import Genesis 47.25.
as much, thou have saved us alive, and we have found favor in the eyes of
our Lord. And surely they lost nothing by what he did in their Verse 21.
propriety, who received again by transmutation a certain right, nor in the
matter of utilitie were they losers, when a perpetuity was regained to them,
and their posterity.

O great wisdom in so great a man! who sought not to get temporal glory out
of superabundant store, but out of extreme necessity could forecast for their
perpetual commodity. For he brought to pass, that the people might help
themselves by their own tribute, and not in their need desire the aid of
others. For it was much better for them to impart with something out of their
increase, then to let go their whole right. He appointed a fifth Genesis 47.24.
portion of collation to the King out of their revenew, whereby he showed
himself more sharp sighted in providing for the peoples good, and also more
liberal minded toward Pharaoh to bring him in greater tribute. Thereby, to
conclude this point, he tying them to harder labor, more careful husbandry,
and more commendable improvement, the land of Egypt, never afterward felt the
like famine. But see how notably he did collect future events: namely from
Pharaohs Genes. 41. Which because may be better there read at large, then here
out of our Author, as many things else for the same cause in the passage of
these books, referring me to the sacred Scriptures themselves, I abridge.
dreams of the fat and lean kine, of the full, and thin ears; the seven
years plenty, and the seven years penury to come. See how wisely there he did
Qua gratia admonuit?
admonish: when he gave counsel to avoid the danger of the latter, by being
provident in the former. The mirror of Joseph's wisdom in the interpretation of
dreams and withal his counsel, vigilance, justice.
What may we first therefore being of divine speculation, admire in it, his
wit, by which he descends into the cabinet, and couch of truths meditations,
and bowels of her secrets? or his counsel, whereby he foresaw so grievous, and
long necessity: or his vigilance, His magnanimity, Genesis 45.5.15 His ingenuity
and sweetness of nature, Genesis 45.14.
and justice, by the one whereof so grave an office being laid upon him, he
gathered together so manifold provision, by the other kept an equality in his
distribution of the whole? For concerning his magnanimity, and courage of mind,
what shall I say? that being sold unto slavery by his brethren, vpbraided not
the injury, Vnde meritoci a patre dicitur in Deuteronomio
but succored them in their necessity? What of his sweetness wherein he
sought the presence of his dear brother Benjamin by a pious kind of fraud?
Genesis 44.2, 4.5.15. and 42.19.22. Gen 42.19.24.
For these his virtues, which God in his rich mercy blessed him with, is his so
high a style given him, and his, both in his father Gen 49.22.
Jacobs, and Deuteronomy. 33.13.15.16.17. See these two several contexts of
scripture, and consider how the words themselves may be applied to fit this
purpose.
Moses benedictions.

CHAP. XVII. Of what desert he ought to be of whom counsel is required, Paul
and Joseph are introduced as patterns for imitation in making our choice.
WHerefore he which gives counsel to another, ought to 1 Timothy 4.11.
be such a one as may show himself a platform 1 Cor. 7.25.
of example to others, in good works, in doctrine, in integrity, in gravity,
that his speech, may be wholesome, and unblameable, his counsel profitable,
his life honest, his opinion decent. Such a one was Paul that gave counsel to
Magisterium 1 Timothy 3.1.
virgins, Sacerdotibus but the text inforceth this interpretation. (...).
chief ruler e to the Bishop, and so that he set himself a form for us to
follow. Therefore he knew how to be abased, so did Joseph, who coming from the
great stock of the Patriarchs disdained not a degenerate servitude, showed it
in obedience, illustrated it in his virtues, he knew how to be humbled when he
suffered himself to be sold, and to be bought, and called him his Lord, that
bought him. Hear how much he does abase himself, My Master knows not what
he has in the house with me, Genesis 39.8.9.
but has committed all that he has to my hand, there is no man greater then
I, neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee because thou art his
wife: how then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? A voice
surely full of humility, full of chastity; of humility, because therein he
gave him due honor, he gave him due thanks. Full of chastity, because to
defile his body with a filthy sin, he thought it a grievous offense. A
counselor therefore ought to be such a one, as uses no deceit, nor
falsehood, is void of vanity, and fables, harbors in his heart no
dissimulation convincing his life, and manners to be counterfeit, no improbity
nor malignitie, which may distaste, and dishearten his clients, and such as
would be instructed and directed by him, For there be some things which we
shun, some things which we contemn, we shun those things which may hurt,
which may damnifie, as if he with whom we consult be of no credit, nor
constancy, greedy of gain, and may be corrupted, we decline him, we contemn
those things which are worthily reputed base, and vile, infamous, odious, of
evil note, contagious, defiled, as if a counselor be a voluptuous and
intemperate man, and though free from fraud, and yet not without avarice, so to
have whereby profusedly to spend, we make no reckoning of him. What proof of
his industry, what fruit of his labor, is he able to produce? what care can
he take? how can he solicit that is lazy, and luxurious, preferring rest,
and riotous living, before the repose, and trust he has undertaken? Therefore
where is contentation there is good counsel to be found. For he advises well
which says, Phil. 4.11.
I have learned in whatso-estate I am, therewith to be content. For he knew the
love (...)
of money to be the root of all evil, and therefore he was contented with
his own, and desired not that was another man's. What I have says he, is
sufficient. Whether I have little or much I always value it as much. Something
seems to be spoken more (...).
expressly, he has used a remarkable word. It suffices me, says he, in the
state wherein I am, that is, neither is there want, neither is there
superfluity. There is no want, because I seek nothing. There is no
superfluity, or nothing over, because what I have, I have not only for my
self, but for For the poor for whom nothing is prepared of purpose, but much
sent to them as in the feast of the Jews, Hest. 9.22. whereas in all feasts
there is some superfluity or surplusage. But the Apostle and all the godly
purposely reserve somewhat for them out of their smalest portion of meat or
money.
more. This concerning money. But concerning all things in general it may be
said, because his present condition did content, and suffice him, that is to
say, he did not desire more honor, more attendance, hunted not after
immoderate glory, undeserved grace, but continuing patient of labor, secure of
a reward, waited for an end of the appointed fight, I know how to be Ver. 12.
(...). Humility of sundry sorts.
abased, says he. It is not therefore humility without knowledge, that is
prayse-worthy, but such as is accompanied with modesty and learning. For there
is some humility that proceeds from fear, some from ignorance and error.
Hence is it in the Psalmist that the Lord will save such as be of an humble
Psalm. 34.19. (...). Hebr. daccei of dacah conterere.
spirit, which they have learned under the rod of correction. It is excellently
well spoken therefore of the Apostle, I know how to be abased or humbled, that
is to say, out of affliction it self, I have learned also in what place
soever, in whatsoever duty, in whatsoever office, and in that moderation
likewise, and to that purpose I ought to demean my self: The Pharisie knew
not how to be humbled, and therefore was he Luke 18.14. dejected or depressed
of God exalting himself.
dejected the Publican knew, therefore was he justified. Paul who though he had
not the treasure of a rich man: yet carried a rich man's mind, knew well how to
abound, he knew how to abound because he required not the fruit of his labor,
to be rendered to him in money, but n the increase of grace. We may also
understand it of the abundance of his affection as when he breaks out in the
fullness of his pure, not intemperate passion, our mouth 2 Cor. 6.11.
is opened to you, our heart is enlarged. Every where in all things he was
instructed, Phil. 4.12.
to be full and to be hungry. Blessed was he that knew to be satiate in Christ,
It is not therefore that corporal, but spiritual saturity, and fullness which
knowledge works, neither without cause is knowledge needful, because man
Deuteronomy. 8.3.
lives not by bread only, but by every word of God, which gives a blessing to
it. Therefore he which knew thus to be full, thus to be hungry, required out of
his knowledge, inquiry always to be made The science of the Metaphysics, that
is, what is above nature must be sought according to Ephesians. 4.6. and 23.24.
(...).
for new ways, renewment of the mind and heart, to hunger and thirst after the
Lord. He knew what was in this wise to be hungry, who knew that whosoever be
thus hungry Mat. 5.6.
shall eat and be satisfied, he knew the same, and in all manner of outward
wants was filled with plenty, for having 2 Cor. 6.10. (...).
nothing he possessed all things.

CHAP. XVIII. That evil counselors are the ruin of them that follow them.
Rehoboam being deceived by the counsel of green heads, is solely proposed as
a sufficient proof thereof.
WHerefore singularly does justice commend such as sit as presidents, and bear
rule in some office: and contrariwise foully does injustice fail them in their
expectation, and is a means of impugning and resisting their ordinaries. 1
Kings 12.8.
Rehoboams lamentable example in Scripture makes it a lasting monument, and a
looking glass for all Herein they may behold the face of this misshapen
monster, and see what strange effects, evil counsel produces.
posterities to gaze upon. The Israelites labored to be eased of their hard
impositions, he sought to increase it, and at the instigation of the Youth is
refractarie to peace, making a rent in that goodly, and glorious united
kingdom of Solomon.
novices exasperated them, with this distasteful answer, my little finger shall
be heavier then my fathers loins; and thereupon that their woeful Verse 16.
reply, We have no portion with David, nor inheritance with the sons of
Iesse. Return O Israel every one to their tents, etc. in so much, that no not
for David's sake, could he securely obtain the society of two tribes.

CHAP. XIX. By justice, and benevolence, and affability, which is solid, and
without flattery very many to be reconciled, and settled in friendship.
IT is clear therefore that equity confirms kingdoms, and that Yea
Rehoboams example makes it evident, that very austerity it self is to be
mitigated in government.
injustice dissolveth them: How can a king possess a kingdom, which cannot
govern so much as one private family? Believe it for the managing of both
Commonweal, and family, benignity, Benignity.
and courteous carriage is specially necessary. Herein also benevolency, or a
well-willing disposition sets forward very much the business. For thereby
we embrace all with kindness, bind them to us with benefits, tie them with
the cords of good offices, engage them with favors. Affability is no less
available in this work of reconcilement upon the estranging of affections, and
regaining of grace. But this must be sincere, and sober without the least
flattery lest by adulation, and fawning, the simplicity, and purity of speech
be impeached. For we ought to set down in our selves a plat-forme to others,
not only in work, but also in word, in integrity, and fidelity. Such as we
would be accounted, such let us be in truth, and what in affection we harbor,
the same, let us make apparent, and exemplary. Speak we not a word tending to
unequal, and unkind dealing, no not in our hearts. For do we suppose any
thing to be hid by silence from him that sees and hears all things in
secret, does work invisibly, has knowledge of the inward, and most intimate
bowels, and which infuseth the feeling, and operation it self, of what is
mured up in these chambers, and closets themselves. Wherefore let us persuade
ourselves whatsoever, or wheresoever we do speak, or Prove. 5.21.
think, that is not good, the same to come before the bar of the common
Assizes by the Lord, the Lord chief justice indeed, and there to be set in
the view, and sight of all So shall it be at the great summons of the supreme
Judge.
men.

CHAPTER XX. To make greatly for the commendation of men, if they adhere to
such as are approved for their wisdom, and godliness. Those unequal in age
to be delighted in the society of such, as are in similitude of manners like
them. The example of Peter and John, is brought for a proof hereof.
WHerefore it profits very much, all men in every respect, to be before
joined in acquaintance, and friendship with the good. It is behovefull likewise
for young men to tread in the steps of men reputed wise, and of desert:
because, he that linketh himself in fellowship with the Prove. 14.7.13.18.
prudent is wise, Prove. 22.20. and 24.21, 22.
but he that converseth with the foolish is acknowledged to be an unwise
person, to be joined to the good both for instruction, and testimony of
honesty, we find very commodious. To whom young men cleave, those they show
themselves to imitate: and this opinion prevails thus far concerning such
that from them they received their similitude of conversation, with whom their
desire was to be joined in familiarity. Thence became Joshua so great, because
his conjunction with Moses did not only instruct him in the Law, but also
sanctified him in grace. When in his Exodus 33.7. Or Ohel-Moed of the
congregation.
Tabernacle the divine presence, and majesty did appear in glory, then was
Joshua there alone to Ver. 11.
behold it, when Moses spoke with God, then was Joshua covered with the sacred
cloud, when the priests and people attented below, then did Joshua ascend up
the mount with Moses to receive the Law. All the people was within the camp,
Exodus 24.13.14.
Joshua without the camp in the tabernacle of the testimony, and when the
pillar of the cloud did descend thither, and spoke with Moses, he stood by him
and assisted as a faithful minister in whatsoever service. Neither did this
young man depart out of the tabernacle when the elders themselves fearing the
divine miracles were willed to wait afar off. Every where therefore amiddest
the admirable works, and highly to be reverenced secrets did he join himself
unseparably to holy Moses, whence it came to pass, that he which was his
associate in assistance, should be his Exodus 33.8.11.
successor in authority. And worthily grew he to that authority, and power with
the Lord, that at his instance he made the floods of Deuteronomy. 31.3.7.
Jordan stay themselves in their course, and that he said to the sun Joshua
3.7.11.13.
in the firmament, stand thou still, and it obeyed his voice, the one until
the people were passed over, the other deferring the night, and prolonging the
day was a joyful spectator of his most honorable victory over five Princes:
what was denied Josh. 10.12.
to Moses was granted to him, and he was only elected to conduct the people
into the land of promise. Deuteronomy. 31.3.7.
He was a man mighty in miracles, mighty in triumphs through the strength of
faith, Moses acts were more illustrious, and of higher renown, his more
successful, and prosperous in the state military, and of possession. Both of
them relying upon divine grace proceeded beyond humane condition, He commanded
the sea, this the heaven, he the air, and rocks for food and water, this the
day, and night with their lamps, and luminaries, for joy and conquest. A fair
and sweet couple therefore are they old and youthful, senior and servant. The
one excells in testimony, the other in solace, the one in magisteriall power,
the other in delightful passage. I omit that Lot being a young man adhered to
Abraham, and lest any one might think that he did it because of propinquity of
blood, or of necessity, and not voluntarily, the story mentions that he did
it, Genesis 12.4.
when he departed out of his country, that we might understand that it was
with the same resolution of his uncle Abraham, Ver. 7. 1 Kings 19.20.
which was to serve the Lord sincerely. What shall we say of Helias, and
Heliseus? For albeit the Scripture does not signify Helizeus to be a young
Ahab reigned years 22. and Eliah was translated in the days of Iehoram, Iehu
reigned years 28. 2 Kings 10.36. his son Ioahaz reigned 17. Elisha died not
until the days of Ioash 2 Kings 13.14.20.
man, yet we may easily observe, and collect that he was Acts 15.39.40.
younger then his Lord Helias. In the Acts o of the Apostles Barnabas took unto
him Mark, Paul Silas Timotheus, Titus. But in the superiors, we see the
offices so divided, that the Seniors were for counsel, Tit. 1.4.5.
the juniors for the ministry. Vita immaculata bonae senectutis stipendium
est. Where the same therefore is, there is the like reverence and reward due to
old age. For the longest life can gain no more, but is most blessed if it
obtain that.
For the most part likewise they were like in virtues unlike in age, delighting
themselves in the fellowship one of another, as did also Peter, and John. And
John to be a young man we read in the Gospel, and that in his own writings,
yet second to none of the seniors in wisdom and deserts. For in his holy
conversation there was venerable old age, and gray headed wisdom. For
immaculate life Acts 16.1.
is the stipend and guerdon of good and grave old age.

CHAP. XXI. Of the praise of pity, and hospitality, and of the evil of
prodigality, with the vanity of popular grace, depending thereupon: and this is
principally taxed in the ministry, wherein all things ought to be done
decently, and in order.
THis helps forward also thy good estimation, if thou deliver the poor out
of the hands of the mighty, and the condemned Prove. 24.11.
from death as far as thou may, do it without the perturbation of justice.
But while thou gettest reputation, thou must beware that thou make not it the
end of thy good actions, and not mercy. For thereby thou may more wound thy
credit, then augment it, more hurt the sore of an hard report then heal it.
Now if thou free him oppressed with the wealth, and power of the mighty, with
the faction of wicked conspirators, rather then for any fault, this may be a
means to increase the good opinion that is already conceived of thee. In like
manner stands it with hospitality. For to be frequent in it, is thought
praiseworthy for the most part. And it carries a public show of humanity, to
receive the stranger to our houses, and entertain him courteously, and that
our gates, and doors stand open to that purpose. The whole world esteems it
very decent to hearken after their coming, honorably to congratulate, and bid
such guests welcome, not to be wanting to them at our tables, in all good
offices, and gifts of delight, and liberality, as far as lies in our power
when they are come. Abraham is commended for it, who stood before his gate to
take a view who passed by, and kept a watch, as it were, that no stranger might
escape him unsaluted, unfed, unfeasted; likewise, if cause required, he would
not they should call upon him, but he went out to meet them; neither did he
expect until they should crave repast, but prevented them, saying, Sirs, Genesis
18.3.
if I have found favor in your sight, pass not by your servant. And for a due
reward hereof, he obtained the blessing of Verse 10.14.
posterity.

Lot Chapt. 19.11.
also his His brothers Harans son, Genesis 11.31. and properly no more then
cousin, as Elizabeth to Mary, Luke 1.36. (...) though nearer: Abraham, calls
him twice brother, Genesis 14.14.16. achin of achah frater usual among the Jews,
Mark 3.31. Luke 8.20. and Math. 12.46. upon which place St. Aug. idest,
consanguineus carnis meae. lib. de Sta Virgin, Cap. 3. Dues not best to exact
in the greatest strictness.
nephew, not only next him in stock, but likewise in virtue, through his
affection to hospitality, removed from him, and his, the dreadful judgment of
God inflicted upon the Sodomites. It becomes therefore a man to be
hospital, gentle, just, not covetous of another man's goods, yielding somewhat
rather out of his own right, then bearing too hard upon that is none of his
own, avoiding strife, abhorring brawling, redeeming concord and tranquillity
with his loss, and hindrance. And in truth a good man to let go some of his
right it makes not only for the commendation of his liberality, but for the
most part for the augmentation of his commodity. First to want the damage of
litigiousnesse, which does much damnifie many, it is no small gain. Next this
benefit follows upon it, that friendship thereby is increased, from which
much utility redoundeth, and he that can contemn this for a time, shall
afterward reap great profit by it. But in the duty of hospitality, courtesy,
and kindness is to be imparted, and extended to all, more frankly, and amply,
and with more reverend, and honorable respect to the righteous. For the Lord
himself has pronounced it, Math. 10.41. Hospitality.
whosoever shall receive a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall
receive a righteous man's reward. But in so great regard is hospitality with the
Lord, that the grace of remuneration shall follow him that bestows no more
upon such, then a Verse 11.
cup of cold water. Thou see that whilst Abraham seeks for the guests, he
receives God himself into his house, and Lot Angels in stead of men. How do
thou know what thou may do, and whether for a man thou may not take in
under thy roof thy mediator, God and man, together with a guest thou may not
also entertain Christ? For Christ is in the poor of all sorts. Math. 25.35.
(...).

The poor as they are Christ's members: so they present to us, howsoever
miserable their condition be; the state of his humiliation.


I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: I was hungry, and ye gave me no
meat: I was thirsty, and gave me no drink: J was naked, and ye clothed me
not: I was sick, and visited me not: J was in prison, and ye came not to
me. It is a sweet thing therefore to apply ones mind not to get coin, but
grace. But this evil now of late years has crept in, and so grievously
corrupted the hearts of men, that they are caught with the love, and honor of
nothing but of money, wholly wrapped, and ravished with the admiration of riches.
Hence issues out the base birth of avarice, as a barren, and withered stock,
to dry up the vain of all good offices, that whatsoever is bestowed, though
to the high honor of God, beside custom, and ordinary course, is thought to
be cast away. But against this disease also, lest it might hinder our good
proceedings, the venerable Scripture has provided a remedy: Better is
hospitality with green Verse 35.36.
herbs, better is a little Prove. 15.17.
with righteousness, better is a dry Prove. 16.8.
morsel if peace be with it. For the Scripture teaches us not to be
prodigal, but liberal. For there be two kinds of largess, or bounty. The one
of liberality, the other of prodigal effusion. To be liberal is to lodge, to
cloth the naked, to redeem the captives, to help such as have not to suffice
for necessary expenses. To be prodigal is to lash out in sumptuous banquets,
and abundance of wine. Whence thou read that Prove. 17.1.
wine is Prove. 10.1. Metonymia efficientis. Is a mocker, or prodigal of proud
words.
prodigal, and drunkenness contumelious. It is the part of a prodigal, Or
plenty brings prodigality, which consists in all manner of wastfull, wanton,
and riotous profusion: and so wine, and this is to our translation, and sense
of the Author.
for the fame of popular applause, to exhaust his own proper substance: which
they do that in the race, fencing school, and hunting disports striving to
outstride their predecessors in their celebrities, fling away their patrimony,
as if one should Dilapidant.
hurl away stones: when whatsoever is done this way is vain, when even in the
matter of good works it self immoderate costs transgress the rule of
decency. Fair liberality toward the poor ought to keep measure, that it may
reach to more, ought not to run out beyond the mean, to gain thereby a
name. Whatsoever is drawn out of a pure, and sincere affection that is comely,
but we cannot range hither such as erect superfluous buildings, nor such as
let pass therein what is necessary for both these, as they run out into
extremes: so they retain not what is sincere. And this belongs chiefly to
the Priest of highest authority in the ministry, when the temple of God is to
be built, or beautified, that it be done with convenient comeliness; and so
that it be dressed, and decked as well for Vt etiam hoc cultu aula Domini
resplendeat.
ornament as for use; in him respect must be had to works of mercy, which must
also be frequented, and out of the common contribution, there must be a
reservation for strangers: in each regard a discerning what is competent,
congruent to humanity without surplusage, without unnecessary complement, lest
by overmuch expense it be driven to seek the aid of strangers. The like
caution must be used by him toward the Clergy, that their allowance be
neither with too great restraint, nor too great indulgency. For the one is
inhumanity, and void of religious affection, the other prodigality: if Si aut
sumptus desit necessitati eorum, quos a sordidis negotiationis aucupijs
retrahere debeas.
necessary allowance be not given them for restraint from their base deceits
of other business, or that which is Aut voluptati superfluat.
superfluous feeding their delight.

CHAP. XXII. Of keeping moderation between remissness, and severity: and that
colored remissness, and pretended looseness, makes way sometimes to more
weighty projects: Which is laid out by the example of Absalom.
MOreover it is very convenient, that a moderation be observed evermore in our
speeches, and in our precepts, lest therein there may seem to be too much
remissness, or too much severity. For many had rather seem to be remiss,
that thereby they may bear the name of good men. But it is a sure thing that
nothing feigned, and counterfeit can possibly belong to true virtue, neither
can it be of continuance. In the beginning it is green, and flourishing, but
in process of time it withers, and is scattered as the blossom of a flower:
but that which is true, and sincere takes deep root. We may prove this
assertion by an example derived out of that family, from whence we have deduced
many, making highly for the praise, and encouragement of such as are desirous
to proceed in a virtuous course: this one we may bring, as a pregnant
testimony of the short reign, and sudden downfall Let no man marvel at the
symptoms of such a malady in the event pernicious, when every bodily disease
is perplexed with some pernicious passion.
of imposture and fraud. In all 2 Samuel 14.25.
Israel there was none to be so much praised for beauty as Absalom, the son
of King David: from the sole of his foot, even to the crown of his head, there
was no blemish in him, he Chapt. 15.1.
prepared him charets, and horses, and fifty men to run before him, he rose
Verse 2.
up early, and stood hard by the entering in of the gate: and every man that had
any matter, and came to the King for judgment, him did he call to him, and
said, of what city art thou? and when he answered of one of the tribes of
Israel, Absalom replied, Verse 3.
See thy matters be good, and righteous, but there is no man deputed of the
king to hear thee. And he said moreover, Oh Verse 4.
that J were made judge in the land, that every man which has any matter, or
controversy might come to me, that I might do him justice. Thus he smoothed
all suitors. Verse 5.6.
When any man came near to him, and did him obeisance, he put forth his hand,
took him and kissed him: so stole he away the hearts of all Jsrael. Such his
flattery set on fire the sense of their most intimate bowels. But these
delicate, and ambitious spirits, seem to make choice of honorable,
acceptable, pleasant, plausible These designs proceeded not merely from
delicacy and ambition: but from sublimity of brain: yet took cold effect.
designs for a time. This David in his divine wisdom foresaw Ibid. Chapt.
18.5.
when he gave charge to the Captains, to entreat the young man Absalom gently
for his sake. And therefore he would not be k present in the field, that he
might not even so much as once seem, to bear arms against one that was a
parricide, being notwithstanding withal a son. It is manifest therefore those
things to be solid, and of perpetuity, which are fairly, and faithfully, not
cunningly, and craftily contrived: and again, what is done by simulation, and
assentation by no means to be permanent, and durable.

CHAP. XXIII. That those which by redemption of money, or by assentation, or
obsecration are brought to obedience, do not long keep their faith: because
whom thou shall once so redeem, and invite, he expects remission always
from thee as a duty, and therefore fears not still upon the least
coffeehouse to break out into disobedience, thinking to have thee ever
under his girdle, and at command.
WHo therefore is there, that either supposes those which are redeemed How ill
did the Sodomites requite Abraham's redemption, when they offered such injury to
Lot? Genesis 14.16.23. and 19.9. Iehoiakim and Zedechiah, Nebuchadnezzars
goodness? the Amalekites Saul's? 2 Kings 24.1.17.20. 2 Samuel 1.10. Benhadad?
Achabs 1 Kings 20.34. David gave them their condign payment, even that
Amalekite, and those that slew Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 4.12.
with money, and so brought to obedience, or those which are drawn by flattery
to it, to be such as will remain fast, and firm to him? For the one sort will
set themselves often to sale for money, the other cannot bear the hard yoke of
government. These with a few smooth, and pleasing words framed to their humor
are Jacob knew this to be the way to pacify Esau, but had learned that no
hold could be taken of his friendship, and therefore kept not touch with him
to come to Seir. Genes. 23.14. Saul was sought for, and solicited to he made
King, but how proved he? 1 Samuel 10.22. The ten Tribes came into another
extreme, reject Rehoboam with vile words, when they had done better rather,
had they dealt with him upon soft terms, 1 King. 12.16.
easily induced; but if thou be a little round with them, they by and by
murmr, fling away, take pepper in the nose, are gone in great indignation,
and choose rather to live at their liberty, that they may domineere as they
list, then to be under command and obedience. Whom they ought to esteem, as
it were, prepositors set over them; those they think they ought to have under
them at their pleasure, and in matter of benevolence obnoxious, and subject to
their will. Wherefore who is there that may place any confidence in either of
them for their fidelity? For he which has received money will think himself
vilely, and contemptuously handled by thee unless thou get him his freedom
still, according to his desire, and he which has been gained by entreaty, and
fair speech, will look for the same continually at thy hands, and what a
miserable tie, and bondage is this?

CHAP. XXIIII. Climing up to honor must be by good means only especially
among Ecclesiastical persons, neither must the inferior orders under the
pretext of greater gifts derogate from the Bishop, neither must the Bishop
bear hatred to the rest of the Clergy, but carry himself just toward all,
cheifely in the seat of judgment.
WHerefore all men must endeavor by good arts, and a sincere purpose to come
to honor and above the rest such as belong to the Church, Adomnia abundat
animi directa simplicitas, satis quae se ipsa commendat.
that neither arrogance, remiss negligence, base affectation, unseemly
ambition be found in them. Smplicity of heart is directed to whatsoever
promotion is abundantly sufficient thereunto and of its self full
commendation. But in the divine function it self it is not convenient that too
strict severity or too much remissness be used, lest we may seem to exercise
our power overmuch or not to fulfill the office undertaken as we ought. Labor
we likewise to bind as many as we can to us by benefits, and duties. Let us
reserve in memory the bestowed grace that they may not justly be unmindful of
the benefit, which stick not to pretend grief, as if they had been
exceedingly hurt by us. For we find by often experience, that preferring
without due desert any one before them, whom formerly thou countenancedst, and
gracedst in some high degree, it is so taken as a turning away thy face from
them But it is requisite for the Bishop in his benefices, and judgments so to
favor, that he keep equity: and so to respect a Presbyter, Or elder.
or minister as his father. Neither does it behove those, which are once
approoved, to be proud, but rather, as being not unmindful of the grace
received, to be humble minded, neither, ought the Bishop to be offended, if
either Presbyter, or minister, or any other of the clergy seeks by mercy, or
fasting or integrity, or doctrine, or reading to increase his own credit. For
the grace, and countenance conferred by the congregation is the commendation of
the teacher, and it is good his praise should be spread that is worthy, if what
he does be done without ostentation, or affectation of vain glory. Let thy
neighbors lips and not Prove. 27.1. and 20.6. and 17.7.
thine own, let the worth of thy works, not thy aspiring desires commend
thee. But if any man obey not the Bishop, but seeks to extol, and exalt
himself with a feigned affectation of some great learning, or of humility or
mercy, and to obscure and weaken his merits: let him understand, that he erreth
being puffed up, because this is the rule of truth, that thou do nothing for
thine own credit to diminish another man's, neither if thou have ought
deserving praise that thou vent it to the defamation of another. Defend Non
defendas improbum, and sancta indigno commitenda arbitreris where et is a
causall for etiam. Quorum Iphitus aevo jam gravior, pelias and vulnere tardus
Vlysse.
not an evil man, yet think withal that holy things may be committed to an
unholy, and unworthy person, An unworthy person may preach the word, or
administer the sacraments, neither without saving fruit to the receivers. For
not the minister, but the divine ordinances obeyed, and received by faith, make
these effectual to salvation. God does his holy works by sinful instruments,
blesses Israel by Balaam, Number. 23.8. tempts the people by false prophets,
Deuteronomy. 13.3. vexes Saul by Satan, 1 Samuel 16.14. punishes David by Absalon. 2 Samuel 15.12.
neither whose crime thou could not by diligent inquiry, and examination
deprehend, and find out before, be thou brought to press it again, and strive
about it. For when in all causes injustice may be soon committed, then above,
and before any in those ecclesiastical, where equity ought to be of necessity,
where it becomes equality to take place, that so he which is mightier do
vindicate nothing more to himself, and he which is wealthier do usurp no
more, then what is right. For whether he be poor, or whether he be rich, he
Gal. 3.28.
is one in Christ, he that is holier, let him arrogate nothing more to
himself, then he that is inferior in grace: nay let him remember that he that
is more holy, of him more humility is both required and expected. In judgment
likewise let equity take place and let us not except of the person of one above
another, let favor be set apart, and let merit arbitrate the cause in
controversy. For nothing does so much impeach a good opinion of thee, and thy
credit among men, as when thou favourest the cause of the mightyer above the
meaner in judgment, or accusest the poor innocent, and excusest the rich
nocent party.

Humane race is prone to this evil, to lean to the more honorable, and to
leave them of less regard in the briers, lest otherwise, they might think
some hurt to be about to accrue to themselves, and lest being put down they
might have cause to repent. But if thou fear the taking of offense at the
hands of the great ones, why do thou undertake to sit as a judge, and thou
which art plaintiff, whether Clerk or of the Commons, being inferior why
do thou provoke thy superior to come to a trial when thou have no hope to
receive according to equity? Thou have liberty to be silent in a pecuniary
business only, albeit it be the part of constancy, even there to be present to
see equity done. To dissemble in the cause of Religion is worthy branding for
prevarication, and rebellion against God.
But in the cause of God, where the communion of the faithful, and fellowship
of the Saints is in danger, there to dissemble, and be without courage, and
pious contention is no small offense.

CHAP. XXV. Favors, and benefits ought to be bestowed more upon the poor,
then upon the rich, because, for that peradventure for which the rich
disdaineth, the poor gives thee great thanks: neither are those such, as are
performed in money only, but in mercy otherwise exhibited.
But what does it profit thee to favor the rich? Is it for that he sooner
rewards him that loves him? For those we usually favor by whom we hope the
like to be rendered us again. But it is better we should be desirous rather to
help the poor, and innocent because by so doing we shall receive a reward of
the Lord Jesus, who under the form of a Luke 14.12.
banquet brought forth a general rule of virtue, that we should rather be
beneficial to those, which cannot gratify us, charging us to invite those to
our feasts, that cannot invite us again, then the rich. For these seem to
themselves to be bidden that they may recompense the like. The (poor because
they have not to restore) when they shall receive any thing from us they make
the Lord their paimaster, Verse 14.
who offreth himself to become bound for them. To help the poor sorteth
better also with the course of the world, for the weathly person disdaineth to
be beholding, and he is ashamed to be engaged for any courtesy. Beside the
wealthy challenges whatsoever is conferred upon him as his desert, because
either as it was received from him as a debt, or therefore given, because he
that gave it, looks for a better gift to be returned him again. So when the
rich receive a benefit, they esteem no otherwise thereof, then if they
themselves, had been at some cost, rather then made pertakers of any
commodity. But if the poor has nothing to render again, he renders thanks.
Wherein it is certainly true, that he repaieth back more, then he received. For
money may be paid again in the same kind, but the heart can never be evacuated
of thanks. Money in the payment of debt may be wasted, but thanks cannot be
wasted, but in giving is paid, in paying is Paid with the mouth, reserved in
the heart.
reserved. Moreover, what the rich shifteth of, that the poor man confesses,
that he has been engaged to any for his better support, that he has been
sustained above some others, he imputes not to his own praise, he thanketh
and acknowledges that his sons were given him, his life restored, his family
preserved by the hand of such as God raised up, as good instruments for him.
How much better is it therefore to be at charge, with the He that is good being
in poverty willingly acknowledges all this rightly to belong to his
benefactor, and lest he should fall short and be taxed of ingratitude, even
much more then is due.
good then with the The very name it self of charity is enough to move toward
the needy, and of needless grieving and palpable glosing to be moved to
gratify them that want not.
unthankful. When we mention benefits we would not be understood of those
alone which consist in pecuniary largition, and devotion, but of those
whatsoever, which are any way done for the releife, and comfort of the
miserable. Whence the Lord to his disciples, Mat. 10.9. The dependence of this
scripture with the precedents stands thus Devotion on these being our Saviors
good Ambassadors was well bestowed, and the use of money forbidden, therefore
it must be done some other way.
Possess not gold, nor silver, nor money: whereby as with a sith he mowes
down the banefull spring of greedy covetousnes budding out in the hearts of
men. For by caution the very principal occasion of avarice is intercepted.
Peter confesses the Acts 3.6. This does not abridge the use of money, but
presses the contempt of riches, which affection, though it be hardly found in
the St. themselves, yet ought to be settled with a true desire in the hearts of
all Gods servants.
same to him that was a cripple from his mothers womb, Silver and gold have I
none, but that, which I have, I give unto thee, In the Name of Jesus Christ of
Nazaret, rise up and walk. Wherefore he gave him no money, but he gave him
health How much better therefore is it to have health with out money, then
money without health? The cripple rose up, and received what he never expected,
and missed money, which he most expected. But this is scarce found in the
Saints of the Lord, that they have riches in Psalm. 119.36.37. Brevissima
addivitias per contemptum divitia rum via est, Seneca See him de fuga seculi.
contempt.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the evil of covetousness, and of the contagiousnesse thereof
in Balaam, Achan, and Delilah.
But the manners of men have been so rooted in the admiration of riches, that
no man but he that is wealthy, has been thought worthy of honor. Neither is
this a matter newly come up, but which is worse, long since has this vice
Inolevit grown bigger.
increased in the minds of men. For when the great city of Jericho had fallen
down at the sound of the trumpets, and Ioshuah had enjoyed the victory, he
understood the Josh. 7.12.
strength of the people to be weakened by covetousness, and the desire of
gold. For when Achan had taken of the spoils of the city Joshua 7.21.
a goodly Babilonish vesture, two hundred Siclus argenteus 2 s. 4d.
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold, and was convented before the Lord for
his trial, he could not deny but disclosed the theft. Covetousness therefore
is an old sin, which began with the Oracles of the divine law: yea for the
suppressing of it the law of God was given. For through avarice Balak thought
Balaam might be brought to curse Gods people, and unless the Lord had expressly
Numb. 22.11.
forbidden him to forbear, he had prevailed with him. Through avarice Achan
caused a Joshua 7.5.
slaughter of the people, and was Verse 25.
stoned to death, and Verse 15.
consumed with fire with all that he had. Ioshuah, that obtained of the Lord
to stay the Sun in the firmament, could not stay the creeping in of this
evil. At his voice the Sun stood still; see the force of the prayer of the
righteous, but avarice stood not still. Therefore by the standing still of the
Sun he gained time, and got to triumph over his enemies, but by avarice he
almost lost the victory: not by that in himself, but in another, which shows
how evil a neighbor it is.

Through avarice was the strongest deceived by the weakest. What else but the
Such a boon being cast into her lap, as eleven hundred shekels of silver,
she will not fail, though her faith be pleaded to him before, but will make
him a prey.
avarice of Dalilah deceived the strongest among men, even Judge. 16.5.
Sampson himself? He which before rent in sunder the Chapt. 13.9.
roaring lion with his hands, brake the new well-twisted Chap. 15.14. and 16.9.
cords, and sevenfold greenest withs, as stubble, with the jaw bone of an ass
slew a Chapt. 15.16.
thousand men, pulled up, and carried away the Chapt. 16.19.
gates and posts of the chief fenced city upon his shoulders unto the top of a
mountain, now bowing down his neck, as an ox to the slaughter, upon the n
knees of a woman, and suffering the ornament of his invincible locks to be
shaven off, lost at once the high prerogative of his impregnable virtue. Money
filled the lap of a woman, and the man lost his grace. Deadly is the blow,
mortal the wound of avarice, inchaunting is the price of pecuniarie payment,
polluting where it is, and nothing profiting where it is not possessed.

Let it be granted, that she may help sometime, some certain, inferiors
they be that find it, and those eagerly set upon gain. What makes this for
him that desires her not, requires not, needs not her aid, is not bowed nor
broken with care for her? What if he that has her be wealthier then others?
Is he therefore honest, because having her, he has that whereby honesty is
commonly lost, because he which has her, has rather what he must labor to
keep, then what he certainly possesses? For what we possess we use. But what
is beyond our reach concerning the use, we enjoy not therein the benefit of
possession, but are entangled in the danger of safe keeping thereof.

CHAPTER XXVII. Of benignity, or a gentle, and ingenuous disposition, and that
an Excommunication is not suddenly, and before serious deliberation to be
denounced.
SVmmarily we know that the contempt of money is the form of justice: and
therefore we ought to decline covetousness; and to strive with all our care,
and power, that we do nothing at any time against justice, but that in all our
labors, and actions, we keep it. If we will commend our selves to God, let
us have charity, let us be of one Acts 4.32. Romans 15.5.6.16. Phil. 3.16.
heart, and soul, let us follow humility, whereby we are directed to this rule
to esteem of others Phil. 2.3. Romans 12.10.16. Ephesians. 5.21.
better then of our selves. For this is humility, if a man arrogate nothing to
himself, but think himself an Romans 12.16. (...).
inferior, and equal to them of the lower sort. A Bishop that he may make use
of the Clerks his members, and chiefly the ministers, which are truly his sons
whom he shall see fit for each office, him shall he depute thereunto.
Likewise that part of the body which is putrified, let it be cut off in grief:
A wound does first remain some good space of time under the Chirurgions hands,
and then afterward when medicines, and all other good means of cure have been
applied, and no remedy found by the advice of some good Physicion, that part,
or member where it is, is cut off: So the affection, and desire of some good
Bishop is to cure the weak; and first to attempt to take away the creeping
ulcers, next to burn some, not to cut them off; last of all, what cannot be
healed though with grief, yet to cut Immedicabale vulnus ense recidendum est,
repars sincera trahatur.
them off. Whence is that most renowned precept, and which ought to bear
special sway with us, that we Phil. 2.4.
look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
other men. For by this means there will be nothing, wherein being angry, we
may either give too much way to our own affection, or inclining in favor may
attribute something more then is just to our own will.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the good of compassion, and that in the time of necessity we
ought not to spare the holy treasures of the Churches. St. Laurence, and
Ambrose himself are introduced for examples.
THis is the greatest provocation of mercy, that we have a fellow feeling, and
suffering of other men's miseries, that so we help them in their necessities, as
far as we are able, and sometimes also above, and beyond that we are able.
For it is Melius est pro misericordia causas praestare velinvidiam perpeti,
quam praetendere inclementiam: or causas prae stare, in this place More
Iuris-consultorum est cautiones dare, or else perhaps both praestare and
praetendere signify no more then exhibere to show.
better to show cause why mercy should be used, and that to the uttermost, yea
to suffer the spightfull looks of the envious, then to pretend the least
patronage for inclemency; According as we our selves sometimes fell into the
lash of envy, because we brake in pieces the mystical vessels, that we might
redeem the captives: which might be matter of quarrel to the Arians, neither
the fact so much as that they might pick something out of it, thereby to get
some color to reprehend our dealing. But who is so hard, savage, and
iron-hearted, as to be displeased with this, that a man is delivered from
death, a woman from beastly uncleanness of the Barbarians, which is more
grievous then death: that the young maidens, young boys, and in a manner
infants are preserved from the contagion of idols wherewith they were
contaminated through the fear of death? Which thing also we did not without
sufficient cause, and therefore so followed it with the people, that we openly
professed, that it was much more commodious to save souls for the Lord, then
gold. For he sent forth the Apostles, and gathered together the Congregations
without gold. The Church has gold not to keep it, but liberally to distribute
it, Tiglath Pileser 2 Kings 16.8.
and that it might be helpful in the time of necessity. Are we ignorant how
much gold, and silver the Shishak King of Egypt, and Benhadad king of Aram. 1
Kings 14.25. and 15.28. 2 Kings 25.15.
Assyrians, Egyptians, and Babilonians had out of the Temple of the Lord?

Does not the Church better gather substance together for alms for the poor,
if they want other sustenance, then that the sacrilegious enemy should with his
contaminate hands touch them, and take them away? will not the Lord say, why
do thou suffer so many poor to dye with hunger? And verily thou had gold
that thou might give alms. Why are so many captives sold for slaves, and
not redeemed? Why are so many slain by the enemy? It had been better that
thou had kept the vessels of the living, then of the metals. For these no
answer could be made. For what might thou say for them? Would thou say,
I feared lest ornament should be wanting to the house of God? It would be
replied, the Sacraments, which are not bought with gold, seek not, neither do
they delight in it. The ornament of the Sacraments is the redemption of the
captives. And they are truly precious vessels, which do redeem the souls
from death. That is the true treasure of the Lord, which works that which his
blood has wrought. Then I acknowledge the vessel of the Lords blood, when I
shall see in them both redemption, that the cup may redeem from the enemy,
those whom the blood has redeemed from sin. How goodly a thing it is, that
when the multitude of the captives are redeemed by the Church, it may be said
of them, these has Christ redeemed. Behold, where is the tried gold, behold
where is the gold well approved of, and profitable? Behold the gold of Christ
which saves from death; behold the gold whereby shamefastness is redeemed
from pollution, chastity is preserved from defilement. These children therefore
do I make choice of rather to set at liberty, and deliver over to you, then to
reserve, and keep in store the most refined plate of gold. This company of
captives, this rank of inthralled bondmen, is better then the beauty, and
bravery of Chalices. The gold of the Redeemer ought to profit this sort of
forlorn, and wretched souls, and to free them from slavish servitude. I
acknowledge the blood of Christ infused into this gold, not only to have
glistered most brightly, but also by the gift of redemption to have engraven in
them the virtue of divine operation. Such gold the holy Martyr St. Laurence
reserved for the Lord, of whom when the treasures of the Church were sought for
by the enemy, and he promising to show them, brought out the next day the poor
to him. Being then demanded where were the treasures, which he promised, he
showed the poor, saying, these are the treasures of the Church. And these are
truly the treasures in which Christ is, and in which the faith of Christ is.
To this purpose speaks the Apostle we have this 2 Cor. 4.7.
treasure in earthly vessels. what better treasures has Christ then those in
whom he said himself to be? For so it is written: I was hungry Math. 25.35.
and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger,
and ye took me in. And afterward, For what ye have done to one of these ye have
done to me. What better treasures has Jesus then those in whom he loves to
be seen? These treasures Laurence showing thereby overcame, because the
Galienus.
persecutor could not take away these. Therefore 2 Kings 24.13.23.35.
Iehoiachims sin punished, for that he preferred the gold of the Temple
before the lives of the people.
Iehoiakim which preserved the gold in the seige of Jerusalem, and did not
dispense it for the provision of victual, to the releife of all even the
meanest in the City, saw both the gold taken away, and himself and it carried
into captivity. Laurence which chose rather to lay out the treasure of the
Church to the use of the poor, then to reserve it for a persecutor, for his
singular wisdom and courage in making such an interpretation, received the
holy Crown of Martyrdom. Whether was it said to this Martyr Laurence, thou
ought not to give away the treasures of the Church thou ought not to sell
the vessels of the Sacraments, in time of necessity for the benefit of the
poor? It is needful that a man faithfully, and with a good conscience,
circumspectly, and wisely fulfill this our office. Surely, if one convert goods
of the Church to his own profit it is a fault, but if he deliver it out to the
poor, or redeem a captive with it, it is mercy. For no man can find fault,
and say, why does the poor live? No man can challenge us for this, that the
captives are redeemed. No man can accuse us for that we build the Temple of
God. No man may justly be angry with us, because we open the ground and bury
the dead: no man may justly grieve, that at the interring of Christians there
is a Solemnity of prayer at the burial of the dead, allowed.
solemnity of prayer and thankesgiving. In these The fostering and burying the
poor are to be accounted as one The 2. the redeeming of Captives. The 3. the
building of Churches.
three cases it is lawful to break, to melt, to sell the vessels of the
Temple. It is requisite that the form of the mystical cup go not out of
the Church, lest the ministry of the Chalice be converted to profane uses.
Therefore in the beginning the vessels were sought out which were within the
Church, and not consecrated afterward they were broken in pieces, lastly they
were melted, then by peice-meale, and small doale distributed to the poor,
appointed also for the prices of redemption for the captives. This may be
though there be no other new ones provided in their stead, or being new are not
consecrated these, and all other ornaments of the Church may in the time of
some extreme necessity in godly wise, as I suppose, be converted to those uses
above mentioned.

CHAP. XXIX. The deposits 2. Mac. 3.11. (...).
of the widows, yea of all the faithful committed to the custody of the
Church of God to be conserved, and kept inviolable even to her own peril. The
example of Onias, and Heliodorus, of himself, Pavia.
and of the Bishop Ticinum accommodated to prove the same.
THat verily is to be looked into with all care, that whatsoever goods the
widows have committed to the custody of the Church be kept with all
diligence, and without any damage, This is no more then what is word for word
in our English bibles, and therefore to set down the sum thereof was thought
sufficient.
neither they only, but the rest likewise of the faithful are in this regard
to be respected. Fidelity is to be showed to all, but the cause of widows,
and orphans is to be preferred. To be breife under the name of widows the
whole was commended to the Temple. Wicked Simon treacherously made it known to
the tyrant Antiochus concerning such moneys committed to the Temple of
Jerusalem, who sent Heliodorus to Onias the high Priest to deliver it to the
Kings use, but he was terrified, scourged, and stricken to the earth, and lay as
one dead with a fearful horseman in shining armor, and two young men in
glorious See the Story, 2 Macab. 3. Let this be a terror to the sacrilegious.
attire. Faith therefore, O my Sons, is to be kept, diligence is to be used
in the goods that are commended to your charge. Your Ministry does appear
from hence to be powerful and protected with the presence of God: and namely
then, when by the aid of the Church, the violence of the potent in the cause
of the widow is suppressed; and whenever the commandment of God does more
prevail with you toward the distressed, toward the innocent and oppressed,
then the favor of the great and wealthy of the world.

Remember how often we in our own person, have endured for the preservation
of what has been taken by us into the custody of the Church in the behalf of
the Widows, Orphans, and other the faithful, many and bitter conflicts,
fearful and forcible assaults at the hands of the Caesar's themselves. I will
here produce the common and fresh example of the Church of Pavia, where what
was deposed to her trust in respect of Widows, was in danger to be lost. For
there he calling for it, which challenged it by a rescript from the Emperor,
the Clerks were contemned, and slighted, the honorable persons that
interceded, told them, that no means were left them to withstand the Imperial
command. The form of the rescript was read, the Register of the Office was
present, and to use no longer circumstance, what was deposed, was granted to be
delivered: Notwithstanding the holy Bishop of the Church consulting, one
compassed about, and strongly fenced that part where he knew the Widows
portion, being translated, remained. Whence when it could not be taken away by
violence, it was received under handwriting, and afterward by virtue of the
same handwriting was required again by earnest petition. The Emperor renewed
his mandate, that thereby he might convent us personally before him, which
being denied him, the authority of the Law of God, the record of the whole
course of holy writ, and the peril by intermedling this way whereinto
Heliodorus fell, alleged for it; the Emperor hardly at the last upon much
supplication took this for an answer: Yet so, that after this the Adversary
again attempted a new way to pull it from the Church, but that the holy Bishop
prevented it, by restoring what he had received to the Widow. In the mean
time the faith of the Church is at safe anchor, oppression is not feared,
because now the matter and substance it self on their part, not trust, and
faithful dealing on our part, is in danger.

CHAP. XXX. Who are to be avoided, and who zealously for their godliness and
piety to be followed.
OH my Sons, fly from the wicked, beware of the envious; between the
wicked, and the envious, this is the difference. The wicked is delighted with
his own good, and is only apparently good; an envious man is tormented with
another man's prosperity; the one loves what is evil, the other hates what is
good: insomuch, that he is in some sort more tolerable that wishes 1 Timothy
5.4.8.
well to himself, then he that wishes ill to all. My Sons, think of that
ye do before hand, and when ye have taken Quicquid aggrediare consulito, and
cum conconsulueris mature facto est opus.
time, and well thought upon it then put in practice what stands with your
approbation. A laudable death when occasion is offered is to betaken hold of
forth with. Glory deferred flies away, neither is it easily overtaken. Love ye
the faith, and true devotion, because hereby 2 Kings 2.25. 2 Chon. 35.24.25.
Josias got the favor of God, and the love of all people. Get the favor of
God, ye that are young now in the flower of your age, as did Josias celebrating
the passover when he was but eighteen years of age, and excelling therein 2
Kin. 23.22. and ver. 23.
all that went before him. Wherefore as he excelled in zeal his superiors, so
take you to you my sons, the zeal of the Lord, let it enter into every one
of your hearts, and so inflame you there, and set you on fire, that ye may
truly say, the zeal of thy house, Psalm. 69.9. John 2.17.
O Lord, has eaten me up. Among the twelve Apostles there was one styled Luke
6.15.
Zelotes and * doubtless not without cause, but this might well have been
Saint Paul's style. For he was so in vehemence, Acts 9.1. Gal 1.14. Romans 9.3.
and 10.1. 2 Cor. 11.2.28.29. and 12.15. Acts 17.16
and heat of nature, and much more rightly so in the state of h grace. But what
do I speak of the Apostle, this divine virtue, was most eminent in our John
2.17.. and 4.34. and 7.38.37. and 11, 35.38.43. Luke 19.41.32. Mark 7.34. Mat.
9.35. Luke 21.27.
Savior whose president is without parallel, and above all exception to cut
off all color of reasoning against the same, and pressing together with his
whole active obedience unto primarie imitation in all his disciples.

Let therefore this divine James 3.13. standing (...) in the meekness of
wisdom.
zeal of his be in you, not that humane v. 14. (...).
which envy begets. For where v. 16. (...).
envy, and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil work, Let
the peace Philippians 4 7.
of God, which passes all understanding be among you, and preserve your
hearts, and minds in Christ Jesus, Love ye one (...) Romans 12.10. (...) 1 Thessalonians.
4.9. (...) James 3.17. 1 Pet 1.22.
another as brethren without faining, from a pure heart fervently, There is
nothing more sweet then Phil. 4.1.
love, nothing more acceptable then peace. And ye your selves know that I have
always heretofore loved you above others, which I do likewise at this
present, and shall also labor to do hereafter respectively, and that the same
may daily These. 3.12. (...).
abound toward you more and more. Wherefore as the sons of one Father, ye
are grown together in my bowels, in like affection toward you as toward
brother germans, and all of you strongly, and deeply seated in my love; Hold
fast therefore that which is 1 These. 5.21.
good, and the God of peace and Heb. 13.20.
love 1 John 4.8.
shall be with you in the Lord Jesus, to whom with the holy Spirit be ascribed
all honor, glory, magnificence, power, praise and thankesgiving, now and
evermore. Amen.

CHRISTIAN OFFICES CRYSTAL GLASS. OR, THE THIRD BOOK OF the godly, learned,
and ancient Father of the Latin Church, St Ambrose the famous B. of Millan his
Offices. WHICH WORK IS CAREFVLLY, and clearly also, considering the excellent
mystery of style in much obscurity, performed, and that with due observation
of the places of Scripture used therein in greatest variety, and others
thereunto pertinent. With some reconcilement eftsoons, where there may seem
to be disagreement, of the Septuagints, and the original of the old Testament.

JOHN 17.2. This is everlasting life to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. In honestate vitam beatam positam esse minime
dubitamus, quam scriptura appellat vitam aeternam.

Tantus enim splendour honestatis est, ut vitam beatam efficiat tranquillitas
conscientiae, and securitas innocentiae.

Ambros. lib. 2. Offic. Cap. 1. LONDON, Printed for John Dawson. 1637.

The Preface.
THE very appellations themselves of the four Cardinals, which is no more then
the first, and chief upon which the other virtues depend, and are subordinate
unto, because not reduced to those four heads in Scripture, nor bearing there
the same names, but such as are better known, and more familiar to them that
are acquainted therewith, are distasted of some. For Prove. 8.12. and 19.14
Prudence, say they, were more clearly expressed by the word Wisdom: Justice
Micah 6.8. Ezech. 18.9. and 33.15
justice by righteousness: Joshua 1.6.7.9. emets fortis esto meod valde, 1 Samuel 10.12.
fortitude by noble courage, valiantness, zeal, patience: 2 Pet. 1.6. 1 Timothy
3.3. Gal. 5.22.
temperance by sobriety, forbearance, meekness. But does not due order, and
method much avail the memory? be not these also used in the book of God?
does not the Lord himself, as in the decalogue, and Lords prayer, comprise the
specialties under the general? Where find they in the word in so many letters,
and sillables Trinity, Jehovah consisting of 4 spiritall letters and therefore
called (...), and (...) ineffable.
Essence, hypostasis, person of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
consubstantiall, the communication of the Or proprieties.
idiomats of both natures in Christ, Sacrament, or sacramental participating
of the body, and blood, sin original, otherwise then by necessary
collection? yet not to believe what these import, has been censured for
heresy. But what speak we of those high points, this being a matter of small
consequence whereupon we insist? Ethnic Offices, say they, humanity, morality,
civility, conduce but a little to Christian duties, divinity, piety, religion.
Yes, nature is a guide to art, and the works of condignitie, or of better
note, the knowledge of the Egyptians was a furtherance to Moses sacred study,
and Saint Paul learning the law, at the feet of Gamaliel, was made more
capable of the Gospel, and so Saint Augustine of the truth, being trained up
in the subtilties of the Maniches, and Donatists. St. Ambrose himself before
he was elected B. of Millan, was no more then a civil man, and unbaptized, but
of rare temperance, and disposition to peace. Cornelius observed not
circumcision, nor external rites as did the Israelites, and Proselites: but
was of that number, who were called (...) religious men.
Cornelius, the Luke 7.1.
Centurion, John 4.64. that royal one.
(...) were all men of more moderate carriage, and therefore pliable to holy
discipline: and surely Seneca a Stoic by profession, and therefore it is
surmised, that he might write to St. Paul, would have been more easily drawn
to have embraced the doctrine of mortification, then an Epicurean Philosopher.
The Lord is able, but this is not ordinary, but miraculous to raise up stones,
that is of the obdurate, and seared, such as was the chief, and jailer,
children to Abraham. The blessed Apostle more then once produces the sentences
of their own Poets Acts 17.28. 1 Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12.
to convince the errors of the Heathens. Tertullian, Lactantius, Augustine
bring irrefragable arguments for confutation of these out of their own books.

Some certain seeds, and small sparks there be of wisdom in the Ethnic
Philosophers Histories, Orators, Poets, writers of Tragedies, but they all come
far short of that is delivered in the doctrine of the Church.

the corruption, and cut-throate of good manners, and discipline.

Or to the next causes residing in the subject or object.
will, not to the just judgment of God against transgressors, as they ought to
do. Remedies against which they can render none that are Some (...) perhaps
lenitives, as light as nothing.
effectual.

Disputing of the souls immortality, they are like the waves of the sea tossed
with the tempests of Plato in Phaedone much doubts hereof himself, and
leaves others his followers in a quandarie (...).
incertainty.

Seeing all things swarving from the diameter they conjecture, and no
otherwise, of a judgment to come upon the world.

gru to it, and as little credit they yield the same.

The Ethnic though he gives this title to God, that he is (...) Xenophon.
beneficent, and a lover of mankind: yet he brings it not home to have comfort
of conscience by it, when he reaches not to the promise of gratuitall Which
must needs be had, where is no full obedience of degrees, not so much as in one
duty: and as for obedience of parts, it is but a piece of performance, looking
indeed toward all, but not keeping in perfection any of the Lords precepts.
remission.

Thus you have some survey of the weakness of their wisdom.

Now whereas justice is thought to (...). Arist. ex Theoguide. Nec Hesperus,
nec Lucifer formosior est justitia. Arist.
comprehend all, as that where it is, there the whole rank of virtues stand
about it, as attendants upon their Mistress. This her commendation extends no
farther, then to outward discipline, and works of what kind soever. Aristotle
places a man in a city, and therefore speaks of civil justice. He sets an
order to a citizen living under Magistrates, and laws in a political society,
and so putting a difference between universal, and particular justice draws
it down to every member, and then divides particular justice into In the
commutative he requires an equal communication of things in a proportion
Arithmeticall: in the distributive an ordination of persons in an equality
Geometrical.
commutative, and distributive. These disputes are full of prudence, howbeit
but legal only, and carnal, not such as satisfy the law of God, not of just
weight in his sight, but the justice of faith is that, which tried in the
balance of the sanctuary, is approved for good. Which relies not upon
whatsoever action, or quality of worth in us, but upon the free mercy of God in
the sole incomprehensible merit, and mediation of Christ.

The allegation of Zaleucus Phocensium legislator inquit, Deus non colitur
sumptu, aut tragaedijs captivorum: sed qui Deo vult placere, eum oportet bonum
esse, non sulum action, sed etiam proposito justorum, and honestorum operum.
Plato in Epinomide (...) etc. Cato, Si Deus est animus, etc. Hic tibi praecipue
sit puramente colendus.
Zaleuchus, Plato, Cato, for inward justice, may be as easily answered,
namely, that no works of our own be they outward, or inward, will serve the
turn to justify us before God. For fortitude, and temperance: in the one,
they sought their own or some other ends, not Gods glory: in the other, there
was no more, then a restraint, as in the case of chastity in Alexander toward
Darius daughters: so in the rest depending thereupon, neither was that ever in
their thought, which moved Joseph to that singular resolution; Shall I do this
thing, and sin against God? I conclude against all humane works, that our
justification to consist only Ita clamat universa Doctrina prophetica, and
Apostolica. Lament. 3.22. Psalm. 88.1. and 89.1. Es. 64.6. Mark 5.34. Acts 15.9.
Romans 3.28 and 4.3. 1 Cor. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.8. Conspirant una voce patres Ambros. in
C. 3. ad Romans August. in Ioh. C. 8. and Psalm. 88. Ex fide enim vivimus, and
quia sola fides Christi mundat, non credentes soluti sunt ab emundatione.
Chrysostom. super Pauli verba, Gloriatio exclusa est. (...), Hilar. in Cap. 9. Math.
Bernard Sermon. 32. in Cantica Hesych. in Levit. l. 1. C. 2. Thom. Aquinas in
hymno quem magno boatu in plateis decantant Pontificij, in quo verba haec
extant, Ad firmandum cor sincerum, Sola fides sufficit
in the mercy of God through faith in Christ alone, excludes them utterly to
have any part therein, without confidence in him. Will thou therefore walk
safely? I am the way, says Ioh. 14.6.
our Savior. Will thou not be seduced Aug. super Ioh.
by subtilty? I am the truth. Will thou not dye the second death? I am the life.

CHRISTIAN OFFICES CRYSTAL GLASS. OR St. Ambrose Bishop of Millan his Offices,
Book III.
CHAP. I. That the Saints and holy servants of God, work the greatest, and
strangest things in silence, and quietness,: which is made manifest in Moses
and Elisha.
THe princely and prophetically anointed of the Lord, divine, and holy David
has taught us, to walk up, and down in our own heart as it were in an
ample, and large gallery, and there to converse, and confer with it, as he
with his, none otherwise then with some chamber-fellow, that so we might in
secretest, and deepest meditation of mind, as he with himself, talk, and
speak to our selves. This is his meaning in his acclamation, in that sacred
hymn. I said Psalm. 39.1. Sept. (...) Hebr. amarti of amar which signifies as
well cogitavit as dixit, and therefore the Geneva has thought, and this
answers sitly to our authors intention.
I will take heed to my ways. Solomon likewise his son advises to the same
purpose, Drink Prove. 5.15.17.18.
thou of the water of thine own cisterne, and of the rivers out of thine own
well, that is to say, use thou thine own counsel. For deep water is the
counsel in the heart of a man. Let them (says he) be thine, even thine only,
and not the strangers with thee, and rejoice thou with the wife of thy youth,
let her be as the loving hind, and pleasant roe, delight thou in her love
continually, and whenever thou Prove. 6.22.
walk talk with her, tie her instructions about thy neck, Bind them Ver. 21
and chap. 33. Here is the wise man's consultation with the Lady wisdom in the
secret chambers of his heart, and this is his daily exercise joined with the
whole intention of mind in all assiduity.
always upon thy heart, and write them upon Cervus amicitiae, et pullus
gratiarum consabulentur tecum.
the tables thereof. Let Exodus 14.15. and 17.11. When we are least in outward
employment, which is the solitude here meant, then to be most busy in holy
meditation, and heavenly prayer, is to make our spare time most advantageous.
the stagge of freindship, and chicken of thankesgiving chatt with thee.
Wherefore Scipio was not the first, that knew he was never less alone, then
when he was a-alone, neither less at leisure, then when he was at leisure,
before him Moses knew it, who when he held his This lifting up of his hands was
the elevation and ejaculation of the darts of supplication in his heart to the
Lord of hosts that is mighty in battle. Such leisure and lazines as it were to
the outward sight was to the all-seeing God, and searcher of the reins a right
savoury remedy to safeguard his people, and to destroy the adversary.
peace cried aloud, when he stood still, and seeming to do nothing fought
strongly, neither did fight only, but albeit not so much, as once touching the
enemies, triumphed over them. So idle in show was he, and void of bodily
labor, that he must have others to hold up his hands, yet was he not less
occupied then Joshua himself, that took up arms to the terror of the
Amalekite. For with his feeble hands, and wanting supporters to bear them up
he vanquished the obdurate foe, which the captain with his soldiers, though
marching valiantly against them, without them could never have done. Wherefore
in respect hereof Moses may be truly said in silence to speak, and at his time
of leisure Ver. 9.12.
standing and sitting still to work marveilous things.

But in the vacation of his, when leaving his residence over his charge he did
reside forty Exodus 19.3. and 24.18.
days, in the mount, how commodious was it? For the law of the decalogue, the
only rule and direction of the whole state of mankind, was then upon the fyle
In secret we have conference with God, as the Psalm. 85.8. Sept. (...). Iunius
expos. from the Hebr. makes for this sense: Quid conqueror? quin potius mihi
auscultandum est, quod loquatur Deus.
Psalmist notes, I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me, and how
much more is it if God speak with one, then if he speak with himself? This
way he found out to resolve him concerning the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm.
62.4.5. and 73.17. and 91.1. Here to fly to God in secret, is to have him
speak in thee. To meditate on his works, Psalm. 77.12 on precepts, and to
delight in his statutes, Psalm. 119.15.16. is a way to it. In his word God
speaks to us, we in prayer to him. These means used, he comes in to us as a
Councellor, 1 Ioh. 3.20.
until I went into the the Sanctuary of God. The Apostles passing by with
their very Acts 5.15.
shadow did cure the diseased, the touching of the garments, or Chapt. 19.12.
Thus was medicine administered in silence by communion with God, secret virtue
infused.
handkerchiffes that came from their bodies did heal the sick. Helias spoke
the 1 Kings 12.1. James 5.17.
word that it might not rain, and it rained not upon the earth for three
years, and six months, and he but spoke the word, that the Verse 14.
meal in the barrel should not be wasted, nor the oil in the cruse
diminished, unto the time that the Lord should send rain upon the earth, and
it came to pass. This his confidence was grounded upon his secret speech with
the Lord. And because most men delight themselves with military feats, which
is the more excellent of the two, to gain the battle by the strength of an
army, or by his own merit? Elisha went not out of 2 Kings 6.13.
Dothan when the King of Syria made great wars upon Israel, but yet
disappointed his weighty wars, diverse Counsels, and subtle devises intended
against it. This he did by the power of Gods Spirit, beholding all the
cogitations of man's heart, and by such instinct was able to give caveat for
prevention of whatsoever evil. The army likewise which hereupon came to
apprehend him, he by virtue thereof lead like a flock of silly sheep into
Samaria, as into a pinfold. What a rut made this rout of Aram? but how soon
did his holy petition root them out, that they came no more into the Verse 23.
land of Israel? Let us compare this tranquillity, quiet life, and free from
molestation of the Prophet with that of other men. For, others that they may be
at rest, withdraw their thoughts from the world, and themselves from the
assemblies of men, go out either into the secret woods, and solitary fields,
or within the City disburden their minds of cares, and depose themselves in a
quiet and secure life. But Elisha in his solitariness, either 2 Kings 2.14.
divides Jordan, that he may pass over, or procures water to refresh 2 Kings
3.9.17.20.
the host in time of extremity, or a Chapt. 4.16, 17. Verse 35.
son to the barren Shunamite, or Verse 40.
raises the dead, or takes death out of the pot, or satisfies an Verse 43,
44.
hundred of the people, a surplusage remaining, with twenty barley loaves, or
makes the bitter 2 Kings 2.22.
waters of Jericho sweet, Chapt. 6.6.
the iron to swim at the instance of a child of the Prophets, the Chapt. 5.14.
leprosy to depart, fecundity, Chapt. 7.1. Here are recited 11. miracles of
Elisha when he was living, and there is a 12 mentioned after his death by
touching his bones, 2 Kings 13.21.
and plenty to succeed in the place of grievous famine, and unheard of penury.
When therefore can the just be alone which is always with God? when can he be
solitary, which is never separated from Christ? Who shall Romans 8.35.38.39.
separate us from the love of Christ? This is the Apostles interrogatorie,
whereunto he no less piously, then peremptorily replyeth, I am persuaded that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord. When can he be vacant from business, which never cease from some
good desert, for the consummating thereof as much as may be? how can he be
circumscribed in a place, whose the whole world is in possession? By what
estimate can he be defined, that in opinion, and thought, can never be
comprehended? For he is as one 2 Cor. 6.9.10.
unknown, and yet known, as dying, yet behold he lives, as chastened, yet
not killed, as sorrowing, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many
rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things. Why has a just man
nothing, but because he looks after nothing, but what is constant, and of
continuance, which is not here to be found? Why possesses he all things, but
because he respects only what is honest, which to be possessed of, is more
then Solomon's magnificence? Wherefore though he seems poor to another, to
himself he is rich, for that he is to be valewed not after the rate of those
things which are momentany, transitory, and invisible to the eye of the body,
but of those which are permanent, everlasting, and 2 Cor. 4.18. and 5.1.
invisibly built up of God from heaven.

CHAP. II. Honesty, and profit among us Christians to be one, as being such as
follow not after temporal, but eternal commodity.
FOR as much as we have handled before what is honest, and what is profitable,
it remains that we should now compare them together, and withal search out
what is to be followed. As there we have discussed, first, whether that (which
we propose to our selves) be honest or Turpe.
dishonest, then whether it be profitable or unprofitable: so some think this
further quaere to be made, whether it be that, which is honest, or that which
is profitable, as divided one from the other, which Christians must stick
unto. But we here admonish, lest we might seem to bring in these as
repugnant one to the other, which we have showed to be one: neither that by any
possible means to be honest, unless it be profitable, neither any thing to
be profitable, but what is honest, because we embrace not the wisdom of the
flesh, with whom the profit of this pecuniarie commodity is of more worth, but
the wisdom which is of God, with whom those things which are of high
estimation in this world, are accounted Phil. 3.7.8.
loss. This (...) a deed happily or rightly done.
right proportioning which is a perfect, and absolute duty proceeds from the
true fountain of virtue. Under this kind according as our ordinary speech does
import, there is a second common duty which is not of so high and singular
note, because it may be common to many. For to take up the gains of money is a
thing familiar to many: to be delighted with a more delicate banquet, choiser,
and sweeter dishes is a thing usual. But to fast, to be abstemious, is found
in few: and not to covet after that is another man's, is rare. Contrariwise to
repine at another, and not to be content with our own, is to be copartner
with the greater part. There be some therefore primarie, some middle offices.
The primarie are frequented by few, the middle by many. To come to speech, in
the same words there is oftentimes a difference. For we call God otherwise
good, otherwise just, then we call men; likewise in another manner, and in an
higher degree do we style him wise. And this are we taught in the Gospel. Be
ye Math. 5.48. Which implies perfection to be in plenitude in his divine
nature, in his regenerate children in great defect, and the force of the
precept is no more then to move us to contend for the price of that high
calling of God in Christ, who is made unto us perfect wisdom, and
righteousness.
perfect, as your father which is in heaven is perfect. I read of Paul that he
was perfect, and not perfect. For when he had said: Not that I have as yet
received, or were as yet perfect; but I follow, if by any means I may Phil.
3.14.
attain: he adds by and by, whosoever therefore of us are perfect. For the
form of perfection is double, one sort having the middle or parts, the other
the full numbers or degrees. One sort here below, another there above, one sort
according to man's possibility, 1 Cor. 1.30.
another according to his future perfection. Phil. 3.12. (...) Verse 14.
But God is just in all his numbers and degrees, wise above all, perfect in all
things. Verse 15. Perfectio partium, and graduum.
There is a difference also among men. Daniel is in one manner wise, of whom it
is said, Ezech. 28.3.
Behold, thou art wiser then Daniel, that is prophetically, and politically,
James 3.17.
some others in another manner, that is, spiritually; Verse 15.
thirdly, there is a carnal, and a worldly kind of wisdom, of the Luke 16.
former St. James speaks, tearming it earthly, sensual and divellish, of the
latter, our Romans 12.16. so the rich man. Prove. 28.11. the Church of Laodicea,
Rev. 3.17. so the sluggard, Prove. 26.16. so the covetous Prove. 23.4.
Savior in the story of the unjust steward, The children of this world are
wiser in their generation, then the children of light. There is beside a
conceited wisdom. Solomon's in another sort, and distinct from those (being in
natural things) excelling therein all the ancient, the wisest of the 1 Kings
4.30.
East, and of Egypt. For it is one thing to be wise in an ordinary, another
thing to be so in a special fashion. He which is wise as men ordinarily are,
he is so in temporal things, and for himself, as to get something from
another, and to add the same to his own estate. He which is specially wise,
regards not his own profit, but looks to that which is eternal, sets
his whole affection upon that which is common, and honest, not seeking that
which is to himself, but that which is of utility to all. This therefore is
the rule between honesty, and utility, which if we keep, we cannot err,
namely, that a just man thinks that he ought to take from no man, neither
augment his own to pull from another estate. This rule does the Apostle
prescribe; 1 Cor. 10.23.
All things are lawful, but all things are not expedient, all things are
lawful, but all things edify not, let Ver. 24. Phil. 2.4. Romans 12.10.16.
no man seek his own, but every one that which is another man's. That is, let
no man seek his own, but another wealth; let no man seek his own, but
another honor: let no man seek his own credit, or praise, but what
belongs to another: in meekness of mind, every man Phil 2.3. Non quae sua
sunt singuli cogitantes, sed quae aliorum, is before. Prove. 9.12.
esteeming other above himself. The Spirit of God by Solomon speaks
evidently the same in the Proverbs, Bono tuo meaning thy virtue cannot be hid,
nor shut up, but must needs break out, as the light, send forth as the box of
Balm, or Spiknard, when it is opened, the sweet savor thereof to them that
are about thee.
If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self: that is, for thine own
good, and thy neighbors, for so do the words implie. But if thou shall grow
wicked thou only shall suck out the dregs of thy sins. For as the just, so
the wiseman cares, and consulteth for the benefit of others, Quandoquidem
consors sui est vtriusque forma virtutis.
since the form of both these virtues is like competible of what is her own.

CHAP. III. Of repressing calumny, and exhibiting beneficence, A passing
proof of the latter to be extended to all is to prove the harmony of the
members, and their mutual obsequiousnes.
IF any man therefore will please all men in all things, let him not seek that
which is profitable to himself but to all men, Phil. 2.6.7. (...) stripped him
of all, brought him to nothing (...). Afterward ver. 8. he expounds (...)
exinanivit by (...) humiliauit. But observe against the Marcionits who deny the
truth of the humane nature of Christ that it is not the purpose of the Apostle
here to teach what the humane nature of our Savior was, but what he was in the
state of his humiliation.
as did Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 10.33. and 24. Romans 15.2.3.
For this is to be conformable to Christ not to seek that which is an other
man's, to detract nothing from him to get it to himself For Christ the Lord
when he was in the form of God made himself of no reputation, that he might
take upon him the form of man, whom he might enrich with the virtues of his
own works. Do thou therefore spoil him whom Christ has adorned, do thou
strippe him whom Christ has clothed? This thou do when thou desire thy
profits to be increased by another man's losses. Consider O man whence thou
tokest thy name had thou not it from the Homo ab humo.
ground which takes nothing from any man, but does bestow all things upon all
men, and administreth diverse fruits for the use of all living creatures? Thence
comes humanity a special domestical virtue, which helps her consort. Let
the frame it self of thine own body, and the parts thereof teach thee. Does
one member challenge to it self the office of another, as the eye the office of
the mouth, the mouth of the eye or the foot the ministry of the hand, or the
hand of the foot? Moreover the hands themselves, the right and the left have
for the most part their office divided, and if thou change the use of them, it
is against nature, thou may sooner cast off the whole man, then thou may
alter the ministry of thy members, thou do not feed thy self with thy left
hand nor remove what molesteth thee with thy right hand, but when necessity
compels. Grant this virtue to the eye, that it may take away understanding
from the head, hearing from the ear, thinking from the mind, smelling from the
nostrels, tasting from the mouth, and assume it to it self, would not this
dissolve the whole state of nature? whence the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 17.
If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? We are therefore all
one body, and diverse members, but all necessary to the body. For one member
cannot say unto another I have no need of thee, Ver. 22.
yea much rather those members of the body which seem to be more feeble are
necessary, and require more care of their preservation, and if Ver. 26.
one member suffer all the members suffer with it. Wherefore how grievous a
thing is it, that we draw away any thing from him for whom we ought to suffer:
and to whom we owe the fellowship and aid of our ministry, do we go about
to defraud, and hurt him: This therefore is the law of nature, which binds us
to all humanity that we each toward other bring to the parts of one body,
neither may we think that any thing ought to be taken away, seeing it is
against the law of nature, not to help 1 Pet. 3.11. Isa. 1.16. cease to do
evil, learn to do well.
one another. For we are therefore borne that the members accord to the
members, one jointly adhere to other ferue and obey themselves in their mutual
ministry. Where one is wanting in duty, the rest neglect their due service: if
the hand pull out the eye, does it not deny the use of its own labor to it
self? If it wound the foot what an impeachment shall it receive for the
proceeding of its own actions? And how much more grievous is it for the whole
body, then for one member to withhold its care? Now if in one member the whole
body be then so violated, as when the fellowship of the whole humane nature is
dissolved in the separation of one man, it follows thereupon that the nature
of humane kind, and the congregation of the holy church which does arise, and
grow into one body knit, and compacted together in the unity of faith, and love
is likewise infringed, and broken. Thereby also Christ the Lord who dyed for
all, shall greive that his own blood is evacuated, and made of none effect.
What other thing likewise does the law of the Lord himself enforce, when it
prescribes that thou withhold nothing from thy neighbor for thine own
commodity sake, as that thou remove Prove. 22.28. Deuteronomy. 27.17.
not thy ancient bounds, which thy fathers have set, that thou bring home Exodus
23.4.5. Mat. 5.44.
thy brothers ox going astray, that thou command Exodus 22.2.
the theife to die that thou defraud James 4.5. Levit. 19.13. Deuteronomy. 24.14.
not the hireling of his wages, nor take increase Exodus 22.25.
of thy money? For to succor him that has not is a part of humanity but it is
a token of hardness of heart, to extort more from him then thou shall give
him. For that if therefore the poor needed thy help, because he had not
whereby of his own to restore, is it not a wicked thing in thee if thou
require more of him under the show of kindness when he was no way able to make
payment of what was less? Do thou therefore discharge the debtor from the
danger of another, that thou may damnifie him in respect of thy self: and
do thou call this courtesy where is professed iniquity? Et hanc humanitatem
vocas vbi est iniquitatis auctio? an open sale of sin.
Herein we excel the other living creatures, because they know not how to
bestow ought wild beasts pull away by violence, mankind administreth help.
Whence the Psalmist, Psalm. 37.21.26. (...). Sept. Call hajom Hebr. both import
mercy, and lending to be in a continual course in the righteous.
the righteous is merciful and lends. There be some notwithstanding on whom
the very beasts, bestow succor and supports; For by collation and fostering
they nourish their offspring, and the birds too by bringing them food satisfy
their young. But to man only it is given to feed all as their own. This is due
by the right it self of nature. But if it be not lawful not to give, how is
it lawful to draw away? The laws command what has been taken away by the
injury of the person, or by heaping up to our own use, to be restored: which
they do to this end either to deteyne the thief from stealing, or to deter
him and reclaim him from it by punishment, howbeit let it be granted, that
some man fears not punishment, or derideth it. Is this of any weight to give
liberty to wrest from another? This is a servile vice, and familiar to those of
the basest condition, so much opposite to nature, that mere poverty may seem
rather to extort it, then nature persuade the same. Albeit so it is, that the
thefts of the poor are private, and secret, of the rich open and public. But
what is so contrary to nature as to offer violence to another, for thy own
vtility sake? when natural affection instigateth to watch, to undergo
trouble, to undertake labor for the good of all, and when it is reputed a
glory for every one, by his own proper peril to seek the tranquillity of the
multitude and when he holds it more acceptable, to have repulsed the ruins
likely to have fallen upon his country, then his own dangers, and does deem
it better, that he has spent his travel for the welfare of the same, then if
he had lead his life in all manner of ease, voluptuousness, and prosperity.

CHAP. IIII. Our commodities not to be sought by other men's discommodities,
WHerefore we collect from hence, that a man which is formed according to the
direction of nature, it he obey it, cannot hurt another. That if he hurt any
man, he does violate nature, neither gain so much profit by it to himself,
as disadvantage. For what wound can be heavier then that of the inner
conscience? What is more severe then a domestical judge, by which every one is
found guilty to himself, and does reprove his own heart, as having unworthily
wronged his brother? Which the Scripture Prove. 9.7, 8.
does in no small measure condemn, saying, out of the mouth of fools is the
staff of contumely. Therefore he is convinced of folly that does use
reproach. Is not this more to be avoided then death, then loss, then poverty,
banishment, the grief of debility? Who does not account an infirmity of the
body, or a loss of patrimony a less evil then the infirmity of the mind, or
loss of credit? It is manifest therefore that the same ought to be desired,
and retained of all which brings the same utility to every one in particular,
which it does to all in general, and that nothing ought to be judged
profitable, but that which grows unto a common benefit. For how can that be
for the commodity of one, which is for the discommodity of all? Verily, he
which is unprofitable to all, seems to me not possibly to be able to be
profitable to himself. For if there be one law of nature to all, there is
one, and the same utility universally reaching to all. For if there be one law
of the universe we are bound by the law of nature to provide also for it.
Wherefore it is not his part which would according to the law of nature
provided for another, contrary to that law to hurt him. For if they which run
in a race are for their better information so instructed before hand, that no
man presumes to supplant, and subvert his fellow, but every one striveth with
all his power, and whatsoever properation to obtain the victory: how much more
then in this our combat to gain a better victory, should we abstain from all
fraud, and circumvention? Some put here a quaere, whether if a wise man be in
danger of shipwreck, he may without injury extort from an unwise man his
board, whereupon relyeth his hopeful evasion, and so to save himself, deprive
him of his life? Albeit it may seem better to me in respect of the common good
for a wise man then for a fool to escape shipwreck, notwithstanding it
seems that a just, and wise Christian ought not to seek to preserve his life
by the death of another, as being such a one, who when he falls into the
hands of one armed, and being stricken may not strike again, lest while he
savegardeth his person, he contaminateth his piety. The sentence in the Gospel
is clear for it. Put up thy Math. 26.51, 52.
sword: for whosoever strikes with the sword shall perish with it: What thief
is more detestable then the persecutor that came to take away the life of our
Savior? But he which would heal all men by his wounds, would not suffer
himself to be defended by the wounding of his persecutors. But why do thou
judge thy self better then another, when it is the part of a Christian to
prefer another before himself, to arrogate nothing in his own respect, to
take no honor upon him, nor to vendicate the price of his desert? To conclude,
why do thou not inure thy self rather to suffer evil, then to be guilty of
evil in scraping from another? What is so much against nature as not to be
contented with that thou have, but strangely to incroach Ambire turpiter.
basely to be ambitious? For if honesty be according to nature, (and who can
deny it, seeing God made all things at the first exceeding good) turpitude, and
beastly dishonesty must needs be an adversary thereunto. No marvel therefore
if these two cannot agree, when they be in the law of nature so far
discrepant, and at variance between themselves.

CHAP. V. Nothing is to be desired of a wise man but honesty, and our welfare
to be less esteemed then it. David's high commendation is put for instruction.
But now that we may lay the Vt ponamus fastigium.
ridge, and put our last hand to this building, let this be the directory to
guide the whole work, that nothing be in our desire, but what is honest. For
a wise man is altogether for honesty. For sincerity an unseparable adjunct to
honesty, is so averse from fraud, could he shroud himself under it, and make
it a cloak to cover the guilt of his crime, yet would he not. For he is first
guilty to himself, before others judge him so, neither is the publication of
the foulness of his fact so shameful to him, as the conscience, and torture
at home. Which to be so, we are to teach not by the feigned fables, and idle
disputes (as some account them, though witty resemblances of natures
impressions) of the Poets and Philosophers of old, but by the true, and
undoubted examples of holy and just men of our sacred profession. I will not
infer here Gyges, which upon the fall of some great rain an earthquake
following, found according to Plato a brazen horse, and in the sides thereof a
golden ring upon the finger of a dead man, which in a covetous desire he
pulled off. But when he came to the Kings shepherds, whence he was by chance
turning the Palam ejus annuli ad palmam converteret. (...). Plat. Pol. 2. is
rendered pala annuli, and pala in our most approved books the bezill, or colet
of a ring: and our sealing ring, everywhere in frequent use, cause this, and
re, and nomine, not to be unknown.
bezill of the ring toward the palm of his hand, he saw them all, and they
saw not him: afterward again when he turned it back to its place he was
straightway seen of them all. Now he thus becoming witty, and able to do
wonders, taking advantage of this opportunity, fell in with the Queen, and
which is ever the next project of such, slew the King with his guard, and got
the kingdom of Lydia. Give this ring, says Plato, to a wise man, that by the
benefit thereof when he is a delinquent he may lurk in secret. But O silly
shelter! for hereby he can no more avoid the contagion of sin, then if he
committed it openly. For it is not the hope of impunity, but the strong hold of
innocence that must be a harbor for a wise man. Neither 1 Timothy 1.9.
is the law given to the just, but to the unjust: because the just has the law
of his own mind, and the rule of his own equity, and justice to measure by,
as being a law unto himself, and therefore he is not called back from sin
by the terror of punishment, but by the rule of honesty. Wherefore that we may
return to our purpose in the argument in hand, let us not receive things
fabulous for true, but let true examples for fabulous only take place, and
prevail with us. For what need I feign the wide opening of the earth, the
brazen horse, the golden ring found upon the finger of the dead, whereof there
was so great force that he which put it on might be seen at his pleasure, and
when he would not be seen withdraw himself? It tends to this end, whether a
wise man though he might use this ring, whereby he might conceal his
wickedness, and attain a kingdom, yet would not thereby be brought so to do,
but rather judge the contagion of sin a greater evil then the pain of
punishment? or whether under the hope of impunity, and escape from punishment,
he would adventure to commit the same?

To let pass the idle imagination of the virtue of a ring, we are able out of
the records of the Scripture to show, that a wise man understanding (if he
once gave admission to sin, that he might both lie hid, and reign as a king,
but contrariwise perceiving the danger of his life, if he declined the same;
yet must choose rather the peril of his life to be freed from the
wickedness, then the wickedness to get himself a kingdom. When David fled 1 Samuel 26.
from the face of king Saul, and he pursued him with three thousand chosen men
to slay him, being with Abner his captain, and all his army fallen into a dead
sleep he might have taken away his life, he spared it, yea protected it, that
none other might spill it. Neither when he was moved by Verse 8.
Abishai to smite him to the earth would he, but answered, Verse 9.
Who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? And concerning
the admitting of the least revenge upon Saul for all the evil that he had done
against him his heart smote him. For it might seem a small matter for him to
cut off the lap of his garment, but even for this he was 1 Samuel 24.6.
touched in his conscience. In both these he preferred his innocence before his
safety, pious fear before impious security, Chapt. 27.23.
exilement before a kingdom obtained by violence. Without that ring of Gyges,
John the Baptist might have escaped the sword of Herod, his own silence alone
might have effected this, that he might have bin seen, and yet not slain of
him. But because for the preservation of his life he suffered himself not to
sin, neither could bear an others offense, thereby he procured his own
death. Verily they which deny it to be impossible that Gyges should be hidden
by the benefit of his ring cannot deny, but that it was possible for John the
Baptist to have held his peace. But the fable though it has not the force of
the truth, yet reason persuades that albeit a just man should be able to
conceal himself, yet should he then in that manner decline sin, as if he
were not able so to do, and that putting on a ring he should not seek therein
a veil for his own person and wicked plot, but putting on Christ and his
righteousness, should labor to have his life, such a one likewise as
consecrated to God, covered in him as the Apostle speaks, our life is hid
with Christ in Col. 3.3.
God. Wherefore let no man here strive to outstrippe others, to arrogate to
himself singularity, or in vaunting wise to bear away the bell from all men.
Christ is herein to be imitated, who would not here be Mark 1.34.35. Luke
4.41. John 5.13. and 6.15. he preached not in the marketplace, but in the
temple in the synagogues, in the deserts out of the ships.
known, who would not the Gospel to be preached in his name while he remained
on the earth. But came in mean estate, not manifesting his glory to the world.
Therefore let us in like sort by our Saviors example desire to be obscure, fly
applause, and worldly renown. It is much better to be here being on our
pilgrimage in humility, and there when the time of refreshing shall be in
glory. This is that, which the Apostle both by his incomparable example and
precept does press us unto: Col. 3.4.
when Christ your life, says he, shall appear then shall ye appear with him
in glory.

CHAP. VI. In the time of famine their ought to be provision made for food,
no holding fast, but liberal imparting with goods greedily scraped together,
prizes of grain, or other victuals not to be inhaunced. The Presidents of
Joseph, and the covetous rich man in the Gospel laid out diametrically for
illustration.
WHerefore let not vtility ovecome honesty, but honesty vtility. I say that
utilitie which is estimated acccording to the opinion of the vulgar. Let
avarice be mortified, let concupiscence, and the desire of riches perish. An
holy man denies that ever he entered the deep lists of worldly negotiation, Job
21.25.
because to make gain Psalm. 15.5.
upon the augmentation of the prizes of things, is not the part of simplicity,
but of Job 21.5.
versutiousnesse, and guile. Another Prove. 11.26. Moneha of manah prohibentem,
comprimentem abscondentem.
affirms that he which withdraws, Prove. 11.26. Moneha of manah prohibentem,
comprimentem abscondentem.
and hourdeth up corn to Captans pretia frumenti.
increase the price, the people will curse him. It is an overruled case, all
scruple therein is removed, and what manner of controversy, or ground of
arguing can there be left, when another alleges husbandry to be accounted
laudable among all nations, the earth being tilled simply of it self to send
forth threefold increase, he which has sowed more, more to be approved, where
is more industry bestowed, such not to be defrauded, the negligence rather in
leaving the country vnmannured to be reprehended. I have plowed carefully,
says he, I have sowed plentifully, I have used all diligence every way to
foster, and preserve it, I have gathered it in with good increase, I have laid
it up advisedly, I have kept it faithfully, I have been provident to retain
it by me without the least detriment, or diminution.

Now in the time of famine I sell the same, I succor, and sustain therewith
the hungry; I sell not another, but mine own grain, neither for more then
others, but for less. What deceit is here, when many would be in great peril
of their lives, if they might not find where they might buy for their money?
Is industry accused for a crime? is diligence reprehended, is providence and
circumspection condemned? He may likewise peradventure allege that Joseph did
in great abundance get together provision into the storehouses, in scarcity
open the granaries for sale. Is any one compelled to buy it at a dear rate?
verily we force him not. Is violence to be offered to the buyer? Fair leave is
given to every one to buy, injury is offered to no man.

These things being thus reasoned upon, according to every man's capacity, or
affection; another steppeth out, and says, husbandry truly is good, which
ministers provision to all, which by mere labor makes the earth fruitful,
and that simply without all fraud. Moreovet, if any fault shall be committed,
the more will be the husbandmans own loss: dressing his ground skilfully, and
painfully, he shall reap the better croppe, sowing the pure grain of wheat,
he shall reap a purer harvest. A fruitful soil restores what it received
with manifold increase: a fertile field renders back what is committed to it
with much usury. Out of the return of fat lands thou have reason to expect a
reward of thy labors, out of rich ground just advantage: but why do thou
convert thine own exercise of body, the indulgency, and bounty of nature to
deceit? Why do thou envy the common burden of the earth man's use? Why do
thou mince, and diminish to the people her heaped measure? Wherefore should
thou be so miserable, when God is so rich in mercy? when he sends plenty, how
unseasonable, how unsavory, and distasteful is it for thee to affect and
effect penury? Wherefore through thy abusing the good creatures of God, do
thou cause the poor to pray for sterility? For when upon thy hoording up the
corn, the price is increased, and they debarred of the benefit of the
fecundity of the earth, they wish rather that she had withheld her fruit,
then that by thy overbusie, and malignant spirit, her pregnant womb should be
misdeemed as withered, and dried up. Thou labourest to make a dearth of corn,
and penury of food, thou grievest at the plentiful burden of the fruitful
soil, thou bewailest the public fertility, deplorest that the barnes are
filled with store, inquirest, Exploras quando sterilior proventus sit quando
exilior partus, votis tuis gaudes arrisisse maledictum, ut nihil usquam
nosceretur.
and searchest for a scanter increase for a thinner croppe; rejoycest the curse
upon the ground to have answered thy desires, that nothing might grow in any
place. The state of things being thus, thou exultest at the coming in of thine
own harvest, thou think this a time worthy thy labor to hoord up, when
others are wringed, this thou namest industry, this diligence, when it is
nothing but crafty counsel, and cunning conveyance to pinch the poor people
of their sustenance: yet this which is a subtle invention, and wicked policy
thou call a Or a relief to thee after some hard distress.
remedy. What may this dealing be termed, robbery or biting usury? For as
robbers attend their times to lay hold of passengers: so do thou wait, and
epsy thy opportunity, whereby as an unhappy, cruel, and crafty copesinate
thou may incroach upon the Commons to gripe away their goods, and Captantur
tanquam latrocinij tempora, quibus in viscera hominum tanquam durus insidiator
obrepas. In many kingdoms there is a legal restraint for the usurer, that
deals in money, but none for him that trades in wheat, he keeps it fast
therefore in his granaries under lock and key, until he may have a vent at
the highest rate, and then making open sale thereof, he passes it away to them
that will give most: and if there chance at any time to come in a glut, it goes
not then off, but must be reserved, and set apart for a better mart.
creep into their bowels to devour them. Imminent danger by his thick
casting in gains, as it were at a Lottery, into the usurers books hangs over,
and is daily heaped upon the head of the borrower. Thou multipliest by usurie
thy closely couched grain, as an usurer thou hidest thy wheat in a corner,
yet do as a common Factor make open sale of it.

Quid imprecaris male omnibus quia major futura sit fames, quasi nihil frugum
super sit, quasi infaecundior annus sequatur? Where seems to be quia for quasi
and the (...) maimed, which is the cause that the copy being imperfect, and so
often elsewhere, there lies no necessary tie upon the translator.
Why do thou use Out of a self-love to envy the welfare of the world, out of
a private lucre to labor after public loss, is a preposterous, and
pernicious craft.
malediction against all Countries, as if thereby the famine would grow sorer,
the year would become more barren, no fruits would be left? This thy cursed
lucre is against the common good of all mankind. Holy Joseph opened the barn
doors to all, shut them against none: neither took he the price of the
provision of corn, but set a perpetual, and no ways unsupportable tax upon
the subject in stead thereof: he Like to Nehemiah chap. 5.14.
enriched not himself thereby, but so disposed of things in his provident
care, that he prevented the like exigence in the ages to come.

Thou have read what construction the Lord Jesus made of the doings of that
covetous worldling, and his greedy scraping together, being a cruel Captatorem
frumentarij pretij.
inhauncer of the rates of corn, whose Luke 12.17
possessions brought in so great abundance, who how much soever he had, yet
brake he out into such complaint of his extremity, as if he had been the most
necessitous beggar: What shall I do? I have not where to lay my goods, I will
pull down my barnes, and build greater: When he knew none other but that his
soul might be taken from him the next hour. He knew not whar he might do,
but remained as one in a woeful straight, and wanting food to sustain his
life. A strange humor, his barnes would not hold his harvest, and yet he
Prove. 13.7. Whatsoever he has, he is sensible of nothing else but of poverty,
his faith is settled upon nothing else but necessity.
repines at his need. Wherefore Solomon speaks truly, he that withdraws
Prove. 11.26. Relinquet illud nationibus, non haeredibus.
Corn shall leave it to the Leom of lom gens Ib.
nations not to the heirs, because the gain of covetousnes comes not to the
hands of the successors. For what is unlawfully gotten strangers devouring it,
it is scattered, Prove. 11.29.
as it were, with certain raging blasts of winds, and he adds Ibid. 11.26.
He that snatcheth up grain is cursed of the people, but blessing is upon the
head of him that sells it. Thou see therefore, that it is an honest man's
part, where corn is, to disperse it, and bestow it not to inhaunce the prizes
thereof to the aggreivance of the commons. That is not therefore to be reckoned
for If charity, pity, and piety may be heard speak, they will all with one
voice cry down such vtility.
vtility, where more prejudice falls upon honesty, then comes credit to utility.

CHAP. VII. Strangers in the time of famine not to be driven from the city:
which by certain examples produced, is proved not only to be dishonest, but
also discommodious.
BUT they likewise, who inhibit strangers the benefit of the city, as to expel
them at such time as they ought to be helped, to separate them from the
commerce of their common mother, to deny them the fruit of her birth diffused
to all her children, to Averruncare to purge as are vines with vine-hookes.
renounce their society of conversing together already begun, with whom there
was a common right with them, to be unwilling in the time of necessity to
impart assistance, is it a thing to be allowed of? Wild beasts abandon not
those of their own kind, and shall a man exclude his own flesh? Both wild,
and tame beasts take the food which the earth administreth as common to all
creatures. Even these are friends, and each of them how feirce soever, foster
them of their own sort, only man, which above all should cherish the sprigs
of the same stock, is at deadly feude with his own blood. How much better did
that person, who when he was grown in years, the commons, (as in the case of
famine, or other like extremity their custom is) seeking to inhibite strangers
the city, called together, as being more eminent, and bearing the charge of the
Lieutenant, the chief, and wealthier citizens, required a common consultation,
and being assembled showed, That it was a barbarous thing to thrust out
strangers from among them, and no better then to cast off common humanity, and
as great an evil as to deny meat to a sick man ready to perish. We suffer
not the very dogs under our tables to be unfed, and do we extrude them of
our own mold, made after the image of God, out of doors, and so affamish
them? How incommodious also were it so much people to be made dead to the
world, and on whom cruel Quos dira conficeret labes.
confusion might take hold, so many great persons memory to perish Quantos
vrbi suae perire.
to their city, who were wont to be an aid to us, either in paying subsidies,
or in matter of traffic, and merchandise, and that wholly of themselves
Neminem fama aliena juvari.
without the assistance of others of more credit, at the utmost we may
protract the time, we cannot expel the famine: yea rather so many dressers of
the ground so many husbandmen failing, it must needs follow, the subsidies in
grain to fail for evermore. Shall we then exclude these the city, which
heretofore have brought us in sustenance? Shall we refuse to feed these in the
time of need, and scarcity which all our lives time have fed us? To be
punctual and to touch what is present and now prefixed before our eyes, how
great, and without number are the things, It derogates from the honor of
Christian religion, and the power of the Gospel to believe, that because
strangers dwell among us, we our selves shall want provision.
which at this very instance are supplied by them to our no small comfort and
commodity? Deutr. 8.3.
Man lives not by bread only. Manna was a light food, and yet the Lord gave
strength to it, to nourish above the best grain, the fattest fleshpots of
Egypt. To feed few, or many with little, or much, is all one to him that is
All-sufficient of himself. Among them remains our family, and for the most
part of them they are our parents, and progenitors. But it is to be feared
lest in banishing them upon distrust of Gods all-sufficient providence, in
relieving so great a multitude, we being few may fall into the same lapse of
distress, and bring thereby poverty, and pinching hunger upon our selves. For
first the extending of mercy was never a detriment to any, but ever an adjument
to him, whosoever he has been, that has exhibited the same. Moreover, the
provision of corn, we are to impart to them, let them make good to us by way
of commutation, and exchange, according to the worth thereof in gold. Is it so
I pray you, that these being sent away, others must be bought with our money to
till our grounds, how much cheaper therefore is it for us to feed these, then
to buy others, and feed them also? Where may thou find to furnish, and fill
up their places with the like? where can thou procure whom thou may thus
conform to thy will, so reform, bring to thy hand, keep under obedience,
make benefit of, as thou do of these? Some thou may get to fill up the
number ignorantly to undertake, looking rather for their wages, then to thy
work: but inexpert in the business of imploiment, unable to manage the
affairs of husbandry. What needs any larger discourse? The gold of the
stranger collated for it, may be in stead of the grain of our fields spent
for their maintenance. For so a revenew is regained into our treasury. Now in
thus determining this holy Senior in his sage wisdom diminished not the stock
of the city, yet subministred victual sufficient for the stranger. How
laudable therefore was this his service to men, but how much more acceptable to
God Deutr. 10.18,
who loves the stranger, and gives him food, and raiment? This great man
deserves great love, true approbation, and showing him the people of the whole
Province might truly say to the Emperor, All these have I reserved for thee,
these live by the benefit of thy Senate, those this thy Court has delivered
from death: How much more beneficial was this to the Commonweal, then that
which was last of all concluded at Rome upon the like occasion, where the
strangers were cast out of the famous city, and all of them, with their
children compelled to depart with weeping eyes? Though they had spent the
greater part of their days there, and that with the good liking of the
citizens, though they deplored no less their unexpected banishment, suddenly
interrupted friendship, violated affinity, then if they had been naturally
borne inhabitants, yet could no mitigation of the rigor take place, but they
must be gone. No reason could be yielded for it, but that the old fashion, and
fancy of the vulgar must run its course. Yet see the event contrary to their
expectation, the fecundity of the year so favored, that the city solely
wanted the importation of grain; and the people of Italy living abroad in the
country, whose children they had expelled, might have helped them in with it,
which now they had just cause to be unwilling to do. Nothing is more odious,
and unadvised then this, first to exclude such as alienated, and estranged from
their condition, without whom their estate can in no wise subsist, and then
afterward to expect, and exact duty, and observance at their hands. Why do
thou labor to cast him out, who has of his own provision to feed himself?
Nay, why do thou seek to cast him out, who feeds thee? With what
countenance can thou retain him as thy servant, whose parents thou strivest
to extrude, and throw out of doors? Do thou partake of his wheat, and not
impart to him thine affection? with what face do thou there extort
maintenance, where thou retortest unkindnesse? How misshapen a monster is this,
and how fruitless a birth? For how can that be fruitful, or any way
profitable which is not decent, which is not honest?

And in truth how much aid did Rome then defraud her self of, by depriving
strangers of her habitation? She might have kept them and escaped the famine.
For so her hope of provision had been no longer deferred then the opportunity
of the winds had fitted the Sailers to bring in their ships. To have dealt
kindly therefore, and endured forrainers, had been no less honest, and
profitable for her, then was that done by the wise Senior. Therein also had
decency been united to honesty. For by the collation of the rich (which had
been done by the wealthy among the forreiners through the exchange of moneys
for grain) to help the needy, to administer food to the hungry, and to suffer
none to want, is such honesty, and decency as none can be greater. The tillers
of the fields to have retained their places, those borne in the country not to
have been removed, and rooted out, had been so much benefit for the public
good as nothing more. Wherefore what is honest is profitable, and what is
profitable is likewise honest. Contrariwise, what is unprofitable is undecent,
and what is undecent is unprofitable.

CHAP. VIII. Honesty to be preferred before welfare is a thing established by
God. The examples of Joshua, and Caleb, with the rest of the espialls extracted
out of Scripture are brought to ratify it.
WHen would our Ancestors have sought their freedom, but that they believed it
not only to be shameful, but also discommodious to be under the servitude of
the King of Egypt? Joshua, and Caleb sent out to search the land of Canaan,
reported it to be very good, and fruitful: but the other Numb. 15.7. Deuteronomy.
1.25.
espialls, that the people of the land were strong, the cities walled, and
exceeding great, the sons of Anak who came of the Giants were there, which
ate up the inhabitants. In so much that the peoples hearts being affrighted,
and shaken into pieces with the terror of the wars, refused to make entrance
upon their promised possession. But Joshua and Caleb did beat down the evil
report, that these brought upon it, willing their brethren not to Number.
14.29.33.34
fear these nations, whose hearts fainted, and were provided for bread for
them to feed upon. They labored also to persuade them that it was against
decency, a thing dishonorable, and dishonest, to yield to the inhabitants: and
therefore chose rather to be stoned to death, which they threatened, then to
give way to the false rumor of the other spies tending to the disgrace of the
honesty, comely, and commendable carriage of so renowned a people, who marched
under the conduct of the Lord of hosts himself, whose power is invincible.
Howbeit those misreporters caused the assembly pitifully to cry out into this
complaint, that they should fall by the sword, their wives and children should
be made a prey. Whereupon the Lords indignation (for nothing incenseth him more
then incredulity) waxed so hot against them, that had not Moses interceded, he
had utterly destroyed them. Nevertheless upon his mediation his wrath was
mitigated, and executing his present judgment upon the perfidious, and
obstinate spared for a time the unbeleevers: yet so, that he denied them
entrance into the land of Canaan, permitting their Numb. 14.22. Call haanashim
omnes viri Arias Mont. but Trem. Iun. homines pueri, and mulieres, qui non
immurmuraverant, vel sexu, vel aetate veniabiles. Whereby it appears that he
thought the women, that murmured not, spared, because of the weakness of their
sex.
children, and women that murmured not together with Joshua and Caleb to
inherit it. Whosoever among them was twenty years old, and above, fell in the
wilderness, protraction of punishment was granted others. The precipitious
Numb. 14.44.
presumption of them, which went up with Joshua, and had dissuaded, made a
forfeiture of their carcasses. But Joshua and Caleb, with the harmless age,
or Cum innoxia aetate vel sexu.
sex entered into the land of promise; wherefore the better sort preferred
honor before welfare, the worse present, and soon perishing ease, and safety
before ever-living, never dying honesty. But Divina autem sententia eos
probavit, qui honesta utilibus praestare orbitrabantur. Eos vero condemnavit
apud quos ea, quae videbantur saluti porius, quam honestati accommoda,
praeponderabant.
the approbation divine was for them, who judged honesty to excel utility: and
the sentence of condemnation against them, who when they were laid both
together to make choice of, did cast aside honesty, and clave unto profit
rather for the preservation of their health.

CHAP. IX. Fraud, and filthy lucre in the Clergy to be a foul stain to their
decency: the comelines of David's, and Naboths honesty, to be a fair ornament
to all men, and of right to be exemplary.
WHerefore nothing is more base then to carry no love to honesty, and love to
be troubled daily with the gain of merchandise degenerating from ancient
simplicity, nothing more ignoble then to have an heart boiling with
covetousnes, gaping after the wasting of another patrimony, when it should be
elevated to behold the splendour of honesty, and the orient beauty of true
praise. Hence-ariseth the hunting after an inheritance gotten under the color
of continency, and gravity, which is abhorrent from the drift of Christian
profession For in the mystery of science so cleped, whatsoever is involved
being set abroach, and compounded of deceit is void of what desert is due to
simplicity. In such as hold no office in the Church the ambitious affectation
of purchase, To leave to posterity earthly possessions for inheritance not so
convenient, as to leave them the sound records under our testimony of true
religion. This is the duty of every good Christian, and specially of those of
the Clergy.
or hereditary possession is deemed incongruous, It stands with good
congruity, for such, whose glass of their life is near run out, to testify
freely what they have in their judgment resolved, and so solidly, that it may
need no second emendation: because it is no honesty to keep back what
abridgements were provided for others, and what they might justly challenge at
their hands as a due debt. Yea because it belongs either to a Bishop, or
minister to seek to profit all, as far as possibly he may, and to be against
the good of no man. Lastly in such a case, where one side cannot be eased, but
the other must of necessity be damnified, there it is more cautious, and
commodious neither to be releived, then either to sustain aggreivance. Of this
sort are pecuniarie causes for the most part. Wherefore in these it is not for
an Ecclesiastical person to intervene, because therein it cannot be, but that
he, upon whom the damages fall, has frequently the harder verdict, and
howsoever it is, he so supposes, for that by the benefit of mediatorship his
adversary prvaileth. Now it belongs to a minister to hurt no man, and to be
willing though he be not able (for this rests only in the power of God) to
pleasure, and profit all men In the cause of life to hurt one in danger, who
ought to be helped, is not without great sin. In a pecuniary cause to
purchase hatred is no part of wisdom. Indeed on the contrary side for man's
safeguard, and preservation grievous troubles oftentimes arise, and arising
ought to be endured, and being endured ought to be reputed an honorable, and
glorious piece of service. For the ministerial function this rule is to be
set, and to be observed constantly, and inviolably, that thereby no man
sustain hurt, no not provoking unto it, or by some injury done does justly
offer offense. For he is a good man, and may be a tutor to the best doctor in
the church, that said. If I have recompensed Psalm. 7.4. (...), Sept.
him that rendered me evil: yea, I have delivered him that vexed me without
cause. For what praise is it we have not hurt him that hurt not us? But this is
a virtue, that being hurt we pardon the offense, forgive the wrong. What an
honest part was it in David, the anointed of the Lord, and heir apparent to
the Kingdom, when he could have taken away the life of the King his enemy, in
whose throne he was assigned to succeed, yet would he spare 1 Samuel 24.7. and
26.11.
him? How commodious was it both for himself, and his successor, and for all
subjects to learn thereby loyalty, and fidelity to their own Princes, to
dread, and reverence them, and not to rebel against them? In this his action
therefore honesty was put before utility, and utility came behind honesty as
less worthy. But thinking this a small matter he had 2 Samuel 1.21, 22, 23.
Elegies of lamentation at his funerals mourning, and grievously complaining
in this wise; O ye mountains of Gilboa, upon you be neither dew nor rain
ye mountains of Sedei thereumoth of sadah ager, and rum elevari, Hebr. agri
elationum. When he styles them mountains of death, either it is his own
using Metonymia effecti, or else in that translation then in custom. For it is
not in our vulgar.
death! For there the shield of the mighty is cast down, the shield of Saul as
though he had not been anointed with oil. The bow of Jonathan never turned
back, neither did the sword of Saul return empty from the blood of the
slain, and the fat of the mighty. Saul, and Jonathan were swifter then eagles,
stronger then lions: Ye daughters of Israel weep for Saul, which clothed you
in skarlet, hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel. What mother did ever
so bewail her only son, as this man bewailed his enemy? who could so lay out
the commendation of his best friend, as he does him, that laid snares
continually for his life? How piously did he lament, with how great affection,
and feeling, The elements could not without terror behold this horrible
slaughter, and therefore withheld their influence as a curse. (...).
did he bewail him? The mountains withered upon his prophetical
malediction, and the divine power made up in full measure the just sentence of
the maledicent. In so much that at the spectacle of the kings death the very
dumb elements themselves paid the punishment. What was the cause of holy 1
Kings 21.
Naboths death, but the contemplation of honesty? For when Ahab the King
required his Vineyard, promising him money for it, he deemed such an unworthy
bargain as to be made an instrument to set a price upon the patrimony of his
fathers. The Lord Ibid. v. 3.
keep me, says he, from giving the inheritance of my fathers to thee. That
is, let not God suffer me to fall into so great infamy, let him not permit so
heinous an offense to be extorted from me.

From mine own tribe mancipiously, and that repugnantly to the mind of the Lord
to alienate the least portion of inheritance allotted. Levit. 25.23. Numb.
36.7. Read Tremel. and Iun. notes.
Verily the Lords inhibition is not of alienation of Vines (for the Lord has
(...); dicitur.
no regard of them nor of earthly possessions) but of the right of the fathers
after his own constitution. Naboth might have accepted of some other among the
Kings vineyards, and so have been enrolled among his best esteemed friends,
which is reckoned no small preeminence in this world: but he liked not to make
profit by such foul work, For we need not doubt, but that he might have
bettered himself by commutation. He liked not to triumph in the ruins of his
tribe, but liked rather to undergo peril with honesty, Vtility twofold,
common and special. Permits by connivency, if not consent, false, and
forged testimony impudently to pass upon Naboth, to his condemnation. This he
did, though afterward upon judgment denounced against him, and his house, he
seemed to be sorry for his fact. 1 King. 21.27. The sin of these is a skarlet
one, there falsehood, and homicide in grain, packed by perjury, polluted by the
effusion of innocent blood.
then profit with ignominy.

When I thus mention profit, I mean such as is vulgar, and in frequent use
with worldlings, not such wherein remains the grace of honesty. The King
himself might have extorted what he desired, but he thinks it an impudent
part, and therefore upon his slaughter was touched with grief. Jezabels
greediness of gain, likewise immanity void of all humanity, savage cruelty,
without the least spark of common honesty, and civility was by the horrible
scourge of the revenging wrath of God justly requited.

All fraud therefore is dishonest. The very balance of deceit, and the false
measure in matters of small worth are execrable. For if in the market where all
things are vendible, and in common commerce imposture is punished, may it be
without reproof among the offices of virtue? Solomon guided by the sacred
spirit censureth and condemns the joint usage of the great, Prove. 20.10.23.
thohabath of thahab signifying abominari or aversari, because we turn away
from that is unclean.
and small weight to a fraudulent intent, and so the double measure, as Prove.
11.1. By a borrowed speech to bring it into more detestation, and to make
known his sore hatred against it. Prove. 16.11.
unclean, and accursed in the sight of the Lord, and as an abomination, the
course and common receptacle of that banefull sin of imposture, depriving daily
the poor hungry souls of their due bread, and releife. And on the other side
for the encouragement of the honest, and upright heart he highly commends
true and perfect balances, whatsoever just weights of the bag, as the work
of Gods speciciall mercy toward the miserable, and most pleasing to him being
the father of all compassion.

CHAP. X. That vices ought to be blotted out with virtues coming in, and faith
to be kept with the perfidious and fraudulent, which by the president of
Ioshuah toward the Gibeonites is made evident.
IN all things therefore fidelity is comely, just dealing aceptable, the
measure of equity pleasant. What shall I speak of other contracts, and chiefly
of the valuation, or a buying Conceptio or coemptio praediorum.
of lands, or transactions Agreements upon communication.
and compacts? Is not that the right form of honesty, when our buying and
bargaining is performed bona fide or under a good intent toward our neighbor,
and when dolus malus a subtle, and sinister intent is removed. Likewise does
it not well accord thereunto, that where guile and falsehood, is deprehended,
the delinquent should be obnoxious to double damages? Every where the
consideration of honesty does overpoise whatsoever opposits, among the rest
delving fox-like fraud out of her den discovers and dislodgeth her. Hence
it is that prophetical David Psalm. 15.3.
levied with so steady an hand that dexterously composed sentence of his
universally to direct in our trading and commerce, that he which rightly
inioyeth a seat in Gods tabernacle, carries ever in his recognizance within
his breast this emblem, do no evil to thy neighbor. Wherefore not only in
contracts, wherein the faults of whatsoever is to be sold ought to be opened,
and unless the seller, albeit he has resigned over his right to the buyer,
shall make known, they are all void by the action de dolo malo, but also in
all dealing of what kind soever between man and man no deceit, but sincerity
with simplicity, and the naked truth ought to be showed. This old form de
dolo, which is not so much the form The sentence of the Scripture, and of the
Civil law, do accord in the matter de dolo.
of the Civilians, as the very sentence of the Patriarch does the divine
Scripture evidently express in the book of Ioshuah. For when a fame was
spread abroad among the people of the Land, the water of the red Sea, and of
Jordan, to have been dried up to give passage, to the Israelites, a fountain
to have flowed out of a rock, manna, or Angels food to have been administered
to many thousands, the walls of Jericho to have fallen down at the sound of
rams horns, the king of Ai to have been overcome, and Ioshuah 8.29. For
terror.
hanged on a tree until the Then cut down that they might not exceed the
bounds of humane compassion.
evening, the Josh. 9.
Gibeonites fearing their power wrought craftily, feigned that they came from a
far country, showed their garments worn out with the length of the journey.
They declare withal to Ioshuah this to be the cause of their long, and
tedious travel, for that they were desirous to enter into conditions of peace,
and make a league of friendship with them.

Who because he was unacquainted with the situation of their cities, and unable
to put a difference between the Inhabitants, he was deceived by them. For not
Josh. 9.9.
consulting with the Lord, whereby he might have found out their fraud,
overhastily, and unadvisedly made a Covenant with them. Beside, so Adeo sancta
erat illis temporibus fides, ut fallere aliquos posse non crederetur.
sacred was faith in those days, that such falsehood seemed incredible. And who
may justly reprehend this in the Saints estimating Math. 7.2.
others after their own disposition, and for that they being friends to the
truth, deem she has no foes, and they themselves keeping touch, no lies to
be abroad? They are ignorant what it is to deceive, they willingly and readily
believe what is in themselves to be in others, neither, can they be suspicious
1 Cor. 13.5. (...)
of them for ought they find not in their own measure. The Prove. 14.15. This
is one of the places wherein the Sept. which the vulgar follows, are clearly
opposite to the Heb. howbeit this is a sufficient correction, that in the
margin it is amended with imperitus foolish. We need not seek therefore any
further reconcilement. Arias Montanus renders pethi of pathah simplex, Tremel.
fatuus, Hieron. insipiens, and parvus as Psalm. 19.8.
innocent believes every word, but the Veharum of harum callide agere, which
antithesis may seem to make for our authors sense.
crafty will understand his step. Facility is not to be discommended, but
goodness much to be commended. This is to be innocent, when one is ignorant
what may hurt: when being once circumscribed, and beguiled, yet not to be
brought to judge hardly, but charitably of all, supposing all men to mean as
faithfully, and truly as he does. This innocence and devotion was it, that
inclined the mind of Ioshuah to give credit to the Gibeonites, and thereupon to
come to articles of agreement, and so to establish peace, and confirm
friendship with them. But when after three days he came to their cities, and
found out their deceit, he perceived howsoever they feigned themselves
dwelling far off, yet that they were near neighbors, and that therewith all
the people were offended with him, and with the Princes of the congregation
thus to be circumvented: howbeit notwithstanding all this could he be induced
to revoke the conclusions of peace, because it was confirmed under Sacrament,
lest while he punished their perfidiousnesse, he should infringe his own
fidelity; Albeit he laid the mult of mancipiousnesse upon them. A sentence
truly of more clemency: but of longer continuance. Their old craft in matter of
offices well matched with, according penalty deputing them to hereditary
bondage, indures to this day.

CHAP. XI. The avaritious, and fraudulent to be sometimes defrauded of their
desires, but always with God to be conscious of malevolence. The story of a
certain Syracusan; the concealment of Paradigma example.
Ananias the a pranke of Doeg the Edomite used to prove the same.
IN making entrance upon inheritances, I will not observe the striking
Percussiones digitorum. A certain custom among the Romans, when they bought,
and took possession, noted by Martial, Iam mea res digitum sustulit
hospitibus. If he were manceps as Petronius Pater being Transpadanus weighing
the coin, libram aere percutiebat.
of the fingers, and the saltations of the Because of licitatio, which is in
cheapning, and overbidding to come to an hard bargain, and as it were to a
pilled, and a bare walled possession.
naked successor, (for these be notes of the vulgar,) neither the show of a
multitude of fishes, and well ordered, for the delight of fishing, that the
affection of the buyer might be thereby allured. For why should he be found so
studious, and carried with such greediness of vanities, thereby to be thrown
into such a slumber of luxury, and fond pleasures to suffer himself to be in
a maze, and stupefied thereby? How may it be convenient here for me, to handle
the delicious secesse for solace at Syracuse, and therein the pregnant plot of
the Sicilian? who when he had lighted upon a certain stranger, strangely
transported with the love of some dainty gardens sweetness, invited him to a
banquet in one of his own, which he had labored a long time to vent,
especially to such a good chapman that would spare no cost for a choice
solitary walk. Their meeting was appointed to be the next day following, when
in the assigned place there was a banquet exquisitely furnished with great
plenty of dishes, and in prospect of the guests a multitude of fishermen
standing in a comely order: every one what he had taken, strived how he might
first offer it up as a present, insomuch that the table was full fraught and
the leaping of the fishes troubled the eyes of them that were sat down.
Whereupon the stranger began to wonder thereat and to behold there so many
boats: and demanding a reason it was told him, that it was a day of irrigation,
Aquationem illic esse.
and the sweetness of the waters brought in, made innumerable fishes to
frequent them. To wind up all in a word the Sicilian wit was to wily for the
stranger, who was so inamoured with the liking of his gardens, that
incontinently, and at his own price he bought them. But when he came the next
day with his friends to review his bargain, he found no vessels there for
fishing, and inquiring, whether on that day were a time of solemnity, and
feasting for fishermen, it was answered, that it was no such time, neither were
they ever wont before yesterday to fish there. Now how could this stranger
rightly complain of cheating when he so eagerly hunted after the least show,
and shadow, that he might feed his fond fantasy with delight? And with what
countenance could he reprove another of fraud, that himself took so base
advantage to serve his delights? For he that reproves another of a fault,
ought himself to be free from the same. I will not therefore fetch in such
trifles within the compass of the ecclesiastical censure, which wholly
condemns all lusting after filthy lucre, and in a compendious frame of
speech, censureth severely whatsoever light and lose dealing. Wherefore what
shall I say of him, who upon that testament, though coined and framed by
another man, which he knows to be false, challenges to himself an
inheritance or legacy, and makes gain of another man's wickedness, when even
the public laws bind him over as guilty, who wittingly makes use of another
man's falsehood? But the rule of justice is clear for it, that it becomes not
a good man to decline from the truth, nor to damnifie another unjustly, neither
to plot or wrap up closely any manner of fraud. What is more evident proof for
it, then that of Ananias, who took some Acts 5.2.
portion fraudulently from the price of the fields, which himself sold, and
laid down in pretense the whole sum at the feet of the Apostle? Being
convinced of hypocrisy fell he not Verse 5.
dead? It was lawful for him to have offered (to God) no part at all, and this
he might have done without deceit. But because he mingled deceit with his pious
devotion, though he were a benefactor to the Church, yet reaped he not the
praise of liberality, but the penalty of perfidiousnesse. Our Lord in the
Gospel renounced the crafty Scribe, who hoping to get some worldly
advancement, sought to curry favor with him, with this rebuke, the foxes have
Math. 8.20.
holes; Commanding us thereby in simplicity of heart, and innocence to have our
conversation. David likewise meeting with the malicious subtilty of Psalm. 52.2.
Doeg tells him, that he cutteth with his tongue like a razor: intimating that
this instrument launcing the festering sore deeply, and dexterously serves for
cure, but sinistrously abused brings a deadly wound to cover it: If any one
therefore pretends friendship, and plots treachery against him, even to betray
him to death, whom he ought to preserve, under this comparison of a razor,
whereby some drunken Aesculapius with his shivering hand launceth where he
ought not, is well resembled. For as he through the strength of wine has
accustomed to do: so Doeg through the lees of malicious despite, conceives
mischief, conspireth against good 1 Samuel 22.9, 10.
Ahimelech the Priest, and consulteth how to make his kindness to the Prophet
whom he had entertained, a capital crime against the Kings person: who no
sooner was possessed with it, but was so enraged through the envy borne against
him, that he brake out incontinently into a most bloody prosecution.

CHAP. XII. Of the evil of the rash oaths of Herod and Iepthes, and that the
daughter of the latter returning after she had bewailed her virginity at a day
appointed, excels the fidelity of those Pythagoreans, Damon and Pythias,
which gave themselves hostages one for another.
WWherefore that every one may use simplicity of speech, and so possess his
vessel in holiness, no man may involve his brother in danger with
circumscription of words, neither may promise what is dishonest: or if he
promise, may hold it more tolerable to break, then to perform in that which
will be a disparagement, his affection ought to be pure and sincere.

Oftentimes it comes to pass, that many men bind themselves under the
Sacrament of oath: and then likewise when they well know, that no such promise
was to be made, yet under the contemplation of a Sacrament, they perform what
they promised, according as we have formerly written of Herod: who Math. 14 7.
shamefully promising a reward to the dancing minion Verse 10. Whereas the one
was superstition, the other persecution dipped in blood. Gross superstition
was it, and blind execrable zeal for a rash, and unadvised oath, to take away
the life of the innocent, discharging the office imposed upon him by God, and
admonishing him to repent.
bloudily put the same in execution. It was shameful, that for a dance he
promised a kingdom: cruel, that for the religion of an oath he gave the head
of a Prophet; How much more tolerable had perjurie been then such performing;
If at least that oath which a drunkard makes in the midst of his cups
inflamed with lust, evirated, and exhausted with Bis hic peccatur primo tamere
jurando, deinde si praestamus malejurata. P. Martin in 1 Regum C. 8. v. 31.
luxury be to be accounted perjury. See then the head of the Prophet is
brought before him in a dish, and this is esteemed for a matter of fidelity,
when it is mere madness. Neither shall I ever be brought to believe that
Prince Iepthe did not unadvisedly Judge. 11.20.
promise, if he should return home with victory, to offer up to the Lord in
sacrifice whatsoever should first meet him within the threshold of his house:
because when he perceived his own daughter first to present her self by way
of joyful gratulation, it much repented him of his vow, which he declared by
renting his clothes, and saying, alas my daughter thou have hindered me, thou
have Verse 35. Thou have brought me low, and art of them that trouble me,
Genev. reha bic rahet in incurvando incurvare fecisti me, Hebr. which
reduplication has respondence with our Authors following the Sept.
hindered me, and in stead of a comfort thou art become a corzive to me. Thus
Jepthe albeit he fulfilled with godly fear the bitterness of his hard
payment: yet he ordained it as a custom to the posterities, that the memorial
of this lamentation should every year be remembered. An harsh promise, and a
more harsh performance, when of necessity he must mourn also himself, who
was the author of the solemnity. I cannot accuse the man who of necessity had
to accomplish what he had vowed: howbeit it is a wretched necessity, which is
executed with Master Perkins is of opinion from Kimohi his exposition of
Lethannaoth Iud. 11.40. signifying, to confer together with Iun. notes, that
he offered not his daughter at all Cas. of Consc. l. 2. c. 14. but what says
St. Ierom? viz. quod fuit in vovendo indiscretus, and in reddendo impius, and
notwithstanding his commendation Heb. 11. yet St. Aug. says, quorum fidem S.
Scr. veraciter laudat, non hinc impeditur eorum peccata veraciter notare. Which
had been a fitter pattern for Iepthe to have followed, then to have proceeded
to so much extremity.
parricide. It is better not to vow then to vow that which the votarie himself
would not, no not for all the riches of this world, but only in regard of his
oath, should take place. Moreover, we have an example in Jsaac, whom though the
Lord commanded to be offered up in sacrifice, yet in his stead made choice of a
Ram for an oblation: All promises to man, much more to God are debts, yet all
of them at all times are not to be kept. God himself changing his sentence
when it is just, ought not man change his being unjust? For, in the book of
Chapt. 14.12.20.
Numbers he had promised to smite with death, and destroy the people, but
afterward being besought by Moses to forbear his indignation, he was pacified.
Again he threatening to consume the multitude that gathered themselves to Number.
16.21.26, 27.31.
Korah, but Moses, and Aaron, falling upon their faces before him with humble
request to spare them, they departing from him, and his confederates, when the
earth swallowed up these, So was it likewise in regard of Nineveh Jonah 3.4.10.
and 4.2. The unrevealed will of God, and his eternal decree remains
unchangeable, howsoever his revealed will may seem mutable.
they escaped. The example of the daughter of Iephthe is of more antiquity,
and authority, then that memorable one among the Philosophers of the two
Pythagoreans, wherefore when one of them was by Dionysius the tyrant condemned
to death, desired that liberty might be granted him to go home to his house,
to take his leave of his friends, and lest his fidelity concerning his return
at the day appointed might be doubted of, he offered such a surety, and pledge,
as should acknowledge himself, if he returned not, to be contented to dye for
him: neither did his assigned friend, and hostage, refuse the condition, but
waited to undergo the hazard of death, even in his own person, and that with
a constant mind, and resolution. Therefore the day being come, neither did the
one or the other fly, or flinch for fear, but did both appear being prepared
to die. Which their entire friendship, and inviolable bond of love, the tyrant
so admired, that whom before he was minded should abide the extremest peril,
he now received with his most endeared affection into a league of amity, even
with himself, setting apart his own highness to enjoy the same. But what in
these among venerable, and learned, is esteemed as very much miraculous, is
deprehended in this Virgin, to be much more magnificent: who to acquit her
sorrowful father of his unadvised vow, and to take off his perplexed grief
advisedly, and constantly, says, my Judge. 11.26. Voto, and voluntati non
restitit patris, and ^redebat quod Dei fuerat secuta judicium. Aug. super Iud.
l. 7. C. 44.
father, if thou have opened thy mouth to the Lord, do with me as thou have
promised, seeing the Lord has avenged thee of thine enemies. Only she
required two months to bewail with her associates her virginity. Neither did
the sad spectacle of complaint in these bow, or bend at all her unremoveable
mind to desist, but that she would, and did return her time being expired. So
did she return to her father as if she had bin bound with a vow, and stirred
him forward being unwilling, and foreslowing, and brought to pass by her
readiness, and cheerefulnes that what was casually Fortuitum impietatis
impiety might be the Motus ad vovendum in generali fuit a spiritu Sancto, quod
immolavit, quod non debuit in hoc peccavit, sed post penituit Aquinas in 11. ad
Hebr. This therefore is an hyperbole to express the vehemence of her desire
not to have her fathers vow infringed.
sacrifice of piety.

CHAP. XIII. Into how great danger did Judith run under the contemplation of
the worthiness of honesty.
BEhold how much to thy admiration does Judith offer her self, that gave so
bold, so desperate, and almost an incredible attempt against that puissant and
dreadful Holofernes cheifetain to great and mighty Nebuchadonosor guarded with
a triumphant troop of Assyrians, whom she struck first with the rays, and
beams of her excellent beauty, and rare comelines: and afterward ravished with
the pleasantnes, Iudeth 11.21.23.
and daintiness of her speech. Two noble triumphs did she bear away in this
her honorable enterprise. The first that she kept her chastity Iud. 13.16.
entire, and vncontaminate; the second that she being a woman had the victory
over a man, a man of valor by her courage, and by her counsel over his
counsel of war. The Persians Chap. 16.10.
that were about him stood amazed at her wonderful prowes, That also which was
so highly extolled in the two Pythagoreans, Damon, and Pythias.
was of more note, in her being a woman of more renown that she feared not
only the dint of death, or the stroke of an headesman, Non expavit mortis
periculum, sed nec pudoris, quodest gravius bonis faeminis.
but not the darts of a whole host, no not, which being lost is more grievous
to good matrons, the hazard it self of her unspotted, and highly reputed
chastity. Behold she being a woman stood in the midst in the thick array of
furious armed men, secure, and regardles of death among the devouring weapons
of bloody and merciless soldiers. If you speak of danger she ran as it
were upon the spears point, if of her faith and religion, she went forth
manfully to fight for it. Judith therefore follows the sway of honesty, and
while she follows the sway of honesty, and while she follows it, she
finds the weight of vtility For it was an honest part of her, to inhibit the
people of God to yield themselves over to profaneness, to expose the rites
and Sacraments of their fathers, the holy virgins also, grave widows, chaste
matrones, to the spoil, and constupration of beastly Barbarians, and by no
means to suffer the siege to break forth upon such detestable All which had
they done, had she not by this her courageous adventure suspended their hope,
and supported their weakness. Chap. 8.9.11. God is to be limited, as is
declared, ver. 15. Ozias, with the ancients of Bethulia, in binding themselves
to the Assyrians, to deliver up the city within five days, brake this rule.
conditions.

Surely a right, honest, and honorable service was it, that she might exempt
all from danger to endanger her self, one soul for many millions. How great
then is the authority of honesty in her, that a woman should not commit it to
them, but vendicate to her self above men, above the princes, Verse. 32.
(to whom it belongs,) in time of wars, (which are abhorrent from her sex)
the chief counsel of public affairs, (when Verse 33.
her condition is to be private) with the whole and sole guidance in the
hardest place of imploiment? Again how great was the authority, and reputation
of honesty in her, that so piously presumed Ver. 33. and chapt. 9.11.12.13.14.
to have God her assistant: in how great grace was she with him, that she
found him in the event propitious, beyond all expectation, Chap. 16.6.11.12.
and to the wonderment of the whole world.

CHAP. XIIII. That vtility evermore follows honesty, which albeit may seem
to fall out otherwise oftentimes with men, yet is it proved by many examples,
to be so constantly, and without intermission with the Almighty.
BUT what other thing did Elisha the Prophet when the Syrian host beseiged the
city Dothan to take him, did he not deal honestly by them, that when he had
smote them first with blindness to hinder their attempt, he afterward brought
them into Samaria, desired God, to open 2 Kings 6.20.
their eyes, and prevailed? Wherefore when the King of Israel would have
smitten them, and Eamque sibi dari a propheta facultatem posceret.
required leave of the Prophet, he answered him, smite whom thou have taken
with thy sword, and with thy bow, but as for these, set bread, and water before
them. And this kindness Ver. 23.
so much overcame them that they came no more into the land of Israel. How much
does this exceed that of the Greeks, that when two The Athenians and
Lacedaemonians striving for the honor of the victory over the Persians at
Plataees, Plutarch in the life of Aristides says, it was given to the
Plataeans, yet afterward
sundry sorts of people, did strive one against the other, for glory and
dominion, and the one Themistocles having this device in his head, to make the
state of Athens greatest among the Greeks in estimation, by setting on fire
the arcenall where all their ships lay, was censured by
of them had occasion offered to set on fire privily the ships of the other,
thought it a dishonor, and chose Aristides for unjust and perfidious.
rather to do what was Maluitque minus posse honest, quam plus turpiter.
less honestly, then what was more dishonestly. Now these could not do this
thing without committing of wickedness. For they in so doing must needs
deceive them who convened with them in society to make an end of the Persian
wars, and closely working them this mischeife, though it might have bin
denied, yet would shame have so covered their faces, that they might not being
charged with it have forborne blushing But Elisha sought not to ensnare, though
they sought his life, but to preserve those Syrians whom the Lord had smitten,
because it was both honest, and honorable to spare the blood of an enemy, when
ir was in his power to have spilt it, Wherefore it clearly appears
whatsoever is honestly carried and in a comely manner is always commodious and
commendable. For both holy Judith raised the siege by her comely and courageous
contempt of her own safety, and procured the public vtility, by her own
proper attempt, and divinely preserved honesty: and Elisha got to himself more
worthy praise by pardoning, and feasting the adversary, Decoro contemptu.
then he should have done by discourteous intertaining more profit to the
kingdom by saving, then he should have done by intercepting him. What other
thing did John the Baptist but consider, and examine the point of honesty, and
thereby discern dishonest wedlock in the King, and so grow to tell him boldly,
that it was not lawful Mark 6.18.
for him to have his brothers wife? He could have been silent had he not
judged it unbeseeming his calling for fear of death, to have his mouth stopped
from speaking the truth: and this to Potuit tacere, nisi in decorum sibi
iudicasset mortis metu verum non dicere, inclinari regi, propheticam
authoritatem adulatione subtexere.
be palpable flattery to pretend that prophetical, in this case must bow to
princely authority, He knew, because for the preservation of piety he was
refractary to a King, and must therefore die, yet it stood him upon to
prefer honesty and the honor of religion before his own security, Dan.
13.21.
and verily what was more profitable then (...) Stoica quae malorum peccatisen
su non afficitur refragatur Exemplo Mosis Exodus 32.19. et hic Baptistae
Observanda tamen phrasis Aug. lib. 22. contra Faust. Manich. in vitia saevire
nos jubet Psalmista, psalm. 4.4. saevire Apostolus, Col. 3.5. mortificate membra.
that which brought the glory of martyrdom to this holy man? And holy Susanna
was not drawn through the terror of false testimony to run into the crime
of incontinency, when she saw her self to be urged on this side with peril,
on that side with reproach, but would rather by an honest death fly infamy,
then by seeking present safety to be branded with the stamp of eternal
disloyalty. Therefore while she truly intended what made for her honesty, she
extended thereby the thread of her life, who if she had preserved that which
seemed commodious for life before it, she had not won so great renown: yea
rather (that which might have been not only discommodious, but perilous also)
she had not perhaps escaped the punishment of a crime. Wherefore we observe,
that what is shameful, cannot be gainful, neither what is honest, and pious
unprofitable. Because true profit comprehends necessary probity, true
probity, piety, and for that each of these friendly drawing together in one
yoke, cooperate in their mutual offices Gods glory, and the good of his
people. The Rhetoricians relate it as a thing memorable, that the Roman
Fabricius discovered to Pyrrhus his Physicions conspiracy. Plutarch in the life
of Pyrrhus.
Captain, when the physician of an opposite king came to him, and offered to
give his Master poison, and so to make a speedy dispatch of the wars,
harkened not to him, bound him, and sent him back to the King his master, to
receive condign punishment of his treachery. And verily it was a brave
resolution, that undertaking arms to try valor he would not vanquish by
fraud. For he placed not honesty in the victory: but even the victory it self
sought by dishonest means in a base manner, he reputed ignominious. But to
let foreign testimonies go, and to come home to our own Moses, and other
far precedent monuments unto this: which being drawn out exceed no less in
excellency, then in antiquity. The King of Egypt would not suffer the people of
Israel to depart, Moses bid Aaron stretch out his rod over all the Exodus 7.20.
waters, he stretched it out, and the waters of the rivers were turned into
blood, and no man could drink thereof, they both sprinkled Chap. 9.10.
ashes toward heaven, and there came a scabbe, and brake forth into blisters
and bladders upon man, and upon beast, they brought down Chap. 9.23.
hail mingled with fire, and thunder, to the destroying whatsoever was abroad
in the fields throughout all Egypt, only in Verse 26.
Goshen there was no hail. But when Moses besought the Lord for remedy
against these evils, all things were restored to their former estate, the hail
ceased, the ulcers were healed, the waters cleared. Pharaoh remaining still
rebellious to God, the land was covered over with Exodus 10.22. Moriebatur.
darkness for three days together; upon Moses lifting up his hands to heaven,
The Egyptians had Chapt. 11.5:
all their first borne slain, the Hebrews had all their children Chapt. 12.27.
preserved. But to these calamities also did Moses put an end by his prayers.

All these miracles performed he plainly, and without imposture, and this is
his praise: his admiration that the punishments inflicted, were by the finger
of God, solely working in his ministry, taken off even from the enemy. This
exceeding meek, and gentle person, as it is written of him, knew for a Numb.
12 3.
certainty, that the King would not keep touch: yet thought it his part upon
request evermore to procure a removal of the plague, upon hurt received to
bless, upon cause of just offense to remit. He cast forth his rod, and it
was turned into a Exodus 7.10.12.
serpent, which devoured the rods of the Egyptians, signifying that the word
should be made flesh, which should evacuate the deadly poison of the cruel
serpent, through his most gracious remitting and pardoning of sin. For, the
rod is the plain Heb. 1.3. and 9.4. Aarons Rod.
word, regal, replenished with all power, and the Virga enim est Verbum
directum regale, plenum potestatis, insigne imperij.
ensign imperial.

The rod was made a Serpent, because he that was the Son of God, was borne
of God, took flesh of the Virgin, and was made man: who as the Serpent Numb.
21.9. John 3.14.
exalted in the Cross: so he upon the Cross infused the medicine of his
blood to cure all humane ulcers. Whence the Lord himself says; As the serpent
was exalted in the wilderness: so shall the Son of man be lifted up. There
is beside another sign belonging to the Lord Jesus, which Moses did. For, he
putting his hand into his bosom it was made as Exodus 4.6.30.
white as snow, doing the same again, it was as his other flesh: which
denotes first the fulgor, and brightness of the divinity of the Lord Jesus,
then the Postea susceptionem carnis in qua fide credere omnes gentes,
populosque oporteret.
assuming of flesh, in which it behooves all nations, and people of the world
by an assured faith to believe.

Not without cause did he put his hand into his bosom, because Christ is the
right hand of God, in whose divine and withal incarnate nature, whosoever
believes not shall be with Pharaoh scourged for a reprobate: who albeit he
would not give credit to the signs, which Moses wrought by the hand of God,
yet when the plagues lay heavy upon him for the mitigation of them, was
compelled to Thus the Lord mighty in power forces them to stoop to his
judgments, that regard not his precepts.
submit himself. Who was the means of mitigation of the judgments, but
Moses? This was his honest dealing toward an enemy. Now toward his own people,
how rare was the affection of his honesty, when for their preservation sake,
he desired his own name to be expunged the Exodus 32.32.
book of life? Tobias likewise plainly expressed a form of honesty, when he
forsook the banquet prepared for him to Tob. 2.4.
bury the dead of his own people; and invited the needy that escaped the
Verse. 2. chapt. 1.16.
sword, daily to his table: but most of all Chapt. 1.18. Chapt. 7.11.
Raguel who being dealt withal about his good will in bestowing his daughter
in marriage, concealed not her infirmities, lest thereby he might have seemed
to circumvent her suitor. Therefore when Tobias the son of Tobias desired her
to be given him, he answered, that by the law he had right to her as a
kinsman, but he had given her to seven husbands, who all dyed. The just man was
more jealous of another harms, then desirous to bestow his own daughter. How
briefly resolved he all questions of the Philosophers that might arise upon
the point. They have three tractates concerning the faults of houses to be
sold: whether namely, they ought to be kept from the knowledge of the buier, or
laid open: this man thinks not good to cover, no not so much, as the secret
frailties of his own daughter. He affects not to move, but was moved for her.
We need not doubt likewise of much more honesty in this man, then in them,
because there is no comparison to be made between the cause of matching a
daughter, and the matter of commerce for money. Let us further consider another
thing, which being done in the time of our fathers captivity, bare the prime
beauty of honesty. For honesty is hindered by no adversity, but therein is more
illustrious, then in prosperity. In the midst of bonds, weapons, flames,
servitude (which to free men is more grievous then all punishment) amidst
tormentors, the ruins of their country, the dreadful terror of the living,
where such tragedies were acted, amidst the woeful beholding the Maccabees 7.8.
blood of the slain, the care of honesty was not interrupted: but, when their
mansions were converted into ashes, shined forth most gloriously in their
affections. Their study was not to bury their gold, nor hide their silver,
thereby to reserve it for their posterity: but in their extremest calamity
they had an eye to the safeguard of their honesty. This was in price with them,
together with their holy religion, and therefore for the preservation hereof,
when they were to go into Persia, they hid the sacred fire in secret, 1
Maccab. 1.19.
and solitary place, signing it with a seal, and covering it with silence,
which is the surest guard. That the impure might not pollute, nor the blood of
the slain extinguish, nor the ugly shape of ruinous heaps abolish, this was
their sole endeavor. Religion the root, and crown of honesty, was that only,
which by their captivity could not be wrested from them, rightly then did they
fix their care upon it, rightly also did they forecast to fasten it upon their
posterity. These, a long time after, when God put it into the mind of the King
of Persia, to restore the temple in Judea, and the lawful rites at Jerusalem,
returning with Nehemias, together with the offspring of these Priests, who had
hid the fire of the Lord taken from the altar, lest it should have perished,
coming to the place being a valley, in stead of fire, found thick water, which
he commanded them to draw up, bring it to him, sprinkle it upon the wood.

Thus then, which is to be admired, at the sun obscured before with clouds
suddenly breaking forth with his bright beams, a great fire was kindled to the
exceeding joy of them all, Nehemias Orabat Nehemias psallebant sacerdotes
hymnum Deo vsque quo consumptum est sacrificium.
prayed, the priests sung an hymn to God, so far forth until the sacrifice
was consumed: which coming to the ears of the King of Persia, he built a
temple, there, and many gifts were dedicated to it. It had the appellation of
Nephthe, which is purification, and of Epathar given it by Nehemias. It is
found in the descriptions of Jeremy 2 Mac. 2.
commanding the posterities to take of this fire. This is the fire that fell
upon, and consumed Moses Levit. 9.24. Hic est ignis qui cecidit super
sacrificium Moysi, et consumpsit illud.
sacrifice, with this fire the sacrifice ought to be sanctified, hereupon the
sons of Aaron bringing strange fire were Chap. 10.16.
devoured. The tabernacle, the arc, and altar of incense, were laid up also
by Jeremy, and the door stopped up. But this when some of them near him more
curiously searched, that they might have noted they could not find, which when
he perceived he told them to this effect, that the place should not be known
until God should gather again his people, and mercy should be showed them:
then should the Lord declare these things, then should his glory Our Author in
this relation of Nehemiah, and Jeremy, out of the Apocryphal seems to be
transported with the sway of the times, those being received of the Church. For
in the time of Iehoshua, and Zerubbabel under Cyrus, was the Altar set up, and
offerings tendered Ezra 3.2.4. under Darius, Ezra 6.10.20. they kept the
Passover, oblations were offered in the reign of Artaxerxes, Ezra 8.35. which
was 40. years after the first return under Zerubbabel. Besides mention is
make of the morning and evening sacrifice, Ezra 3.3. and 9.41. where the
consuming it with fire from heaven, was a sign of Gods presence 1 Kings 18.38.
2 Chronicles. 7.1. Judge. 6.21. The time of Ezras return being the second, was in
the 7. of Artaxerxes, Ezra 7.7. Nehemiahs being the third in the 20. Neh. 2.1.
According to which computation, the finding of the holy fire here mentioned,
falls short of the truth above fifty three years. But howsoever the
application is good.
appear. We understand when the Congregation of the people should be, we
acknowledge the same to be the propitiation of our Lord God, which he the
propitiatour in his own person has wrought by his passion. How can we be
ignorant of this fire, when we read that the Lord Jesus did baptize with the
holy Ghost: and with Math. 3.11.
fire? The sacrifice was rightly consumed, and brought to nothing, because it
was for the utter abolishing of sin. That fire was the type of the holy
Ghost, which was to descend after the ascension, purging sins, inflaming the
minds, and hearts of the faithful. Whence Ierem. 20.9.
Jeremy his word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones. I was
weary of forbearing, and I could not stay. Whence fell the holy Ghost upon the
Acts 2.3.23.
Apostles, and upon the rest, waiting for the promise of the Lord in the
similitude of cloven tongues like to fire, and whence was the elevation of the
spirits of them that spoke diversity of languages, that they were thought for
their nimblenesse, and fluency therein, to be filled with new wine. But what
may this import, that the fire was made water, and again, that the water
stirred up fire, but the spiritual grace burns by fire, and by water
cleanses our sins? For sin is both washed, and burned away. Hence the 1
Cor. 3.13.
Apostle, the fire shall try every man's work what it is; and afterward, if 15.
any man's work shall burn, he shall suffer loss, but himself shall be
saved, but as it were through fire. This then as a type of future remission of
sins descended upon the sacrifices. In the time of captivity when sin
reigned it is hidden, but it is drawn out in the time of liberty: Howbeit it
were changed into likeness of water, yet retained it still the nature of fire,
that it might consume the sacrifice. And no marvel. For God the Father says,
I am a Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire, and they have forsaken me, the fountain of living Ier. 2.13.
waters, and the Lord Jesus of himself; I came to Luke 12.49.
send fire upon the earth, and I am the John 4.1.4. and 7.27.38.39.
water of life: fire, to inflame the hearts of the hearers, and the drink of
the water of life, to cool the thirsty souls. This is resembled in Eliahs
sacrifice, when he confounded 1 Kings 18.23.
Baals priests, whom he provoked to kindle their altar without putting to it
ordinary fire. As for his own, when he had powered four barrels thrice upon
the burnt offering, and wood, replenished the ditch round about it with water
likewise, crying to the Lord, fire came down from heaven, and consumed the
whole burnt offering. Thou, O man of God, whosoever thou art, art the sacrifice,
consider therefore seriously, and in silence this work. For the blessed vapor
of his holy Spirit descends upon thee, and burns up thy sins. In Moses
time the sacrifice which was consumed with fire, was a sacrifice for sin, and
observe that it was 2 Maccab. 2.11. Lev. 10.16.17, 18. and 6.18, 19.
wholly wasted, signifying the Kom. 6.3.4.6. (...) our Author reads Vetus
homo noster exterior crucifixus est Cruci: but exterior the outward, not found
in the original.
mortifying wholly of the old man in the Sacrament of baptism. The Egyptian is
Heb. 11.29.
drowned, the Hebrew rising again by renewment of the holy Ghost in the 2 Cor.
4.16.
inner man, passes through the red Sea without stumbling, as upon dry land.
All the Fathers were 1 Cor. 10.2.
baptized in the cloud, and in the sea. In the deluge all flesh Genesis 7.
perished, but just Noah with his family were preserved: Is not the old man
consumed, when this mortal is swallowed up of 2 Cor. 5.4.
life, when, though the outward be corrupted, yet the inward man is 2 Cor.
4.16.
quickened? Neither only in Baptism, but also in repentance there is a death of
the flesh, for the renovation of the spirit, the holy Apostle delivers over the
incestuous to Satan, for the 1 Cor. 5.3.
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. A more prolix excursion in admiration of this mystery, while we study to
open more largely the revealed Sacrament, may seem to be made: howbeit so
far forth in truth as it is full of honesty, as it may be granted to be full
of religion. How honorable is the regard of honesty among the ten Judge. 20.1.
tribes, when with one joint consent the Chapt. 19.25.
violence offered to one woman, was in so bitter terms of hostility pursued
against their brother Benjamin? whom when they had overcome, how did they
obtest Chapt. 21.1. Victo populo tribus Benjamin obtestarentur in conjugio se
eis proprias filias non daturos.
against him in the case of affinity, denying him their daughters in marriage,
in so much, that using the liberty of Remanserat tribus sine ullo posteritatis
subsidio nisifraudis necessariae accepisset licentiam.
necessary fraud, was found the only way of keeping the whole tribe from
perishing?

See into what streights sin does thrust, either dying without offspring, or
by unwarrantable course, making shipwreck of soul. Behold again that liberty
of theirs proceeding from inforcement, was a retaliation of their intemperance,
they took the Levites wife by violence, to the Congruo intemperantiae
supplicio non videtur vacare.
same are they in an exigent Et revera dignum fuit, ut qui alienum contubernium
solverant ipsi nuptiarum amitterent solennitatem. Harm do harm find,
depriving another, they are deprived of their wives, using cruelty they reaped
it.
constrained. And in truth it was worthily recompensed them upon their heads,
that they who had made a breach in the marriage bed should themselves be
debarred of the solemnity of Matrimony. But how is the history fraught with
commiseration? There was a man a Levite which took to him a Vir Levita
acceperat sibi jugalem.
yoke fellow, which by Concubina a concubitu. Judge. 19.8. baiom hachamishi,
Hebr. the 5 day. This notwithstanding may not be untrue, for that verse. 9.
there is vaiakom from the root kom, signifying and surrexit, which Tremel.
renders tandem surrexit, and the Genev. afterward he arose. For this may
seem to implie some more then five days, and so 7. according to our Author
following the Sept. beside he departed not until the evening which belongs to
the next day. For God began the creation with the evening.
companying together, I think to be called a concubine, (which as of old has
been) taking some offense went away from him to her father, thither her
husband went after her to bring her again, where he feasted, and made his
heart merry until the Ibid. 19.8. Netoth of Natah declinare.
seventh day, when being earnestly dealt withal to stay, because it grew
toward Judge. 19.24.
the declining of the day, yet would not be entreated: proceeding therefore on
his journey, he came late to Gibeah of Benjamin with his yoke fellow, and
servant, where while they were refreshing themselves, the inhabitants
compassing the house where they were, and striving to break in upon them,
required after a lustful manner the Levite. To satisfy them the Master of the
house offered rather then they should commit such villainy, his own Judge. 19.24.
daughter being a virgin, and also his guests the Levites yoke fellow. The
latter they took, and abused until the morning. Her Lord therefore took her
up, carried her home, and divided her into twelve pieces, and sent them to all
the quarters of Israel. Forty thousand therefore of them, wherein appears the
great, and special regard they had to honesty, drew their swords even against
their brethren, to revenge the injury of their impudent intemperancy: who at
length prevailed against them, made them pay the price of their dearest blood
for their incontinency, and burnt, as they justly deserved for their so strange
burning in lust, their cities into ashes. Albeit they received at their hands
two sore affronts, yet were they not stricken with Tamen nec adversi metu belli
procitus populus Israel.
fear, nor through the cross hazard of battle discouraged. But to avenge the
violation of honesty, threw off Vindicandae custitatis sequestravit dolorem.
dismal thoughts, rushed valiantly upon the spears point, dint of sword, and
dart, prepared with more effusion of their blood, either to wash away so great
infamy, or utterly to spill it. But an honest cause never had a final doom,
neither had theirs. Thus are the mighty stirred up for the preservation of
honesty, neither are the weak wanting therein, but the very 2 Kings 6.
lepers strive to keep it. There was a great famine in Samaria, being besie-by
the Syrian host, a woman cried to the King, making report of the eating of her
son, he threatened Elisha the Prophet as the cause thereof, as Ahab did Eliah,
when himself was. But prophesying 2 Kings 7.1.
plenty, which though it were not believed of the messenger sent to him being a
prince, who was for his incredulity pressed to death, yet the four lepers
remaining without the gates (for such must dwell apart) tasted of it to their
exceeding comfort being affamished, and imparting the same honestly, and
faithfully to the city, filled their fainting souls with incomprehensible joy.

CHAP. XV. The praise of honesty is commended by the magnanimity of Ester, the
fidelity of Jonathan and Ahimelech.
WHat did Queen Ester that she might deliver her own people, which was both
a comely, and honest part? feared she the unlimited prerogative, or unbridled
wrath of a mighty Monarch? said she Ester 4.16.
not if I perish I perish? To be affronted by such a favorite as Haman, was
enough to daunt the most warlike spirit. But an happy success was ever the
companion of a good cause. Assuerus the great King of Ipse rex Persarum ferox,
and tumido cord, tamen decorum judicavit, indici insidiarum, quae sibi paratae
forent gratia^ repraesentare, etc. indici insidiarum for indictarum insidiarum
such devises as admit no defense to be made against them.
Persia, though of a fierce, and swelling spirit, judged it a decency, not to
deny her a boon in repealing that bloody decree, barring whatsoever plea to
cross it, for delivery of the innocent, and free people from servitude, and
the drawing out the nocent of such an unbeseeming and notorious devise to
death. Treachery was devised not against her nation alone, but against her own
person the Monarchs royal consort. She put her life into his hands to releive
her people appointed to the spoil, and he heard her request against him the
second in the kingdom, and chiefest among all his favorites. For when he saw
his fraudulent practices not only to derogate from honesty toward his subjects,
but to be very dishonest even toward himself he assigned him a gibbet, that
loved so well mounting to clime upon. A worthy president doubtless in a man of
so high a rank, thus to patronage honesty. For that favor, that friendship is
approved, which protectes honesty, and to be preferred truly above all the
wealth, honor, and dominion, which this world can afford. To put that before
which should follow after is to invert order. Friendship and honesty sort well
together: but so that honesty have the pre-eminence, and friendship follow
after it. Was it not the wisdom of 1 Samuel 20.32.33.
Jonathan thus to discern when he had so great respect to David's honesty, and
piety, that for the love thereof he regarded not to retain his fathers
freindship, feared not his offense, avoided not the peril of death? For Saul
his father was no ordinary person, but a King, and had the power of life and
death in his hand. Was not the same in Ahimelech, Chap. 2.6.
who to show himself hospital, to innocent David in his necessity, adventured
to incur rather the Kings indignation, then to give him coorse, and
Nabal-like intertainment? Under the pretext of freindship to have betrayed him,
had been the next devise to have acquitted himself, but so had he bin worse
then Doeg, who portending evil, yet pretended not this. Not neglecting the
other he was sure of death, but to have affected this only, though he had never
effected it, had been worse then death. The griping hereof being over, the
pain is past, but the brand of such infamy as cleaves to that, will never be
removed.

CHAP. XVI. Of the moderation to be kept in the conservation of friendship,
Aristot. Eth. lib. 8.
with which the volumne is shut up.
NOthing therefore is to be preferred before honesty, which notwithstanding
lest it should be overborne with the sway of friendship, we are to heed what
the scripture admonishes, concerning Philosophical questions tending
hereunto, we are to subscribe Arist. lib. 8. Cap. 9. and lib. 5. Cap. 1.
Plutarch in vita Coriolani, Themistocli, et Coriolano amicus contra patriam
inventus est nemo Cic. de amicit. Coriolanus own mother. Volumnia was against
him herein, Salus populi suprema lex est Idem lib. 3. de legibus The public
good (...) fairer and more divine Arist. Eth. lib. 1. Cap. 2.
negatively: namely to such as these whether one ought for his friends sake to
conceive any thing against his country, and again whether one ought to make
shipwreck of his faith, to do his friend good, either in his substance,
report, or person: The scripture says indeed, A man that bears false
witness against his Prove. 25.18. berehehu the root whereof is raha pascere
because he is ones friend, that feeds him. It is translated neighbor, and so
it may indifferently be being incident to both.
friend, is like a hammer, a sword, and a sharp arrow: but consider what may
be built upon it. For he reprehendeth not the testimony spoken against a
friend, but the false testimony. What if for Gods cause, what if for his
countries cause, a man must be compelled to give testimony, ought freindship
to prevail with him more then religion, more then the love of his citizens?
Not so, but the truth of the Romans 3.7.8. For promoting the cause of a friend,
country, religion, falsehood must not be used.
Testimony is to be sought after, lest one friend, which by his faith given
ought to absolve another friend, should by his treachery desire to entangle
him in a snare So then a friends eye must be always fastened upon the truth,
neither gratifying the nocent nor beguiling the innocent. Mat. 18.15.16.17.
Verily if he must needs bring in his witness, what he knows to be amiss in
his friend, he ought to admonish him of it Prove. 27.5. Levit. 19.17.
secretly, but if being admonished he will not amend, to reprove him openly.
For corrections are good, and for the most part better then silent friendship.
Howbeit thy friend think himself hurt, yet rebuke him, yea though the
bitterness of reproof wound his soul, yet fear thou not until thou
conceive some better hope of him, still to rebuke him. For the wounds of a
friend are better then the kisses of a Adulantium oscula Ibid. ver. 6. or of an
enemy flattering, quam fraudulenta oscula odientis Vulg. Venahtaroh hatar Heb.
orare.
flatterer. Wherefore correct thy friend when he is in an error, as for thine
innocent friend in no wise forsake him. For freindship ought to be constant.
Eccles. 6.15.
We must therefore persevere in our affection: we must not in a childish
manner and an unsettled judgment change our friends. (...). Ibid. ver. 16.
Open thy breast to thy friend that will be faithful to thee, This is added
for there is no more in the orig. interlineall.
whereby thou may receive comfort from him. For a faithful friend is the
medicine of life, and a special favor of him that is immortal, the weight of
his worth is unvalueable, he is a fortress of strength; whosoever finds him
finds a treasure. Esteem thy friend as thine equal, neither think it any
discredit to prevent him in whatsoever good office. For freindship harbors
no pride, she knows her not, regards not her high looks deeming ignorance
of her acquaintance to be the mother of virtue. Likewise prides companion
disdain is out of her Element. Therefore the wiseman Ecclus. 22.23.25.
says, Amicitia nescit superbiam,
be not ashamed to salute thy friend; forsake him not in his necessity, be
faithful, be steadfast to him in his poverty, because freindship is an help to
the life of man. Wherefore, as the Apostle admonishes, bear ye therein one
another Gal. 6.2.
burden. He speaks it to those that are joined together in the same bond of
love: For if the prosperity of a friend be benefit to his well-willers why
should not they again lend their helping hand to him in his adversity? We must
where true friendship is, help by our counsel, by our labor, by suffering
together in our affections: and if necessity requires, by enduring whatsoever,
be it never so bitter, in the cause of our friends. He that shall stand in the
defense of the innocence of a friend, must content himself for the most part
to get thereby hatred, and many times to be traduced, and depraved. When he is
rebuked, and accused of an adversary, if offense be taken against thee thou
resisting, and answering for him, repent not, because this is the voice of a
just man; Howbeit Etsi mala mihi evenerint propter amicum sustineo.
many evils befall me for my friend, yet still I bear it. For a friend is
tried in Prove. 17.17. As the Lords opportunity to show mercy is man's misery: so
in some resemblance of his great Master, is the trial of every good servant of
his toward his friend, seen in the time of adversity.
adversity: in prosperity all are friends.

But as in adversity the patience, and forbearance of a friend is necessary: so
answerably is his authority congruent to reprove, and take him down in
prosperity, when he sees his friend to have too high an opinion of his own
worth, and his mind swells with insolency. This order was inverted in Jobs
friends, and therefore in his calamity; he cries not upon them without cause,
O my Job 19.21.
friends take pity on me, take pity on me. For it is not the voice Non
abjecta vox ista est, sed censoria.
of an abject, but of one justly censuring their overmuch harshnesse, and
unjust condemnation. When he was wrongfully burdened by them, he answered,
take pity upon me my friends: that is, it behoved you to deal mercifully
with me, but in stead of extending compassion toward me, as ye ought, in my
misery ye oppress me with your speeches, and impugn me daily. The authors
admonition to his sons in the case of friendship.
Learn ye, O my sons to avoid the like offense, and preserve ye carefully
with your brethren, not such pretended, but that 1 Pet. 1.22.
true friendship tending to perfection, which is already begun, which to
consummate is to come to the Math. 22.40. Romans 13.10.
complement of all duties, and to attain to the 1 Cor. 12.31. and 13.13.
top of all graces. Labor ye to know more perfectly what is the sweetness
of Christian friendship, how great, and how graceful the fellowship of the
Saints. A chief solace surely is it, and of inestimable price in this
sorrowful pilgrimage to have one to whom thou may safely lay open thy breast,
participate thy secrets, commit thy estate, and life it self; he will rejoice
with thee in thy welfare, suffer in thy tribulation, How fast, how ineffable,
how inviolably chained together was that friendship of the three Dan. 3.19. No
less was that of holy David, and Jonathan, witness that elegiacall hymn, 2
Sa^. 1.26. Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan, very kind have thou been
to me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women. Yet David's
own exceeded his, 2 Samuel 20.41.
Hebrew children, whom the fearful devouring flames of the seven times heated
furnace was not able to divide?

A good hearing, The name Jesus in St. Bernard is honey in the mouth, music
in the ear, a joyful showte in the heart.
music for the ear, and melody for the heart is it where it resideth, as in
these two: 2 Samuel 1.23.
Saul and Jonathan were lovely, and pleasant in their lives, and in their
deaths they were not divided. This is the fruit of friendship, not that faith
for the sake of friendship should be forsaken: for he Non potest homini amicus
esse, qui fuerit Deo infidus.
cannot be a friend to man, who shall be unfaithful to God. Friendship
Pietatis custos amicitia est, and aequalitatis magistra.
is the guardian of piety, the Mistress of equality, that the superior may
show himself equal to his inferior, the viz. in friendship.
inferior to his superior. Where is disparity of manners, there cannot be
friendship: and therefore for such among whom is disagreement to seek to Idem
velle, idem nolle firma amicitia est.
accord therein, ought to be a grace, and crown to them both. In the case of
friendship between a superior, and an inferior, if the matter require, let
neither authority be wanting to the inferior, nor to the superior humility:
Let the superior hear his inferior, as his compere, and equal, and let the
inferior admonish him as his friend, chide him also if there be just cause,
but with a charitable affection, and without all desire of ostentation.
Bitterness in admonition which is as gall, and wormwood, contumely in
objurgation, which is little better then a sarcasme, or scurrility ought to be
avoided. For as friendship must fly from flattery: so must it be estranged
from Which is the mother of contumely.
insolency. For what Quid est amicus nisi consors amoris?
is a friend but a fellow-partener of thy love, on whom thou may fix thy mind
unremovably, set thine heart, apply, appropriate, so infert thy thoughts to
make one of Another in person, the same in affection.
two, to whom thou may commit thee, as to another the same, from whom thou
may dread nothing, desire nothing dishonest for thine own commodities sake.
For friendship is not to be valued by Non vectigalis amicitia est, Arist.
Ethic. l. 8. Cap. 1. (...) Friendship is either a virtue, or of near affinity
with it.
revenew, not by wealth, but by that is of true worth; Because friendship is a
virtue, no gain, but the gift of grace, no Nec licitatione preciorum, sed
concertatione benevolentiae.
beating prizes, but heating the affections, that benevolence may bud forth.
Hereupon it is, that for the most part the friendship of the poor is better
then of the rich: and that oftentimes the rich are without friends, when the
poor have them in great abundance. For that is not true friendship where is
deceitful flattery: such as is the assentation of the most part, seeking
thereby to hold themselves in favor with the rich. But this is the poor man's
happiness, and prerogative above the wealthy, no man Erga pauperem nemo
assentator est.
flattereth him, where he finds favor it is in truth, neither needs he
fear losing, because lodged in the heart of his lover, nor envy, because she
always takes an higher flight. How precious a jewel friendship is, does no
way better appear, then for that it is as well angelical as humane. Whence
the Lord Jesus most graciously, and with a most keen edge of speech to stir
up devotion: Make ye Luke 16.9.
friends of unrighteous mammon, that when ye shall want That which our author
here understands to be meant of the Angels, the new writers who follow St.
Chrysostom. and Theodoret interpret to be the poor, St. Augustine the Saints, Qui
sunt qui habebunt tabernacula aeterna, nisi Sancti Deo? Et qui sunt qui ab
ipsis accipiendi sunt in tabernacula aeterna, nisi qui eorum indigentiae
serviunt, and eis quibus opus est hilariter administrant. In Genesis C. 3. in haec
verba, and erant nudi Adam, and mulier ejus, and non pudebat illos.
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. It is he himself
according to his own testimony, that of servants has made us friends, ye
are my John 15.14.
friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. He has given us herein a form
of friendship which let us follow: namely, that we do the will of our friend,
that is, that we open whatsoever secrets we have in our The riches of Gods
grace whatsoever they be, which he has bestowed on us, let us open our breast,
and impart them to our friend.
breast to our friend, and that we be not ignorant of his secrets. Thus let us
reveal the hidden things of our heart to him, and he to us. Therefore, says
he, I have called you friends, because all Multa dicuntur in scripturis tanquam
facta sint, cum in fpe adhuc esse intelligitur. Aug. Ep. 57. reciting this
place for witness among others; his reason is, because our Savior says
elsewhere, I have many things to say unto you which you cannot carry away now.
Omnia nota fecit eis, quae illi poterant audire, and quorum erant capaces,
Theod. Non revelavit Apostolis omnia, neque ad hoc venerat, ut redderet eos
omniscios. Musculus. He that will be in friendship with God, must submit
himself to his will. This is to be desired, to be required in faithful
friendship: amiable, and graceful evermore is it, wheresoever it resideth. Sit
neque quisquam detestabilior quam qui amicitiam laeserit.
things whatsoever I have heard of my father, I have made known to you.
Wherefore whosoever is a true friend concealeth nothing, but reveals all,
pours out his whole mind, even as the Lord Jesus did effuse out of his sacred
breast in all plenitude the high, and hidden mysteries of his heavenly Father.
Therefore he which does the commandment of God is his friend, and under this
honorable name is received of him into his family.

To be a friend, is to be of the same mind with him to whom thou professest
friendship, because there is always unity of mind in true, and constant
lovers, which in one word is called Unanimity. Let nothing be more disasterous
then the detestable instrument, which cuts the cord that binds together in one
the minds of two. And it is worthy the observation, that where this breach is
made it grows from The antithesis hereunto is been mutuis fidum pectus
amoribus, Horat. Carm. lib. 2. od. 12. Vnde in proditore Dominus hoc
gravissimum invenit, quo ejus condemnaret perfidiam, quod gratiae vicem non
repraesent arit, and convivijs amicitiae venenum miscuerit. This had been
gross, and course glosing at the ordinary feast of the Passover: but the
Lamb in presentation being there now in person, it was too too palpable and
pestilent.
ungratefulness. Hence was it that the Lord found nothing so heinous in the
traitor, whereby to condemn him of perfidiousnesse, as for that he received
from him no intercourse of love, but a mixture of poison with the feasts of
friendship: no hearty affection for effects of greatest consequence, no pious
duty for manifold deserts of highest moment: but an hard, and unheard of
measure of treachery for trustiness, of virulent malitiousnesse for the
white, and pure milk of innocence. Not without special cause therefore in the
mouth of the Prophet, lively shadowing in his Achitophel, this requital is he
thus Checked; But thou, O man, of Psalm. 55.13. (...) Sept.
one mind with me in religion, and going together into the house of God as
friends, chief in my counsel, and always partaking the daintiest dishes of
my secrets. That is to say, it cannot be endured, that thou being an unanimous,
and bosom friend should bear a viperous appetite to hurt him, who has
heaped upon thee so much grace. Surely if an adversary had done me this
mischief, I could have borne it patiently, if it had proceeded from a
professed enemy, I could have hid my self. An enemy may be, but a friend
lurking secretly may not be prevented. We take heed of him to whom we commit
not our counsels, but of him to whom we commit them we cannot beware.
Wherefore, that so he might aggravate the envy of the sin, he said not, thou
art my servant, thou art mine Apostle, but, thou art mine in one mind, mine
affianced friend. That is, thou art not a betraier of me, but of thy self,
because where is unanimity, we two being thereby made one, thou thrustest in
enmity, and so destroyest as well thy self, as me. The Lord himself when he
was displeased with those three This seems to be of as uncertain truth, as
that of the three wise men of the East, neither does this allegation, howbeit a
received opinion, make it certain: the tables at Collen of the three Kings of
the East do not warrant that. For Dionysius Carthus. de Epiph. Dom. Who was
both able, and willing to say much for it, yet mark how doubtfully he speaks:
Quidam dicunt, quod Magi isti regnaverunt in Arabia minori: veruntamen verius
dicitur, quod fuerunt de Perside, and sic Chrysostomus super Math. fuerunt viri
orientales de Perside, dicti Magi, id est, Sapientes. In like manner concerning
this. The three friends of Job to be Kings, there is no sure ground for it:
Amici Job, quem quasi regem circumstante exercitu venerari seliti sunt, in
sterquilinio sedentem deridebant. Rupertus de operibus Spiritus Sancti. l. 2,
C. 10. he says not that they were Kings, bus that they worshipped Job as a
King. Where should they be kings? the same Author denies Job to descend of
Esau, of whose stem were kings, and says that he came of Nahor Abraham's
brothers son Hus, Helui the fourth man to come ot Buz another son of Nahor
upon Genesis C. 2.22. of whom proceeded no king at all.
Kings, because they rendered not to holy Job his deserved Job 42.7.
honor, chose rather upon their submission, to steal them a Commission of
remission at his supplication as their Howsoever in their prime purpose those
three were his friends also: yet accidentally, and upon the point of misprision
back-friends.
friend, then at their own, that so the Job 42.8.
indulgence for their sins being pronounced by his mouth might be the
suffrage of the reconcilement of their friendship. The voice therefore of his
Ibid.
prayer, not Mal. 1.7. because polluted, but his person. ibid. v. 9. etc. Genesis
4.4. and his priesthood as Melchisedechs Genesis 14.18. being a type of the
Messiah mediatorship.
their own Itaque rogavit Job, and Dominus ignovit. Their atonement must first
be made with Job, whom they had offended, then would the Lord have respect to
their sacrifice: which also must be tendered to the Lord by him, sanctified by
his supplication. For so, and not otherwise would the Lord pardon them, Math.
5.24.
was accepted. Their own insolency stood as a bar against them: his
friendship regained, must be as a door to give them entrance to the throne of
mercy.

FINIS.
The Epilogue being a summarie catalogue to his Sons, which is so compendious,
that except he should have said nothing, he could not have said less: so
complete, as nothing more could have bin in many lines delivered.
THese things have J recommended to you my Sons, that ye might have them in
perpetual memory, and imitation: which whether they may be for your profit,
experience shall prove. In the mean time they will bring you all kind of
presidents in much plenty. For well-neare all the examples of the ancients in
sacred Scripture, very many also of their divine sayings are comprehended in
these three books: so that although the speech be not of that grace, and
excellency may be expected, yet the antiquity of things laid down in the holy
Bible briefly expressed, and pregnantly applied therein to every several
point, may yield you being carefully observed no small instruction.

An admonition to the Reader.
THE difficulty of this task of translation (Christian Reader) is not well
known to any, but to such, as have thoroughly tasted of it by experience: The
translation of the fathers is rare, and such as has seldom been undertaken
and least of all of this our author, because of the abstrusenesse of his style.
For neither is it Non flaccidus, nec humilis. Erasmus.
languishing without vigor, nor poor, Hierom de Spiritu Sto.
and naked, but as it is worthily answered by the St. Augustine.
worthiest divine in his behalf though it be more demisse, yet such as well
sorteth with those great, and deep mysteries. But even there, no less then
elsewhere, when the matter requires it, and chiefly in his books de viduis et
virginibus, he has his aculeos, pricketh forward the reader to try his wits,
and beat his brains not a little to find out his meaning: and so it fares
with us in this piece of work. If any man make a question hereof, let him read
over the last chapter of the first book or that against Which has been the
cause that extraordinary pains has been spent about it both to clear the
many difficulties therein and to enlarge the argument.
Symmachus, and accordingly pass his verdict concerning the residue. He
breaks not out into tragical passions with Hierome, and Hilarie, but goes
on in an argute, and sharp, pleasantness Est quem non omnino sine causa
mellistuum Doctorem vocant. Erasm.
of speech: the whole frame whereof is checker-worke like a great deal of
matter wrapped up in a little room, which is Senecaes high delight. Some times
the whole furniture of his collections, is altogether sententious, Epiphonema
is frequent with him, and (...): the one is powerful to pierce the conscience,
the other implicate, to set wits on work, the one quick, and quaint, the
other curious and cunning, which the more intricate it is, the more acceptable
is it reputed. Pithy, persuasive compendious above all other forms of speech
are interrogative points: of these almost are his whole volumes compounded. He
is full of piety, and divine mystery in all variety every where, but especially
here, where occasion is offered him to touch all sorts of moral subjects,
which was one principal inducement to move me to pitch my labors upon it, as
a prime work: yet so, that this part likewise is covered oftentimes with the
mists, and cloud of much obscurity, and The cause of obscurity is his
concisenesse according to that of the Poet, dum brevis esse laboro, obscurus
fio, which to clear, and to make the text more evidently to cohere together,
was an inducement to the many and more large marginall notes.
the sense so shadowed, and cast over eftsoons throughout the same: that some
Ariadne is still wanting to get Theseus out of the streights, some Aaron to lay
out more clearly Moses meaning. What is done herein, I submit my self to the
censure of the learned, nothing regarding the virulent tongues of the enemies
of all such pious endeavors. I was not so careful at the first evermore to
tie my self strictly to the words but rather to the meaning, Non verbo verbum
curabis reddere fidus Interpres; nec desilies imitator in arctum, Horat. in
Art Poet. may give some liberty of enlargement in point of obscurity. Yet I
know that the extremes lie on both sides, which is the cause of the often
putting down his words in the margin in his own tongue, that thou may the
better perceive it, and bear with me, choosing rather to retain them though
they may seem harsh and strange then not to hold me narrowly to what I
undertake: that of St Hierome which follows, is not against this, but against
the taking the Scripture always according to the literal sense, as for
example in the participation of the Sacrament of the supper. For who so take it
deceive themselves. Qui verbo tenus cord ficci et mente aridi sacris
participant donis, lambunt quidem petram, sed inde mel non sugunt Sic Cypr.
sermon de caena Dom.
nor altogether to the sentence but to the sense, as now I have been upon a
second review. And St. Hieromes rule for the Scriptures, which our father
plentifully cites, has been my drection in this course, Super Epistol. ad
Ephesians. lib. 1. Let us not think the Gospel to consist in the words of the
Scripture, but in the meaning, not in the upper face, but in the marrow, not in
the leaves of speech, but in the root of reason.
Non putemus in verbis scripturarum esse evangelium, sed in sensu, non in
superficie, sed in medulla, non in sermonum folijs, sed in radice rationis: and
(...).
Theodoret of the same subject to the same purpose, the word of God Aug. lib.
1. super Genesis Cap. 169. Tom. 4.
foolishly understood is not the word of God I have studied rightly to
understand my author, and have rendered him thereafter: so that he has lost
little I hope of his beauty in the substance, though peradventure coming forth
in a new and unwonted suite stripped of his ornaments of a better dialect, and
thrust out of his own element, he may seem to be another, and not the same. I
have added a supply to some few chapters, and likewise to some few points
partly from other places of his own works where I found him more plentiful
to that purpose. He following the Septuagints, I have labored, as appears
eft-soones in the margin, to reconcile the same with the Hebrew. Neither is the
difference much between these being advisedly observed. Melancthon out of his
maturity of judgment saw it to be so, and that in the matterials they both
agree. Likewise acute and judicious Iunius by invincible arguments convinces
it to be so in his paraphrase. The mouth of the fathers, l and mirror of
Antiquity next to the Primitive easily reconcileth the great difference
between the Hebrew, and Greek texts Ion. 3.4.
concerning Nineves destruction. One text has after forty, the other after 3.
days, both may be true says he, that in the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ, sins might be understood to be dissolved, and abolished, who Romans
4.25.
was delivered to death for our sins, rose again for our justification. For
the appearing of our Lord is known to be both in the resurrection, and
ascension, whereof the one was after three days, the other after forty. Let
us not say therefore one of these to be false, neither let us be litigious
herein for one interpretation against another, when both they which interpret
out of the Hebrew do confirm unto us, that to be written which they deliver
us, and when also the authority of the Septuagints, which we have commended to
us by divine That miracle was that the 70. being shut up apart by the
appointment of Ptolomie Philadelph King of Egypt, in so many several celles.
Nihil alicujus eorum codice inventum est, quod non eisdem verbis, eodemque
verborum ordine inveniretur in caeteris. Aug. de doctr. Chr. lib. 2.
miracle wrought at the same time, is by so great antiquity established in the
churches. A great number of other places, and differences does he Idem eodem
lib. et Cap. and Eus. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. Cap. 8. Ex Irenaeo, who reports
the same of Esdras his restoring again, the former prophets, lost in the
captivity, through divine instinct.
reconcile.

2. There is a prejudicate opinion among too many in our age, that the ancient
fathers cannot easily be refined from the dross (...); Clearchus apud
Athenaeum.
of sundry errors, and therefore they distaste, or at least distrust, and
suspect whatsoever proceeds from them. It is strange that the name of a
Father should work such contrary effects to that it imports. For what else
does it import, but a leader, and guide in the way of verity, and piety. Next
to the foundation of the prophets, and Apostles, are the Fathers, and Councels
in their times for 600. years after Christ produced of the worthies, and walls
of our church, as vouchers of our doctrines. The learned interpreter of the
scriptures so plentiful allegations in his institutions, and commentaries out
of them, the delight, and felicity that many of our best divines take in citing
them, and others though more secretly, yet sensibly enough, the weight of their
reasons rules, directions, persuasions, sentences are sufficient, would they be
persuaded, to yield them satisfaction: yea, to regaine to their perusing, their
diligent care, to their name, their love, and good liking.

3. Tullies offices though a common book, yet being of no common vtility in
the matter of morality, our author imitateth as no less profitable in the
study of divinity, and of so excellent use to the Church of God, that he
places it in the Primus hic tomus continet (...), hoc est, quae admores
Christianorum instituendos faciunt: quorum oportet primam esse curam. Erasm.
His works of a later edition printed at Rome in an other order, derogate
nothing from what was precedent.
frontispice, as of most respect, of his large volumes.

4. The Fathers of the Latin Church Anno Dom. 179. Eusebius. sets down the
French Martyrs commendation of him to Eleutherius Bish. of Rome. Is omnium
doctrinarum curiosissimus explorator, inquit Tertullianus.
Irenaeus, who flourished at Lions; under the Emperor Verus, Anno Dom. 202.
Famous for his Apology, which he wrought for the Christians, Eus. l. 2. c. 2.
Tertullian a Divine of Carthage, who flourished under Severus; A. D. 254.
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 3.
Cyprian B. of Carthage, who flourished under Decius, and was chief in the
Synod held in that City; A. D. 310.
Lactantius famous for his institutions under Dioclesian, and He wrote 12.
books of the Trinity, and therein among other things, being a man of singular
eloquence, confuteth the arguments of the Arians against the Canon of one
substance. Soerat. l. 7. c. 8.
Hilarie B. of Poitiers under Constantius, were ancienter then Who was chosen
B. of Millan 378.
St. Ambrose: but because they were all touched with some heresy, as
Chilianisme, or Montanisme, or rebaptization he is in more account, and the
first of the four renowned: and because most orthodox next in estimation,
after the first four general Counsels, to the sacred Scriptures, or as they
use to speak, to the four Evangelists. He was the Grandem illum caetum in
Ecclesiae sagena^ pertraxit.
converter of St. Augustine himself to the Christian faith. Evermore striveth
he to prove his documents out of the Quem mihi dabis, qui pari synceritate
tractet sacras literas, qui cautius vitaret suspecta dogmata? Erasm.
Scriptures, wherein he is very Howbeit giving those of his own collection
the prime place, I have seconded them with others of like tenure: but as for
the full length of the story of Scripture, which he much uses, and no less of
his citations, though very rarely, I tie not my self expressly, but summarily.
frequent, and skillful, acute to gather the true sense, careful to make the
best use. Of great gravity, and authority was he in his government, austere in
his discipline, not only a bitter enemy to sin, but a courageous executor of
the laws of the Church against it without partiality, even upon the person of
the Emperor himself: powerful in his doctrine to persuade, and in his life
adorned with rare endowments of nature, art, and virtue to win to godliness.
He held his Episcopal estate under Valentinian, and Theodosius, to whom,
together with all the Clergy, Ipsum Ambrosium foelicem quendam hominem secundum
seculum opinabar, quem sic tantae potestates honorarent. Aug. Conf. l. 6. c. 3.
Nobles, and Commons professing the Christian faith, his word was an oracle to
convince the conscience, and pull down the wilfullest sinner, and most
obstinate heretic upon his knees by way of submission. Faveat Roma, quae
genuit Ambrosium, Erasm. in Epist. ad Alasc. Posito in administratione
praefecturae Galliarum patre ejus Ambrosij, natus est Ambrosius qui infans in
area Praetorij in cunabulis positus, cum dormiret aperto ore subito examen apum
adveniens faciem ejus, and ora implevit; and therefore he might be borne in
France.
By Nation was a Roman made President of Liguria, Prelate in Lumbardie.
Insubria, worthily reputed a chief Doctor of the Christian world. He spent
his labors in preaching at Millan, but wrought for the benefit of all, and for
us of this Nation, even the most ignorant among us, when he is now made
speak, through the Wisd. 8.1. (...) which reaches from one end to another
(...) powerfully, and disposes of all things (...) profitably: which the Lord
thereby bring to pass herein.
providence of Almighty God, in our English tongue.

5. I have waded the deeper in this river of the authors commendation, who as
Nilus watered the Egypt of his time, albeit nothing to the Ocean of his
deserts, to draw thee to his love, and thereby, through reaping the benefit of
his godly labors to the more gainful mart of thy soul: and above all to his
love, that is the author of all grace, the sovereign good, and souls only
solace, which is the upshot of all holy studies, according to the sacred
Epiphoneme of his most proficient disciple, which were it imprinted in the
hearts of all professing Christianity, would make a heavenly melody. O my Aug.
in Manuel. Cap. 24.
soul, says he, inammeled with the image of God, redeemed with the blood of
Christ, espoused by faith, endued with the spirit, adorned with virtues,
deputed with the Angels, love thou him of whom only thou art loved.

6. But out of the depths Ambrosij Lib. 5. Hexam. Cap. 25. Devota ad Dom. I. C.
deprecatio cum clausione 5. diei.
of thine undrainable love have thou respect to us (O Lord Jesu) that we may
call to mind every one in his own particular his manifold transgressions,
water our couch daily with the tears of repentance for them: and so suing in
the deepest contrition, and lowest submission joined with amendment of life at
thy mercy seat, may find remission. Whatsoever fault has crept into this
work, O Christ pardon it. Thou have vouchsafed to make me a dispensor of thy
heavenly mysteries, we of the ministry are all thy messengers, but not Ex
libro ejus 5. cap. 1. de fide.
equally all, because thou have bestowed thy gifts according to thy good
pleasure. We are all (O Lord) (...). 2 Cor. 6.1. Chrysostom. in his Tractat on the
shepherd, and sheep.
coworkers together, blessed is he that bestows his talent to the best
advantage. Blessed is he that builds upon the foundation of faith in thee,
gold, 1 Cor. 3.
silver, precious stones. If our diligence satisfy not men, let it suffice,
when we shall render our account to thee, that we have done our best endeavor.
Make them that read this, learn, being purged thereby with the working
together of thy sacred spirit from their corruptions, to shine as gold tried in
the furnace in the beauty of holy duties. Thou art the good Samaritan, cure the
wounds of the people, power in wine, and oil, heal the breaches of the land.
It is overwhelmed with vanity, covered with injustice, it swarmeth with
intemperance, lies naked, and is stripped of zeal, fortitude, courage, and
constancy, in the cause of the maintenance of thine honor, of sincere
doctrine, virtuous life, true practice after much profession, many religious
exercises, and perusing multitudes of godly books. We acknowledge that this
increases our sin, heapeth an heavier judgment upon us, withholds thy
love from us, and incenseth thine indignation, when we bring not forth
answerable fruits. Add therefore we beseech thee (dear Savior) the fire of
thy Spirit to warm our affections, and by the flames thereof so kindle our
spirits, that we may be moved forward with a fervent affection in the way of a
pious conversation abounding in all manner of good works for the great glory
of thy Name, the credit of our profession, the continuance of thy Gospel, the
turning away of thy judgments long threatened, yet hitherto in thy unspeakable
mercy withheld from us. And because of thine inexplicable love toward us, and
merits above that we are able to ask, or think, with thy heavenly Father for
us, our humble duty also binding us thereunto, stir us up through the
fervency of the same spirit of strength, to seek continually at thy merciful
hands by hearty, and earnest prayer, the increase of thy special blessings
upon thine anointed, the breath of our nostrels King Charles, with his royal
consort, upon Prince Charles, the rest of the royal Progeny; the Princess
Palatine likewise, and her Princely issue; upon the house of Levi, and the
whole Commonweal of this kingdom from the highest to the lowest. Incite us
we instantly pray thee in the last place, but not with our least, but best
remembrance unto all thankfulness for thy primarie mercy unto us for the same,
our most religious, and virtuous Iehoshaphat, and the continuance of the
precious jewel of thy Gospel under him our gracious Sovereign. Cause us in
sincerity of soul, in a burning desire, and endeavor to render for both these
(then the which nothing in the world can be greater) not unmindfull of
whatsoever benefit beside, to thee our only Redeemer, with the whole
undividable most sacred Trinity, one in Nature, three in Person, (infinitely
worthy to receive of the whole family in heaven, and earth, of Angels, men,
and all creatures,) everlasting honor, and glory immortal praise, and
benediction. Amen.

The translation of St. Cyprians Epistle ad Cornelium fratrem, being then B. of
Rome, de sacerdotibus reformandis.
IN Deutronomie Deutr. 17.22.
the Lord God speaks, saying, And the man that will do proudly, and not
hearken unto the Priest or Judge, which shall be in those days, even that man
shall dye, and all the people when they shall hear it, shall fear, and shall
do no more wickedly. In like manner to 1 Samuel 8.7.
Samuel, when he was despised of the Jews; they have not despised thee, but
they have despised me. The Lord likewise in the Gospel: Luke 10.16.
he which hears you, hears me, and him that sent me, and he that rejects
you, rejects me: who rejects me, rejects him that sent me. And when he
had cleansed the leper: Math. 8.4.
go, says he, and show thy self to the priest. And afterward in the time of
his passion, when he had received a stroke John 18.22. (...) (...).
by a servant of the high priest, and when he had said to him, do thou so
answer the high priest? The Lord against the high Priest answered nothing
contumeliously, neither from the honor of the priests detracted any thing, but
vindicating rather, and showing his own innocence. If I have evil spoken,
upbraid me of the evil, but if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me? Also
in the Acts of the Apostles blessed Paul, when it was said to him, Act. 23.4.
Do thou so charge Gods high priest in reviling him? albeit the Lord being
now crucified, they began to be sacrilegious, impious, and bloody, neither did
retain at this time any of the priestly honor, and authority,
notwithstanding thinking upon the very name it self, howbeit void, and being
a certain shadow of a Priest, was afraid: I knew not brethren, says he, that
he was the high Priest: For it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the
ruler of thy people. When these so great, and such like, and many other
examples do go before us, whereby the priestly authority is strengthened by
divine verdict, what manner of persons do thou suppose them to be, who being
enemies to Priests, and rebels against the Church Catholic, are neither
terrified with the threatening of the Lord forewarning them, neither with the
vengeance of the judgment to come: Heresies and schisms, whereupon they grow
up.
For neither have heresies risen, or schisms sprung up from any other ground,
then from hence, that obedience is not given to Gods Priest. Neither one Priest
for the time, nor one Judge for the time is thought to be in Christ's stead: to
whom, if according to magisteriall office divine, the universal brotherhood
would dutifully submit themselves, there would be no moving at all against the
College of priests: no man after divine judgment, after the suffrage of the
people, after the joint consent of the Bishops would make himself a judge, not
now of the B. but of God. No man in the breach of the unity of Christ would
rent asunder the Church: no man pleasing, and swelling apart abroad, would
build up a new heresy: unless, if there be any of so sacrilegious temerity,
and reprobate mind, that he may think a Priest to be made without the
judgment, and ordinance of God, when the Lord says in the Gospel: g are not
two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and neither of them falls to the earth
without the will of your Father? when he says, not the least things to be
brought to pass without the will of God, can any one imagine the chiefest, and
greatest matters to be done in the Church of God, he no way knowing, nor
permitting the same, and the priests, that is to say, the Lords stewards, not
to be assigned by his own sentence? That is not to have faith whereby we
live, By the disposition of God all things are governed.
namely to give honor to Christ our Lord, and God, by whose birth, and
arbitrament we know, and believe all things to be ruled, and governed.
Clearly it appears Bps. which are without the Church, not to be made by the
will of God, but against the disposition, and tradition of the Gospel: so the
Lord himself puts down, and speaks in the twelve Prophets: they have set up
a King, Hos. 8.4.
but not by me.

An Index of the context of Scripture which occasionally are expounded in this
Volume, not otherwise. For the number of them in the whole arises in exceeding
great quantity. The figures before the Text declare places of Scripture: those
after where they are found in the work it self. What is prefixed afterward
for instruction to the Alphabeticall, must also be a direction here for the
searching them out every one in its due rank, that so it may appear how they
are opened, and applied to their proposed ends.
The old Testament.
Genesis.
1.33. GOd saw all things that he had made, and they were exceeding good, Fr.
p. 3,

2.10, 11, 12. And out of Eden went a river to water the garden, from thence it
was divided, and became into four heads, Pishon, Gihon, Tigris, Euphrates,
Intr. p. 2.

2.24. They both shall be one flesh, and one spirit, Off. l. 1. c. 32. p. 81.

6.5. God saw that the wickedness of man's heart was exceeding great in the
earth, etc. Fr. p. 14.

10.9. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord, Pref. in lib. 2.

12.1. Get thee out of thy country from thy kindred, etc. Off. l. 1. c. 22. p.
52.

47.18. But when the year mas ended they came again the next year, Off. l.
2. c. 16. p. 42.

Exodus.
12.11. Thus shall you eat the Passover with your loins girt, Intr. p. 3.

16.12. He that gathered much had nothing over, etc. Off. l. 1. c. 30. p. 73,
74.

20.26. And the second row shall be an Emeraud or Carbuncle, Intr. 2.

20.26. Neither shall thou go up by steps to mine Altar, lest thy filthiness
be discovered, Off. l. 1. c. 18. p. 41.

Numbers.
3.45. Et erunt mihi Levitae, etc. The Levites shall be mine.

Deuteronomie.
33.8. Give to the Levite thy Vrim, and Thummim, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 125.

Samuel.
1.10.10. Is Saul also among the Prophets? Off. l. 1. c. 29. page 68.

1.28.1. And it came to pass in those days that the people of other nations,
etc.

2.18 21. Then said Joab to Cushi, go tell the King what thou have seen,
Intr. p. 3.

Kings.
1.10.10. It was a true word which I heard in mine own land of thy sayings,
Off. l. 2. c. 10. p. 28.

1.21.3. The Lord keep me from giving the Inheritance of my fathers to thee,
Off. l. 3. c. 9. p. 31.

2.6.22. Thou shall not smite them whom thou have not taken with thy sword,
Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 28.

Job.
1.21. As it pleased the Lord, so comes it to pass, etc. Off. l. 1: c. 38. p.
39.

19.21. O my friends take pity on me, etc. Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 59.

21.9. They have waxed old, and abound in wealth, their seed is established
according to their desire, Off. l. 1. c. 12. p. 21.

32. Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and remain in the heap, Off. l.
1. c. 16. p 32.

Psalms.
4.4. Be angry and sin not, Off. l. 1. c. 20. p. 46, 47.

6.9. With thee is the fountain of life, Intr.

7. Title Shiggaion of David which he sang to the Lord concerning the words of
Cush the Benjamite, Intr. p. 3.

7.4. I have recompensed him that rendered me evil, Off. l. 3 c. 9 p. 30.

8.6. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, Off. l. 1. c. 28.
p. 64.

23.8. His mercy shall prevent me, p. 13.

26.5. I have hated the Congregation of the malignant, and I will not sit among
the ungodly, Add. p. 128.

27.26. The just man is merciful, and lends, Off. l. 2. c. 8. p. 24.

30.9. What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to corruption? Off.
l. 2. c. 6. p. 14.

34.11. Come ye sons and hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord, Off. l. 1. c. 1. p. 1.

37.21.37.25.38.13. J was as a deaf man and heard not, and as a dumb, Off. l.
1. c. 5. p. 10. 18.

39.1. I will keep my ways, that I offend not in my tongue, Off. l. 1. c. 2.
p. 6. 9. 11, 12, 13. and l. 3. c. 1. p. 1.

39.4. Lord let me know the number, etc. that I may know what I have not
attained to, Off. l. 1. c. 49. p. 115.

45.9. Kings daughters were among the honorable women, upon the right hand did
stand, etc. Intr. p. 2.

51.4. That thou may be justified in thy sayings, and clear, etc. Add. p.
135.

52.2. He cutteth with his tongue like a razor, Off. l. 3. c. 11. p. 38.

55.6. O that I had wings like a dove, etc. Off. l. 1. c. 20. p. 4.

55.13. Thou o man of one mind with me in religion, Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 63.

55.15.59 10. Let them go down quickly into the grave Off. l. 1. c. 12. p. 23.

65.1. Praise O God beseems thee in Sion, Off. l. 1. c. 20. p. 108.

68.13. Though ye have lien among the pots, etc. Intr p 2.

72 20 Lord in thy city thou will bring their images to nothing, Off. l. 1. c
39 p. 119.

82 4. Deliver the poor, and needy, Off. l 1. c 16. p. 33.

85.8 I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me, Off. l. 3. c. 1. p. 3.

93.1. The Lord has reigned, he has put on comeliness, Off l. 1 c. 45. p.
107. 108.

112.5. The good man is merciful, and lends, and will guide his words, etc.
Off. l. 2. c. 8. p. 24.

119 57. The Lord is my portion, Add. p. 132.

Proverbs.
5.15.17.18 Come eat, etc. Intr. p. 2.

9 5.12. Drink thou of the water, Off. l. 3. c. 1. p. 1. 2.

10.15.11.26. He that withdraws corn shall leave it to the nations, Off. l.
3. c. 6. p. 21. 22.

14 15. Innocent believes, Off. l. 3. c. 10. p. 35.

20.1. Wine is prodigal, Off. l. 2. c. 21. p. 54.

20.10. Diverse weights, and diverse measures, both these are an abomination to
the Lord, Off. l. 3. c. 9. p. 32.

23.10. When thou sit to eat with a ruler, etc. Off. l. 11. c. 31. p 77.

24.30. I passed by the fields of the slothful, Off. l. 1. c. 31. p. 77.

26.4. Answer not a fool according to his foolishness, Off. l. 1. c. 10. p.
18.

27.10. Better is a neighbor that is near then a brother, etc. Off. l. 1. c.
34. p. 83.

Isaiah.
3.1. Take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah the stay, and the trust, the
whol^ stay of bread, Intr. p. 2.

25.5. In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and a
diadem of beauty to the residue of the people.

6. And for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment.

Jeremiah.
9.24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows me that I am the
Lord which exercises loving kindness, Fr. p. 4.

Ezechiel.
21.26. Thus says the Lord, remove the diadem, take off the crown, Intr. p.
2.

Daniel.
11.43. He shall have power over the treasures of gold and silver, Intr. p. 2.

Zachariah.
4.6. An Angel said to me, what see thou? And I looked and behold a
candlestick all of gold, Intr. p. 2.

6.11. Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head
of Joshua, Intr. p. 2.

13.9. And I will the third part to pass through the fire, and will refine
them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried, Ib.

14.14. And thou, O Judah, shall fight at Jerusalem, and the wealth of all the
heathen round about shall be gathered together gold, and silver, etc. Ib.

The New Testament.
Matthew.
4.3 IF thou be the Son of God, command that these stones, etc. Add. 138.

5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, etc. Off. l. 1 c. 16. p. 30, 31

5.28. He which sees a woman to lust after her, has committed, etc. Off. l.
1. c. 5. p. 1. etc. 50. p. 125.

5.44. Love ye you enemies, pray for them that revile, etc. Off. l. 1. c. 48.
p. 114.

6.2. Verily, etc. Off. l. 2. c. 1. p. 2.

8.20. The Foxes have holes, Off. l. 3. c. 11. p. 38.

10.9. Possess not gold, nor silver, nor money, Off. l. 2. ^. 2.5. p. 63.

10.23. They persecuting you in one city, fly into another, Add. p. 139.

10.41. Whosoever shall receive a righteous man, in the name of a righteous
man, shall receive, etc.

12.46. Behold his mother and brethren, etc. Off. l. 2. c. 21 p. 53.

14.30. The Prince of this world shall come, and shall have naught in me, Off.
l. 1. c. 29. p. 116.

19.14. Of such is the kingdom of heaven, Add. p. 142.

19.17. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, Off. l. 1. c.
11. p. 18. 19.

25.25. I was hungry, and you gave me, etc. Off. l. 2. c. 28 p. 69.

What ye have done to one of these, ye have done to me, Ib.

Luke.
1.23. Zacharias the Priest, when the days of office were fulfilled, Off. l.
1. c. 8. p. 14.

1.75. That he would grant us, that being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, we might serve him without fear, etc. Fr. p. 3.

2.26. Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, Off. l. 2 c. 10. p. 29.

6.2. Woe to you that laugh now, for you shall weep, Off. l. 1. c. 21. p. 50.

12.17. I will pull down my barnes, and build greater, Off. l. 3. c. 6. p. 21.

16.9. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, Fr. p.
28. line 21. for of read nor did his knowledge reach to, and Off. l. 3. c 16.
p. 61.

16.19. The rich man was clothed with silk, etc. but the poor man lay full of
sores, Off. l. 1. c. 15. p. 29.

17.10. When ye have done all that ye can say, ye are unprofitable servants,
Fr. p. 11.

21.21. Let those in Judea fly to the mountains, Add. page 141.

23.24. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Add. p. 136.

John.
2.17. The zeal of thy house, Off. l. 2. c. 30. p. 74.

7.32. Out of his belly shall flow even rivers, Intr. p. 2.

37, 38. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, ib.

15.5. Without me ye can do nothing, Fr. p: 13.

15.16. I have called you friends, because whatsoever I have heard of my
Father, I have revealed to you, Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 62.

Acts.
17.23. I found an Altar with this inscription to the unknown God, Fr. p. 3.

Romans.
2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, it is not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, Fr. p. 8.

2.15. Which show the works of the law written in their hearts, Fr. p. 2.

5.35. Affliction works patience, Off. l. 1. c. 36. p. 88.

6.13. Neither give ye your members as weapons, Off. l. 1. c. 37 p. 90.

8.7. Wisdom of the flesh is enmity, Fr. p. 6.

10.10. With the heart man believes to righteousness.

12.17. Provide that is honest, Off. l. 2. c. 6. p. 15.

13.13. Let us walk honestly, Off. l. 1. c. 45. p. 107.

14.23. Whatsoever is without faith is sin, Fr: p. 16.

Corinthians.
14.13. Being evil spoken of we bless, Off. l. 1, c. 48. p, 114

16.12. All things are lawful for me, but all, etc. Off. l. 2. c. 6. p. 14.

17.35. This I say for your profit, not that I may take you in a snare, but
that ye may follow that which is honest, Off. l. 2. c. 6. p. 15.

1.10, 23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient,
Off. l. 2. c. 2. p. 7.

1.11, 13. Does it become a woman to pray, etc? Off. l. 1. c. 46. p. 109.

1.12.17. One member cannot say to another, J have no need of thee, Off. l. 3.
c. 3.

1.12.23. Upon those members of the body which we think most unhonest, Off. l.
1. c. 18. p. 108.

1.14.40. Let all things be done honestly, Off. l. 1. c. 45. p. 108.

2.4.7. We have this treasure, Off. l. 2. c. 28. p. 69.

2.8.10. Not only to will, but to do, ye have begun a year ago, Off. l. 1.
c. 30. p. 72.

2.9.7. God loves a cheerful giver, Off. l. 1. c. 30. p. 69.

2.9.17. If I shall do it willingly, J shall have my reward if against my
will, Ib.

Galatians.
3.28. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, Off. l. 2, c. 24. p. 61.

Ephesians.
2.8. By grace we are saved, by faith, it is not of our selves it is the gift
of God, Fr. p. 12.

3.12. By whom we have boldness, and access with confidence through faith in
him, Ib. p. 10.

Philippians.
2.4. Look not every man on his own things, Off. l. 2. c. 27. p. 67.

2.7. Christ the Lord, when he was in the form of God, made himself of no
reputation, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p. 8

3.12. Not that I have as yet received, or were as yet perfect, Off. l. 3 c. 2.
p. 6.

4.8. If there be any virtue, any praise, think on these things, Pref. in l.
2. p. 4.

4.12. J have learned to be humbled, and to abound, Off. l. 2. c. 17. p. 45, 46.

Colossians.
2.8. Beware lest any spoil you through Philosophy, Fr. p. 31. and Pref. in
lib. 2. p. 1.

2.21. If therefore ye be dead with Christ, Off. l. 1. c. 36. p. 88.

3.1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek, p. 89.

3.5. Mortify therefore your earthly members, Ib.

Timothy.
1.1.9. The law is not given to the just, but to the unjust, Off. l. 3. c. 5.
p. 15.

1.4.8. Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable to all
things, Off. l. 1. c. 36. p. 89.

1.5.8. If any man provide not for his own especially, Off. l. 2. c. 30. p. 73.

Titus.
2.12. Teaching that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live
righteously, Fr. p. 2. 3. 7.

Hebrews.
13.12. Jesus our captain that he might sanctify the people suffered without
the gate, Add. p. 133.

James.
1.5. If any one lack wisdom, Fr. p. 12.

1.17. Every good gift, and every perfect, Fr. p. 7.

Peter.
1.1.15. As he which called you is holy: so be ye holy, Fr. p. 7.

Add to your faith virtue, Fr. p. 7. and Pref. in lib. 2. p. 4.

John's Ep.
2.10. If any one come to you, and bring not this doctrine, Off. l. 1. c. 3. p.
39.

Revelation.
1.12. I saw seven golden candlesticks, Intr. p. 2.

18.2. Babylon the great is fallen, Fr. p. 5.

21.20. The tenth a Chrysoprasus, Intr. p. 5.

An Alphabeticall Index for the more easy finding out of what is comprised in
this work. Wherein the letter (l) with the figure annexed to (Off) points at
the first, second, or third book of Offices (Test.) at the Testimonies of the
Authors commendation (Ill.) at the Illustration of the Method (Intr.) at the
Introduction; (Add.) to the Additions affixed to the first book of the Offices
(Fr.) at the Frontispice.
A
AAron what it denotes, page 130. his rod what, Ibid. why he and Eleazar
consecrated by Moses, ibid. what carriage required of him, ib. his rod what
it signifies, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 47. Why turned into a Serpent, why made a
Serpent, Ib. Abigail her deprecation for pacification, Off. l. 1. c 20. page
46. line 29. for fear, read, so far forth. Abishai, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p. 16.
Abraham Off. l. 1. c. 23. p. 52. where line 32. for would r. could. He
believed above nature, p. 53. where line 5. for blessed, r. believed. Absalom
his imposture, Off. l. 2. c 22. p. 56. Achab, Off. l. 2. c. 5. p. 10. Achans
covetousness, Off. l. 2. c. 26. p. 64. Achish Off. l. 1. c. 43. p. 104.
Action. It must be inquired how it agrees to persons, times, and ages. In some
cases that not to be accommodated to Samuel, which to David, etc. Off. l. 1.
c. 43. p. 104. Adversity to be endured with a contented mind, Off. l. 1. c.
37. p. 90. To be sometimes declined, Ib. To be no otherwise judged of, then as
a thing incident to nature, Ib. c. 38. p. 92. and 93. where thou may learn
of Job in all extremity to carry the person of a wise and just man.
Affability, and mansuetude joined with goodness does much avail, Off. l. 2.
c. 7. p. 17. etc. 19. p. 48. Affection, not cohabitation that brings agreement,
Off. l. 1. c. 33. p. 82. and l. 2. c. 7. p. 17. Agnes Martyr, Off. l. 1. c. 41.
p. 100. line 13. for spark read speak, and in the margin, for immitentur r.
imitentur. Ahimelech, Off. l. 3. c. 11. p. 38. his preferring David before
Saul, because of honesty, c. 15. p. 56. how he might have done worse then
Doeg, Ib. Alms, who to receive them, Off. l. 2. c. 16. p. 40. blessing after
giving them, Ib. and p. 41. Joseph's, Ib. In such measure to be bestowed, that
somewhat may be reserved for strangers, c. 21. p. 55. Alone, never is the just
man, Off. l. 3. c. 1. p. 4. 5. Ambition, and Avarice put off the form of
Justice, Off. l. 1. c. 28. p. 65. Fly them. And p. 139. Ambrose his
Testimonies of commendation in 6. p. in the Forefront before the first book of
Offices. None of the Fathers handled the holy Scriptures with like synceritie
according to Erasmus Test. p. 3. line 11. The mellifluous D. Ib. line 23. a
certain moderation observed in his writings, p. 4. line 18. This moderation
eternized as it were his works, when others of the Fathers lying in the dust
were neglected, p. 5. line 3. He converted St. Augustine, and baptized him, p.
5. line 24. his method what, Ill. p. 1. line 19. p. 2. line 16. why he is so
much in the extolling of the virtues of men. Fr. p. 5. his justification for
making away Church vessels for relief of captives, Off. l. 2. c. 28. p. 68.
69. Ancient, Off. l. 1. c. 43. p. 104. Anger, Off. l. 1. c. 20. p. 44. where p.
45. line 11. his, r. its. More p. 46. etc. 39. p. 94. Antiochus terrified with
Eleazars attempt, Off. l. 1. c. 40. p. 97. and l. 2. c. 29. p. 71. see in him
the terror of such as commit sacrilege. Antiquity Fr. p. 20. line 12.
Apparel, comeliness therein, Off. l. 1. c. 19. Appetite, Off. l. 1. c. 21. p.
48. etc. 47. p. 111. ought not to forestall reason, and how many sorts there
be of appetites, p. 112. Apposite, not opposite, in the fifth line of the
Frontispice. Arcenall set on fire by Themistocles, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 44.
Architas Tareninus his saying, Off. l. 1. c. 20. p. 46. Arausican, not
Aransican Council gives strong proofs for sole infusion of grace, Fr. p. 2.
Mary (d) line 16. Aristides, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 44. Aristotle denies Gods
providence to descend any lower then the Moon, Off. l. 1. c. 13. p. 25. line
16. for if, read is. and p. 26. l. 2. c. 2. p. 3. Arrius heresy what? Off. l.
1. c. 24. p. 56. Arrians quarrel against St. Ambrose Off. l. 2. c. 28. p. 67.
68. Assyrian what by interpretation (Intr.) p. 4. l. 2. Assuerus what manner of
person, Off. l. 3. c. 15. p. 55. 56. In Astronomy some questions too far
carried, Off. l. 1. c. 25. p. 58. Astronomers in numbering the stars, and
Geometricians in measuring the spaces of the profound air, forget the rule of
comeliness, Front. 25. line 18. While the Athenians, and Lacedaemonians strive
who shall have the greatest credit in the victory against the Persians;
Themistocles does unjustly, Off. l. 3 c. 14. p. 44. Austetitie, to be mitigated
in government, Off. l. 1. c. 19. p. 48.
B
Balaams covetousness, Off. l. 2. c. 26. p. 64. Banquets of strangers to be
avoided, and better to be hospital at home, Off. l. 2. c. 19. p. 42. I.
Baptist would he have held his peace might have escaped the sword of Herod, but
such silence in a Prophet had been impious. Off. l. 3. c. 5. p. 17. For
prophetical authority in case of his Ministry being public, was to take
place, though to the displeasure of Herod, l. 3. c. 14. p. 45. Beatitude, Fr.
p. 27. and line 22. where (not) to be expunged, and to be read, that it may be
obtained in this life. Way to beatitude affliction, Ib. line the last. It
consists in the knowledge of God, and good works, Off. l. 2. c. 2. p. 3. 4. 5.
In innocence and knowledge, c. 3. p. 6. In grief, p. 7. etc. 45. Difference
between a blessed life, and eternal life, c. 5. p. 11. Beneficence, Off. l.
1. c. 30. p. 68. of what it consists, Ib. Reasons to persuade to it, l. 3. c.
3. p. 10. 11. To be exhibited one toward another, Ib. p. 8. and that by
example of members, p. 9. Benefit recompencing, Off. l. 1 c. 31. p. 76
Restoring it in affection, c. 33. p. 78 wherein consists, l. 2. c. 25. p. 63.
Benevolence to be better then liberality, Off. l. 1. c. 32. p. 78. Its
commendation, ib. p. 79. 80. where it begins, ib. here page 80. line 29.
represent, read withal represent the obligation to the debtor. Not without
Justice, not without fortitude, ib. c. 33. p. 82. 83. Correptions or rebukes to
belong to it: and again sometimes it overcommeth the bonds of natural
affection, ib. Benjamites, and their retaliation of their intemperance upon
their heads, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 53. the greatness of their sin, and
thereunto answerable destruction, ib. Toward Benjamin Joseph's pious fraud,
Off. l. 2. c. 16. p. 43. Bigami, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 121. Bishops office, Off.
l. 1. c. 1. Add. p. 127, 128, 129, etc. he must be unreprovable, p. 131. holy,
and abstemious, ib. How he ought to carry himself toward others, and they
toward him, Off. l. 2. c. 24. p. 60. and 61. what belongs to him in general,
Off. l. 3. c. 9. p. 36. Bodies, parts comely, and uncomely Off. l. 1. c. 18. p.
39. Young Boys speech to Antiochus, Off. l. 1. c. 41. p. 99. mother of 7.
boys encouragement, ib. p. 100. Brotherhood Christian the best, Off. l. 1. c.
33. p. 81. Burial of the dead in Tobias very rare, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 48.
C
Caleb and Joshua good Espials how they speed, Off. l. 3. c. 8. p. 28. Calling
of parents most follow, yet in our Ecclesiastical calling nothing more rare,
because an obscure, and uncouth life to young men, Off. l. 1. c. 44. p. 205.
Cavilling, and exception not to be suffered among the members of the Church,
Off. l. 3. c. 3. p. 8. Cardinal, what? Pref. to l. 3. p. 1. not to be
rejected, though not read in Scripture, no more then Trinity, Essence,
Sacrament, etc. ib. p. 1. line 24. Cardinals, four described, and found all
of them in the practick life of Abraham, Job, Jacob, Joseph, David, Off. l. 1.
c. 23. p. 50. 53, 54, 55. That these in those most eminent, ib. and p. 56, 57,
58. meet in Jacob, Noah, moderation likewise, ib. Cardinals in themselves so
linked in one, that they cannot be divided, Off. l. 1. c. 27. p. 61. Calipho,
Off. l. 2. c. 2. p. 3. Charity, Fr. p. 26. line 30. Plato knew not what it
meant, ib. p. 18. line 4 difference of Ethnic from Christian, ib. p. 26. line
30. Fr. p. 19. Cham, Off. l. 1. c. 18. p. 40. Churches goods, Off. l. 2. c. 28.
and 29. Church ought to be comely, Off. l. 2. c. 21. p. 55. Ceremonies, F. p.
19. Children deformed, how handled, Fr. p. 18. line 5. Devoid of malice, Off.
l. 1. c. 20. p. 45, 46. Christian soldiers compared to wrestlers, Off. l. 1.
c. 16. p. 31. Clergy, Off. l. 3. c. 9. and l. 2. c. 21. Cogitations, Off. l.
1. c. 21. p. 48. Comeliness, Off. l. 1. c. 21. p. 48. etc. 48. p. 106.
Comeliness for a widow to remain in her widowhood, Off. l. 2. c. 16. p. 16.
difference between it and honesty, better understood then expressed, Off. l.
2. c. 6. p. 13, 14. (...) what l. 1. p. 107. where correct the Hebrew to geoth
of gaith, Comeliness appears in restraint of passions, Ib. To it what
required, Off. l. 2, c. 21. p. 55. how it accords with the Scriptures, Off. l.
1. c. 10. p. 16. Temple of God to be beautified with convenient comeliness,
Off l. 2. c. 21. p. 55. Conscience, Off. l. 1. c. 2. p. 4. Contribution, l 1.
c. 30. p. 70. and 71. Covetousness, Add. p. 139. Off. l 2. c. 25. p. 64, 65.
Counsel who fit to give, Off. l. 2. c. 17. p. 44. of whom required, Off. l. 2.
c. 17, p. 49. line last, for ruler read rule, for Bishop read Bishops, Counsel
guided by reason to be embraced, Off. l. 1. c. 21. p. 40. Moses counsel, Off.
l. 2. c. 11. p. 29. and 30. Joseph's and Daniels, Ib. The wicked to be avoided
in matter of counsel, c. 12. p. 31. he that is able to give good counsel
must be like a fountain shut up, Ib. God being offended, takes away good
counselors, Ib. p. 32. line 26. for taunt read taint. Courage, Fr. p. 27.
line 5. Court corruptions, Add. p. 140.
D
Dalilah her covetousness, Off. l. 2. c. 26 p. 65. Daniel, Off. l. 1 c. 35. p.
85. David's mildness, never any more worthy of love, Off. l. 2. c. 7. p. 20,
21. Master of morality, Off. l. 1. c. 20. p. 46. his being dumb what a virtue,
Off. l. 1. c. 48 p. 114 not inferior to St. Paul in blessing of enemies, Ib
himself blessed in his greatest adversity, Ib. l 2. c. 5. p. 12. Sparing of
Saul's life, preferring therein exilement before a kingdom, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p.
16. before Panaetius, Aristotle, Socrates, Pythagoras in moderation of his
tongue, Off. l. 1. c. 10. p. 16. Deceipts read work fails, not world
falls, Off l. 1. c. 29. p. 70. line 2. Difference between Ethnic, and
Christian Philosophy. The whole Frontispice, Pref. in lib 2. lib. 3. Off. l 1.
c. 50. p. 123. Instances, wisdom to be preferred before justice, according to
divine doctrine, not so according to Ethnic, Ib. 2. about beatitude, Off. l.
2. c. 2. p. 3, 4. etc. 3.4. etc. 5. p. 10. Difference between a blessed and
eternal life, Off. l. 1. c. 5. p. 11. Diodorus, Off. l. 2. c. 2. p. 3. Dispute
against justice by way of disquisition an ancient course, Off. l. 1. c. 22. p.
22. line 16. Dives, Off. l. 3. c. 7. p. 21. Doegs malice, Ib. c. 11. p. 38. De
dolo malo, the sentence of the Civil law, and the Scripture agree, Off. l. 3
c. 10. p. 34. Dues not best to be exacted in the greatest strictness, Off. l.
2. c. 21 p. 53. Dumb if thou be, he reviling thee, thou shall perplex most
that Adversary, Off. p. 1. c. 5. p. 10. etc. 6. p. 11. 12.
E
Ecclesiastical persons ought to come to honor by good means, Off. l. 2. c.
24 p. 59. Eleazars deed not to be justified, Off. l. 1. c. 40. p. 49. yet was
Razis much worse: and it was our Authors mere private opinion in justifying
Eleazarus. Elias prayer in silence, Elisha's likewise, Off. l. 3. c. 1. p. 34.
Eliza's honest dealing with the Syrian, utilitie followed, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p.
44. left all that he might wholly addict himself to the service of God, but
leaving all, slew his oxen, and gave the rest for to feed the poor, Off. l. 1.
c. 30. p. 71. Egyptian learning because rejected by Moses, may be a caution
for scholars evermore to mix their humane studies with Divine, Fr p. 25. line
20. Enemies called strangers, Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 67. to spare their lives is
honesty, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 44. Envy must be fled from, and cast out, Add.
139. Epicurus, Off. l. 1. c. 13. p. 27. and l. 2. p. 3. Equity, and justice
confirms kingdoms, Off. l. 1. c. 19. p. 48. Esau, and Jacob, Off. l. 1. c.
33. p. 82. Esters happy success the companion of a good cause, a comely and
honest part was it in her to hazard her life to deliver her people, Off. l. 3.
c. 15. p. 55. Ethiopia its Etymology, Intr. p. 3. line 25. Ethnicks confess
the truth of the Scriptures, Fr. p. 19. line 27. their constant opinion through
all the East, that the Ruler of the world should come from Judea, Ib. p. 20.
line 9. They aspired to eternity in some sort, Ib. line 18. confuted out of
their own writings, Pref. to 3. book, p 3. line 4. They come short of wisdom
divine, Ib. line 11. Euphrates Etymology, Intr. p. 4. line 25. there line 12.
for confronting read affronting, Hebr. Perah from the root parash expandere.
The confluence of rivers, which Auxe. Justice compared to it. Ib. p. 5.
Excommunication when to be denounced, Off. l. 2. c. 27 p. 66. Exorcisme, Off.
l. 1. c. 44. p. 105.
F
Fables not to be admitted according to Scripture, Off. l. 1. c. 21. p. 50.
Faith as mentioned, Romans 14.22, 23. not to be expounded conscience, Fr. p. 16
line 13. for place read sense. Faith because the foundation of good works
has eternal life, Off. l. 2. c. 2. p. 4 yet not as a work, but as an hand,
and instrument to take hold of Christ. For so it Justifies, Fr. p. 8. line 25.
From the faith of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, God himself takerh witness,
Christ's tender love to support faith Off l. 2. c. 5. p. 11, 12, 13. Faith in
keeping promise, Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 68. Faith implicit without sure
confidence in our selves, not conscience insufficient to salvation, Fr. p. 10.
line 2^. Famine in Samaria, Off. l 3. c. 6. p. 19, 22. etc. 14. p. 53. and l. 2
c. 11. p. 29. Favor gained by heedfull respect, Off l. 2. c. 7. p. 21. To be
showed rather toward poor then toward rich, Off. l. 2. c. 25. p. 65. Our
Fathers of Christian Religion, and among us whosoever is most sanctified, has
nothing but what he has received, Fr. p. 4. line 32. and p. 5. line 2.
Fidelity the way to procure love, Off. l. 2. c. 8. p. 24. Fire sacred of
Jews, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 49. Effects thereof, Ib. p. 50. 51. Flights end to
be respected. Flight from wrath of God, Add. p. 140. Flattery, Off. l. 1. c.
47. p. 110. No part of fortitude, Ib. c. 42 p. 103. Fornication fly from, Add.
p. 139. Fortitude Ethnic differs much from Christian, Fr. p. 26. line 24.
without justice no virtue, Off. l. 1. c. 35. p. 84. fuel of iniquity, Ib.
wherein consists, Ib. c. 36. p. 86. described, p. 87. line 4. read is cast
down with no adversity. Its effects Ib. At war with vices, Ib. c. 39. p. 93.
Enters lists of duel not devil, with anger no comma must be there before
rifling. Fortitude seen in suffering, Off. l. 1. c. 41 p. 98. Fraud in dealing
deserves expulsion by David's example, Off. l. 3. c. 10. etc. 11 p. 38.
Fraudulent friendship, Ib. line last, for prosecution, read persecution.
Friendship the upshot of all virtues, and why, Ill. p. 2. l. 31. and p 3. line
1. Friendship Christian, Fr. p. 28. line 19. and Off. l. 1. c. 33 p. 82.
Friendship and honesty sort well together, so that honesty has the
preeminence, Off. l. 3. c. 15. p. 56. Moderation to be kept therein, Ib. c. 16.
p. 57. Friend is a defense, Off. l. 2. c. 7. p. 24. in the Margin, for (...)
put (...) and line 18. for but is, read but it is: and line 30. for it, read
he. Friends part to open to his professed friend, secrets of the kingdom of
God, Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 62. Gods friend that does his command, Ib. Unanimity
of mind in true friendship, Ib. Disastrousnesse therein grows from
ungratefulness, Ib. Nothing so heinous in Judas the traitor as
unthankfulness. This traitor was prefigured in Achitophel. Faithful Friends
commendation, Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 58. ought to be prevented by his friend in
every good office, Ib. Friendships description, Ib. harbors not pride nor
disdain. Tried in adversity, Ib. friend swell with pride, to be taken down
by him that bears him good will. True Christian friendship, which is the
Communion of Saints how graceful, Ib. p. 60. Ineffable friendship of the 3.
children, whom devouring fire could not divide, Ib. Such David and Jonathan. He
that is unfaithful to God, cannot be a friend to man, Ib. Friendship not to be
valued by wealth. Friendship of the poor, better then of the rich, Ib. p. 61.
poor man's happiness in friendship above the rich, no man flattereth him.
Guardian of piety, Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 60. Not found in disparitie of
manners, how to be ordered between superior, and inferior. Bitterness to be
avoided between friends. Ib.
G
Galatian and Tyrian Merchants in fame in old time, Off. l. 2. c. 14. p. 35.
Gate, and gesture discovers what is in the heart, Off. l. 1. c. 18. p. 37, and
38. Geometrical questions too far carried, Off. l. 1. c. 25. p. 58.
Gibeonites, Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 2. 66. and l. 3 c. 10. p. 34. how Joshua
deceived by them, Ib. and p. 35. Gift good or bad, according to affection, Off.
l. 1. c. 3. p. 71. Gihon and Nilus the same, Temperance compared to it, Intr.
p. 3. line 16. and 21. Vain Glory, Off l. 3. c. 5. p. 17. to be avoided by
Christ's example, Ib. Gluttony Add. p. 133. line 23. God one alone to be is
agreed upon by all Nations: the dissenting is about the Mediatorship, Fr p. 3.
line 8. God the giver of all virtue in the confession of Pagan and Papist
together with us, Fr. p. 4. line in Margin 1. Good and honest according to
nature, Off. l. 1. c. 46. p. 108. 109. Goodness does more insinuate it self
into our minds for the embracing of it then ought beside, Off. l. 2. c. 7 p 17.
Gold taken in Scripture for wise inventions, Intr. p. 2. l. 24. Goliath, Off. l.
1. c. 35. p. 84. Goths, enemies to all good letters, Fr. p. 10. Grace
preventing, Fr. p. 13. line 2. universal Graces sinister Tenet, the more
branne not brain, for that misimprinted is found in it, Fr. p. 13. line 29.
Grave, resting place, Off. l. 1. c. 12. p. 23. line margin 15. where for
correction put to Hebrew shalah whence sheol signifying pacificum esse, and
there for Es. 25. put 53. and to Psalm. 15. put v. 15. Gyges, in Plato his ring
replete with secret virtue, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p. 15. and 16.
H
Haman, Off. l. 3. c. 15. p. 55. Harmers, do harm find, Off. l. 3. c. 14 p.
53. Harlots, company to be avoided, Add. p. 136. Heart, Lord searches, Off. l.
1. c. 14. p. 27. and 28. simplicity of heart of much respect with God, Off, l.
2. c. 24. p. 59. etc. 19. p. 48. Hatred, a capital evil, Off l. 2. c. 6. p.
16. Heliodorus, Off. l. 2. c. 9. p. 71. Horillus, Off. l. 2. c. 2. p. 3
Hieronymus the Philosopher, Ib. Herod, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 124. Herodias, Ib.
his, which Jephthes oath better broken then kept, Off. l. 3. c. 12. p. 39. and.
40. Holofernes, what he was, l. 3. c. r 3. p. 42, 43 What is honest, is
accounted profitable according to Scripture, Off. l, 2. c. 6. p. 14. Honesty,
is according to Nature, turpitude is against it, Off. l. 3. c. 4. p. 14 etc. 5.
To be preferred before welfare, c. 8. p. 27 Honesty and turpitude opposite,
various acceptions of honesty, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 126 Honesty what and how it
sorts with comeliness, Off. l. 1. c. 44. p. 106, 107. The praise of honesty,
Off. l. 3. c. 15 p 55. Honesty the root of all Cardinal virtues, their
comportment and complement, Ill. p. 2. l. 7. In nature it self to deserve
commendation, therein to be discerned from dishonestie, Fr. p. 3. line over y
in margin 11. brought by author as he testifies under benevolence, Off. l. 1.
c. 35. p. 84 By it a blessed life acquired, l. 2. c. 1. p. 1. It is above other
good things, even in the worlds account, Ib. has its best testimony from its
own bosom, Ib p. 2. The less it hunts after glory, the more eminent is it
above it, Ib. Honor of God, ought to be the end of all our actions, in this
Ethnic failed, Fr. p. line 22. and p. 2. l. 1. Hospitality to be imparted to
the good more franckly, Add. p. 133. Hospitalities fruits, Off. l. 1. c. 31. p.
80. c. 21. p. 53. Judgment against such as be unhospitall, Ib. Humane lerning
an help to Divine, Pref. to 3. book, line 13. of Humility sundry sorts, Off
l. 2. c. 17. It is humility to esteem of others better then of our selves,
Ib. c. 27. p. 66.
I
Jacob why blessed, Off. l. 2. c. 5. p. 11. his wisdom in passing by injuries,
Off. l. 1. c. 24. p 58. Idleness in Bps. Add. p. 122. Iehoiachim, Off. l. 2.
c. 28. p. 70. Iephthes Off. l. 1 c. 50. p. 124. Jests, Off. l. 1. c 21. p. 50.
Ethnic Philosophy admits of these, Christian does not therein therefore is
there difference, ib. Image of God to be gotten, Off. l. 1. c. 49. p. 116.
defaced by covetousness, ib. p. 18. Image of Tyrant, of death, of devil, to
be put off. ib. p, 19. Imploiments, Off. l. 1. c. 23. p. 51. Not Impunitie, but
innocence must be the harbor of a wise man, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p. 15. Infants,
Add. 141. Innocence of children, Add. 136. Intemperate, Add. 137, 138 Injury,
Off. l. 1. c 28 p. 63. Job his fortitude, Off. l. 1. c. 35. p. 86. c. 39. p.
94. blessed in his affliction, Off. l. 2. c. 5. p. 13, 14. Those friends of
Job, 3. kings, Off. l 1. c. 12. p 21. Jonathan, Off. l 1. c. 4. p. 95. his
love, l. 2. c. 7. p. 21. l, 3. c. 15. p. 56. Joseph's provision for corn, Off.
l. 3. c. 6 p. 21 In him all virtues meet, Off. l. 2. c. 15. p. 43. Joseph
living under servitude blessed, Off. l. 2 c. 5 p 13. line 3. where miserable,
must be not miserable. Joshua, by Moses society sanctified with Grace, Off. l.
2. c. 20. p. ^9. attending him evermore was the way to gain that Grace, ib. p.
50. Josias, by loving the Faith and true Religion, got the favor of God, Off.
l. 2 c. 30 Italy, in the case of provision in a time of dearth how it dealt,
Off l. 3 c 7. p 25. Judas through covetousness fell into treason, Off. l. 2.
c. 6. p. 15. He to whom stewardship, and so others in like sort, and so others
in another kind the Lord would not should complain of want, because they should
be without excuse, l. 1. c. 16. p. 33 Judas Maccabaeus, and Mattathias, Off. l.
1. c. 40. p. 47. Judge, God shall be hereafter from whom nothing is hidden,
then the which consideration nothing more available to be drawn to a godly
life, Off l. 1. c. 25. p. 60. Judgment of others in what is comely not to be
despised, ib. c. 47. p. 101. He that will not regard Gods precepts, shall be
made stoop at his judgments, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 48. Jupiters sepulcher, Fr.
p. 23. line 7. Isaac blessed, Off. l. 2. c. 5. p. 11. Justice to be referred
to the society, and community of mankind, Off. l. 1. c. 27. and 28. p. 62,
63. Justice placed by the Psalmist in him that fears God, Off. l. 1 c 24. p.
56. which much in contribution, ib properties of a just man, ib. Observation of
all the 4. Cardinals in Abraham sacrificing his son, ib. p. 57. Excellency
of justice, ib. p 65. It and fidelity to be showed to enemies, ib. c. 29. p.
66. Faithful counsel of the just man over-prizeth that of the wise, Off. l.
1. c. 9 p. 27
K
Knowledge of God and good works, way to beatitude, Fr. p. 27. line 24. and
274
L
Laban, Off. l. 1. c. 49. p. 116. Laurence Martyr, Off. l. 1. c. 41. p. 101.
what torments pursued his persecutors, ib. and p. 102. and l. 2. c. 28. p. 69.
Laws ordained to make men good, Fr. p. 2. line 9. Learn may oldest man, Off.
l. 1 c. 1. p. 2 Lepers strive to keep honesty, Off l. 3. c. 14 p. 54. 55.
Levites duty, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 120. and 125 Liberality. wherein it
consists, Off. l. 2. c. 1^. p. 35, 36. false liberality, Off. l. 1 c. 3. p.
70. object, household of faith, Ib. in sted Ill. p. 71, 72. Redeeming of
captives, work of liberality, Off. l. 2. c. 15. p. 36. line 12. for all r.
or. and p. 37, 38. liberality in giving relief, and counsel collated
together, Off. l. 2. c. 15. p. 38. Love, Off. l. 2. c. 30. p. 74. 75. etc. 7.
p. 16
M
Man's dignity is now defaced, Off. l. 1. c. 27. p. 51. Man not depraved in
essence, but in qualities, Fr. p 3. line 15. Man's difference from brute beasts.
Off. l. 1. c. 25. p. 60. Maniches heresy with Marcionites, and Eunomians what,
Off. l. 1 c. 24. p. 56 Maccabees, Off. l. 1. c. 40. p. 97. l. 3. c. 14. p. 4.
Malignitie worse then malice, and why Add. p. 129. Therefore we must beware of
false prophets, because they bear malignant spirits, and against the truth.
Master teacher one, Math. 23.8. Marie, the Mother of our Lord her modesty,
Off. l 1. c. 18. p. 46. Marriage, Off. l. 1. c. 32. p. 81. Martyrdomes glory,
which provoked persecutors, Off. l. 1. c. 42. p. 102. Mauritania, Intr. p. 3.
line 25. Meats taken for good works, Off. l. 1 c. 24. p. 77, 78. Men
generated for the cause of men, and that they might profit each other, Off. l.
1. c. 28. p. 64. Melchisedech, Add. p. 130. Mercy, Off. l. 1. c. 11. p. 19. l.
2. c. 28. p. 67. Mercy not to be truly found in Ethnicks, Fr. p. 30. line 9.
Meruit in our Author no more then praevaluit. Merit disavouched, Fr. p, 11.
Off. l. 1 c 31. p. 77. Metaphysics, Off. l. 2. c. 17. p. 46. used there no
otherwise then according to the nature of the word. Method, Pref^ in l. 3. p.
1. line 18. Midianites Off l. 1. c. 29. p. 66. Minister, Off l 1. c. 50. p.
120, 121. line 5. that is wanting, c. 36 p. 88. unworthy unjust may preach the
Word, and administer the Sacraments, Off l. 2. c. 24 p. 60 Ministers duty, Off.
l. 1. c 50. p. 123. 124 Modesty, Off. l. 1. c, 18 p. 35. c. 19. To be observed
in the motion of the body, p. 47. shadowed in Priests of old, putting on
linen breeches, Ill. p. 41 Moderation in our speeches, and precepts to be
observed, Off. l. 2. c. 22. p 56. Moderation of friendship, Off l. 3. c. 16. p.
57. secretly to be admonished, p. 58 not easily to be changed, ib. Molestation
disturbeth the appetite, Off l 1. c 47. p. 111. and 112. shakes off reason, Ib.
Moneys love in our days above measure: yea in our Authors days, Off l. 2. c.
2. p. 54 Its contempt that form of justice, Ib. c. 27. p. 67. Moral
Philosophies antiquity, Fr. p. 6. line 27. Moses averse to the learning of the
Egyptians, Off. l. 1. c. 25. p. 59. his prayer in silence, Off. l. 3. c. 1. p.
2. His mansuetude, Off. l. 2. c. 7. p. 17. a comparison between his acts and
Joshua's, Ib. c. 20. p. 50. good dealing toward enemies, l. 3. c. 14. p. 48.
Motion of the body, is a kind of speech of the mind, Off. l. 1. c. 18. p. 47.
48. Motions of the mind to be watched over, Ib. c. 47 p. 111^ Mothers
encouragement of her children to constancy in Religion, Off. l 1. c. 4^.
Musculus, Off. l. 1. c. 49, p. 117.
N
Naboths death, Off. l. 3. c. 9. p. 38. Natural instinct for office or trade
to be followed, Off. l. 1. c. 44. p. 105. The knowledge of precepts concerning
honest actions inherent in nature, Fr. p. 2. line. 27. Nature the Mistress of
modesty, Off. l. 1. c 18. p. 39. Punishment is inflicted for voluntary, not
for natural vices, Ib. c. 45. p. 109. Nature, a direction how to order our
courses in matter of commodity, and discommoditie, also for speeches, Off. l.
3. c. 4 p. 12. Nathan, Off. l. 2. c. 5. p. 10. In Nehemia's time, sacred fire
found how, and where, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 50. Nephte, and Epathar, the
Appellations of the sacred fire, Ib. Nilus, and Gihon the same, Intr. p. 3.
line 16. Nimrod, Pref. in lib. 2. p. 5. line 3.
O
To Obedience, some brought by flattery, some by money, Off. l. 2 c. 23. p 58.
Offices division, Off. l 1. c. 9. p. 15. what moved St. Ambrose to write upon
that Argument, viz Psalm. 39. Off. l. 1. c. 7. p. 13 Office how pertinent to
Divinity. Its Etymology, Off. l. 1. c. 8. p. 14. In Tractate of office, not
duties of the body, but of the mind intended, Ib. 35. p. 84. Officers unjust
resisted, Off. l. 2. c. 18. p. 47. Such as follow evil counsel come to
naught, Ib. Ohel moed, Hebr. Tabernaculum conventus, the tabernacle of the
Congregation, Off. l. 2. c. 20. p. 49. Opportunity in speaking, Off. l. 1 c.
7. Order, Off. l. 1. c. 24. p. 57. Orphans, Off. l. 2. c. 29. p. 71. Other men's
things to be looked after before our own private respect, viz. tending to
edification, and souls health, and that according to Christ's example, Off l.
2. c. 27. p. 67. where likewise willed to bridle our own will. For otherwise
it cannot be, but that we shall not choose but prefer another cause to our
own, and with all break out into rash censure against him.
P
Panaetius, Off. l. 1. c. 10. p. 16. he and Tullie wrong for offices.
Paradise, Intr. p. 1^ 2, 3 4. where rea e thus line 20. the Lord Jesus Christ
is as the fountain coming out of Paradise, the 4. virtues of the soul, as
those 4. rivers divided afterward into 4. springs. The 4. Virtues are compared
to those four. Parthians, Off. l. 1. c. 5 p 11. Passions enumeration, Fr. p.
24. Church of Pavia, Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 72. Patience Ethnic, Stoicall
Christian Intr. p. 23. line 28. breeds Pusillanimitie, Fr. p. 18. line 27.
Peace, Off. l. 2. c. 30. p. 74, 75. Perfect, how to be understood, Off. l. 3.
c. 2. p. 6. perfectio, Off. l. 1. c. 11. p. 18. where line 28. young by (b)
reference in Margin, put for (d) V. 20. Perfection, no where but in the life to
come, Off. l. 1. c. 48. p. 115. 116. Pearls of price, Intr. p. 2. line 3.
Peoples joint suffrage in the election of a Bishop, the voice of God in
Valentinian the Emperors opinion, Test. p. 1. line 21. Pharisie and Publican,
Off. l. 2. c. 17. p. 46. Phiolsophie, Christian and Ethnic how they differ,
Off. l. 1. c. 6. p. 11. c. 9. Philosophy Ethnic acknowledges God to be the
true good, Fr. p. 3. l. 6. Its defect, Ib. p. 17, 18. The erroneous opinion of
their many Philosophers, p. 21. our Authors proofs manifold confirming Divine
philosophy far to excel Ethnic, Ib. p. 31. and Pref. in lib. 2. 23.
Philistims Etymology, Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 68. Piety toward God, and Prudence
fountain of all goodness, Fr. p. 25. line 29. Pilades, and Orestes, Off. l.
1. c. 41. p. 102 Pison, Root Pasah crescere, Intr. line 25 has diverse
appellations, p. 3. Pishons interpretation, p. 2. line. 2. p. 3. line 8.
Prudence compared to it. Pisotigris, Intr. p. 3. line 28. Pity, praised, Off.
l. 2. c. 21. p. 52. Pious, Pref. in lib. 3. line 8. Plato, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p.
15. and l. 1. c. 12. p. 22. where correct Pluto by Plato. Dame Pleasures
baits, Add. p. 137. Poor, and persecuted suffering wrong ought to be relieved,
Off. l. 1. c. 16. p. 33. poor present before our eyes, show the state of
Christ's humiliation, Off. l. 2. c. 21 p. 54. Popes, or Bishops of Romes
supremacy shaken, Fr. p. 5. line 32. held of Fathers of that age, but a
brother, Ib. p. 6. yea some of them better esteemed then he Ib. line 16. Off.
l. 1. c, 23. p. 51. Popular grace, how procured, Off. l. 2. c. 7. p. 17.
Practical life. l. 1. c. 23. p. 51. Prayer of Jobs friends, why not accepted
of the Lord, Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 63. prayer in a Bishop of singular
consequence, Add. p. 132. Praising of an enemy, and of an evil man, in whom
remains some good parts, may seem to be ratified by David's praising of Saul,
Off. l. 3. c. 9 p. 31. Priests, how in their office to observe the 4. Cardinal
Virtues, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 123. To Princes, loyalty to be rendered, Off l.
3. c. 9. p. 31. Prodigality, or lagition taken for the effect of humanity,
Off. l. 1. c. 33. p. 79. Promises not at all to be kept, nor yet oaths, Off.
l. 3. c. 12. p. 40 Proportion Arithmeticall, Geometrical, Pref. in lib. 3.
Providence a pillar of Fortitude, Off. l. 1. c. 38. p. 91. 92. where line 4.
after cogitations must be inserted, viz. things to come according to
providence, riches in respect of better things to be neglected, Ib. Providence
of God oppugned even by Aristotle, with other Philosophers Ethnic, Fr. p. 25.
and Off. l. 1. c 13. Prudence, and Justice are so concatenated, that they
cannot be divided, Off. l. 1. c. 8. p. 24 No prudence where heresy or
ignorance, Off l. 1. c. 24. p. 56. Its definition. Prudence, and wisdom used
by our Author indifferently. Off. l. 2. c. 13. p. 33. The whole world a wise
man's country. Off. l. 2. c. 14. p. 34 not moved with gold, not touched with
taint of concupiscence. A wise man is in mind above his treasure, and in due
observation beneath his friend, Ib. p. 35. Pulchrum, or that which is fair and
lovely, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 126. Pyrrhus, how honestly dealt withal by
Fabritius, viz. in discovering Physicians conspiracy against him, Off. l. 3. c.
14 p. 46. Pythagoras, his silence enjoined his scholars for 5. years
reproved, Off. l. 1. c. 11. p. 17. Pytheas, and Damon being Pythagoreans their
fidelity inferior to that in Jephthes daughter, Ib. c. 12. p 41.
R
Rachel, Off. l. 1. c. 39. p. 116. Rashly, nothing to be attempted, Off. l. 1.
c. 47. p. 111. where line 22. and 23. correct profitable by probable and
expunge of after to. Reason, no good guide in case of religion, Fr. p. 14.
Instances given, p. 16. Rebekahs Etymology, Off. l. 1. c. 20. p. 49. Rehoboam,
Off. l. 2. c. 18. p. 47. Religion to be used in Decency, Fr. p^ 25. line 9. In
cause of Religion no dissembling to be admitted, Off. l. 2. c. 24. p. 61.
Religion the root and crown of honesty, Off. l. 3. c. 14 p. 50. Religions
inheritance better then all earthly possession, Ib. c. 9. p. 29. Resurrection,
why thought incredible to Ethnicks, Fr. p. 20 line 28. Plinies arguments
against it, Ib. p. 22. fetched from Democritus, howbeit in some sort ejusdem
assertor, Ib. p. 22. Pope John 22. was as very an Atheist as Pliny, Ib. p. 23.
Reputation must not be the end of good actions, but mercy, Off. l. 1. c. 21. p
52. Restitution, Off. l. 1. c. 31. p. 76. 77. Reconcilement, Off. l 3. c. 16.
p. 63. Reconciliation, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 53^ Revenge of tongue, evil
revenge in wars. Gospel clear against revenge, not to be executors against
persecutors, Off. l. 1. c. 5. p. 9. Ib. c. 29. p. 66. and l. 3. c. 4. p. 12.
Rich man in estate is a poor creature in the testimony of his own
conscience, Off. l. 1. c. 12. p. 23. 24. With God no man is rich, Ib. p. 18. c.
47. where line 4. expunge freely. Modesty is rich, because the Lords portion,
Ib. Not the use, but the contempt of riches pressed in Scripture, Off. l. 2. c.
25. p. 63. Ring, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p. 15. Rogues, Off. l. 2. c. 16. p. 39. Ib.
p. 40. and l. 2. c. 56. p. 65. Rome in the case of strangers how sometimes it
dealt, Off. l. 3. c. 7. p. 26.
S
Sacrament of Baptism, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 52. Salomons wisdom, Off. l. 2.
c. 8. p. 24. 25 Satan has naught in them that are Christ's, Off. l. 1. c. 49.
p. 116. Sclavonie, or Illyrium, together with Thracia their grievous spoiling
of Churches liberality commended in their redemption, Off. l. 2. c. 15. p. 36.
Scripture banquet, Off. l. 1. c. 31. p. 78. 79 Scripture rightly divided, and
fitly applied by the Minister, is as the fat and flower of wheat purest; and
choicest oil, best wine taken in sobriety, Test. p. 2. l. 17, 18, 19.
Serpent, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 47, 48. Shamefastness, the companion of
chastity Off. l. 1. c. 18. p. 46. Sheba, Off. l. 2. c. 10. p. 27. Shimei, Ib.
c. 6. p. 12. etc. 48. p. 114, 115. Silence, Off. l. 1. c. 2. the Lord by it in
the Gospel wrought our salvation, Off. l. 1. c. 3. p. 6. It must not be there
where commanded to speak, L. 3. c. 5. l. 17. The surest guard, Ib. c. 14 p 49.
In silence great things wrought, Off. l. 3. c. 1. p. 2, 3. 4.. Silence of
Pythagoras borrowed of David. Not to speak, but to hear the Lords precepts
most called upon in Scripture, Fr. p. 25. Simplicity of speech, Off. l. 3. c.
12. p. 39. where line 3, read that no man may involve. Single life, and
continuance in Widowhood much magnified by our Author, but it is no general
received opinion of the Church, and the holy Scripture is of no private motion,
Off. l. 3. c. 14 p. 49. Sins very face is to be flied, Add. p. 40. Sitting,
what it imports, Add p. 127. Slaves, how handled among Ethnicks, Fr. p. 18.
Sobriety, is a kind of Fasting, Off. l. 1. c 18. p. 47. Society divided, Off.
l 1. c. 28. p. 63. of the godly to be frequented, Ib. c. 20. p. 49 50, 51.
Soul, first to be consecrated to God, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 123. Speech,
familiar, Off. l. 1. c. 21. p. 48. Speaking commended, where no idle word, Ib.
(...) for (...) negotio vacuum, Off. l. 1. c. 2. p. 5. In speaking Satan
seeks to ensnare, Off l. 1. c. 4. p. 8. 9. Spies, evil preferred present
utilitie before honesty, Off. l. 3. c. 8. Stoics agreement with Scripture,
Off. l. 1. c. 28. p. 64. and l. 2. c. 2. p. 3. Standing imports blessing, Add.
p. 127. Strangers intertainment acceptable to God, Off. l. 3. c. 7. p. 25.
Expulsion of them, Ib. 76. Susanna, her silence commended, Off. l. 1. c 4. p.
8. 9. and l. 2. c. 9. p. 26. and l. 3. c. 14. Syrians, Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 66.
T
Taciturnitie commendable. Add. p. 135. Teacher, ought first to learn before
he take upon him to instruct, Off. l. 1. p. 2. where hic mistaken for hoc, viz.
hoc est juxta proverbium, where according to St Gregory's judgment from our
Saviors example, none should teach in the public assembly, but such as have
attained to our Saviors years Thief, not chief, Pref. in lib. 3. p. 3. line
1. Theophrast, Off. l. 2. c^ 2. p. 3. Temperance, in the Ethnic is in the
outside, not in the inside, Fr. p. 26. l. 10. described, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p
125. c. 43. p 103. Testimony, must be for the maintenance of the truth, not
to benefit a friend, Off. l. 3. c. 16. p. 57. Text, Hebr. and Sept. reconciled,
Off. l. 1. c. 29. p. 67, 68. etc. 30 p. 72. etc. 44. p. 107. etc. 45. p 108.
etc. 46. p. 109. etc. 49. p. 119. Off. l. 2. c. 2. p. 4. etc. 3. p. 6. etc. 8.
p. 24. Off. l. 3. c. 1. p. 1. etc. 9. p. 31. etc. 10. p. 35. 53. 56 57. Tigris,
interpretation. Hebr. Hiddekel of hadal, a Persian word. Fortitude compared to
it, Intr. p 3. Tillage, in the time of famine how to be husbanded, and the
increase how to be bestowed, Off. l. 3. c. 6. p. 19. Tobias, his exceeding
great kindness to his people, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 48. Tongues, evil. Add p.
128. where line 16. read, thou sit and speak against (which wanting)
thy brother. Tongue of the learned, Off. l. 1. c. 2. Tongues scourge Ib. c. 41
p. 99. Tranquillity, what. Off. l. 1. c. 36. p. 89. Treachery, to be flied;
Add. 3. p. 40. Treacherous dealing toward Gods servants, the brand of that
infamy will never be removed, Off. l. 3. c. 15. p. 56. In Trouble inexpected,
what to be done, Off. l. 1 c. 38. p. 29. Truth, what to be done in the
searching thereof. Time and diligence must be brought to the searching of it.
Ingrafted in all men by nature to search out the truth, Off. l. 1. c. 25 p. 59.
60. Turpe, Off. l. 1. c. 50 p. 126. Tyrian Factors, in fame of old for lucre,
Off. l. 2. c. 14. p. 3 5.
V
Vanity, Off. l. 1. c. 49. p. 116. Vanity to scrape together riches, p. 117,
118. Merchants traffic vanity. Verecundie, Off. l. 1^ c. 43. p 103, 104.
Virtues Cardinal, comprised in Scripture, No virtue meritorious, Fr. p. 7.
line 27. 32. yet not without their singular use, Fr. p. 8. line 3. the work of
God in us, Ib. line 23. St. James and St. Paul accorded, Ib. line 17. rarely
used in the Scripture. Pref. in l. 2. p. 4. line 6. Virtue whence derived, Ib.
line 11. Lady Virtue, Add. p. 138. what virtue in every eestate of men
blessed, Off. l. 2. c. 3. p, 6. A life accumulated with virtue near step to
eternity. Virtues are undividable, Off. l. 2. c. 9. p. 26. The vulgar look to
them separated, Ib. Not ingrafted in man by nature. This is not denied of any
professor Christian (no not of the Ethnic) save only of the Pelagian, Fr. p.
1. line 22. The whole praise af virtue to consist in action is the confession
both of Ethnic and Christian Philosopher, Fr. p. 2. line 25. Vices to be
spoken vehemently against, Off. l. 3. c 14 p 45. what is shameful cannot be
gainful, Ib p. 46. Vice voluntary, Fr. p. 14. l. 1. Victory, not to be
gotten by dishonest means, Off. l. 3. c. 14. p. 46. Ungodly, their flourishing
estate of no continuance, deserving punishment even in verdict of own
conscience, Off. l. 1. c. 22. p. 22. 24. Contrariwise is it with godly, Ib.
etc. 15. p. 29. 30. Voice, Off. l. 1. c. 19. c. 22. p. 50. where line 25.
expunge natural, line 27. after sounding, put in fit for singing. Use in the
right kind of spiritual graces, Off. l. 1. c. 21 p 133, 134. Utility, and
honesty to be one, Off. l. 3. c. 2. p. 5. A rule whereby they may be kept
inviolably, Ib. c. 7 Utility evermore to follow honesty, c. 14. p. 44.
Utility, honesty, and decency wherein they accord, Off. l. 3. c. 7. p. 26.
Utility joined with ignominy, Ib. c. 7. p. 32. Some Utility corporal, some
belonging to piety, Off. l. 2. c. 6. p. 16. That which must move as principal
to Utility, ought to be Faith, love, and equity, Off. l. 2. c. 7. not
filthy lucre, Ib. c. 6. p. 13. 15. Vzza, Off. l. 1. c. 50. p. 122.
W
Warlike virtue to be commended in holy men professing religion, Off. l. 1. c.
40. p. 95. Wars, never waged by David, but being provoked in all his wars
he had prudence for his companion, Off l 1. c. 35. p. 84. In all his wars
consulted with oracles of God, Ib. p. 85. In Well-willer, better to put
confidence then in the wise, Off. l. 1. c. 33. p. 79. Wickedness, not to be
committed to get a kingdom, Off. l. 3. c. 5. p. 16. Between wicked and
envious difference, Off. l 2. c. 30. p. 73. Widows, Off. l. 2. c. 29. p. 71.
Women's society to be avoided. Women to be covered in time of prayer, Off. l.
1. c. 19. p. 43. etc 45. p. 108. Will of man able to do nothing in the matter
of salvation, Fr. p. 12. Free- will we have none to do well, Off. l. 2. c. 6.
p. 14. where line 13. his to be put out. Wisdom 4. Off. l. 3. c. 2. p. 7.
Ordinary and extraordinary, ib. Special, ib. Words unseemely, Off. l. 1. c.
18. p. 39. In preaching, Ib. All works humane excluded from Justification,
Pref in 119. l. 3. and that our Justification is by faith. Good works though
they merit not, yet manifold is their utilitie, Fr p. 9. The practice whereof
why not received of the Lord at the hands of the Ethnic, ib. p. 10. want of
faith cuts them off solely. God their Author, ib. p. 2. and 13. From worldly
molestations good to fly, Add. p. 140, 141. but must withal take up holy
meditations that will come to salvation. Work specious in the tongue, and
without true affection of no validity, Off. l. 2. p. 5. Worlds contempt, and
of fleshly lusts ought to be in Ministers, and professors of the Gospel, Off.
l. 1. c. 49. 119. Worlds beginning maintained by some Ethnicks, Fr. p. 20. l.
16. Worldly lusts to be avoided, Add. p. 139. Worldly conversation not good,
and why, Add. p. 133. Worship false is against nature, honesty, and
comeliness, Off. l. 1 c. 25. p. sto. Writers humane were read and studied by
the chiefest of the Fathers of the Church, Off. l. 1. c. 25. p. 60.
Y
Youth may receive instruction from Josiah, Off. l. 2. c. 30. p. 34. Immaculate
life in them the stipend of old age, Ib. c. 20. p. 51.
Z
Zeal, Off. l. 2. c. 30. p. 74. Zelotes, Off. l. 2. c. 30. p 74. Zeno, Off. l.
2. c. 2. p. 3.
TRVTHS TRIVMPH: OR, St. AMBROSE HIS CONVICTION OF SYMMACHVS A Gentile,
pleading for the Altar of Victory being demolished by the Christian Princes,
to be erected again in the Court of the Senate of Rome. Done into English by
the former Translator of his Offices.

Symmachus Ambrosio (...) non (...) astat,
Atterit os discors (...) aure sonus.
1 COR. 10.20. What the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not
to God. LONDON, Printed for John Dawson. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, and my very good Lord, GODFERIE L. Bishop
of Gloucester.
My very good Lord:
IT is not without cause that the Apostle speaking of good Works, breaks
forth into this Epiphoneme, (...), and this I will that thou affirm, that they
which believe in God be careful to maintain good works; and afterward, let
ours learn so to do: and that St. John the Divine ioynes with him, ratifying
the same from the infallible testimony of the Spirit, when mentioning the
blessed estate of them that die in the Lord; adds withal, that their works
follow them. For where the effect is found, there, and no where else, the cause
undoubtedly is in place, which is a lively, saving, and justifying faith.
Neither can they be denied to be Via regni, si siant non timore, sed amore: non
formidine poenae sed dilectione iustitiae: Which is that St. Augustine requires
for the inside: but, because that is known only to the Searcher of all hearts;
we must in caritie go no further, then to what is outward: and esteem good
works as they are; good, and profitable for men, (...). And the truth is, it
redounds greatly, to the discredit of the professors of the Gospel: especially
to those of eminent place, to be (...), without fruit: our neighbors of New
Windsor, and their posterity are exceedingly bound to your Lordship, for your
most gracious and liberal contribution for the better ornament of their Church
and market place, as also for the maintenance among them the perpetuity of
that morning watch of divine service to the great honor of God, and stirring
them up to holy devotion. The remembrance whereof, together with your Lordships
right Christian disposition, to the daily and continual practice of charity
was a special motive of this my Dedication. We all admire his virtue, who was
able to say, Job 21.15.
I was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame; I was a father to the
poor, and his loins have blessed me. In these barren and frozen days of
Hospitality, who does not admire your Lordship, from whose gates the poor
never depart with an empty bosom. Blessed is he, Psalm. 41.
as the Psalmist speaks, that judges wisely of the poor. St. Laurentius that
holy Martyr, Archdeacon to Sixtus Bishop of Rome, when the tyrant Decius sought
the spoil of the treasures of the Church, cried out, Horum manus (meaning the
hands of the poor) thesauros ecclesiae in coelum deportaverunt. For these are
truly the treasures in which Christ remains; 2 Cor. 4.7.
we have this treasure in earthly vessels according to the blessed Apostle, and
it is written, I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave
me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in. Afterward punctually, what
ye have done to the least of these, ye have done to me. For this cause our
holy Father himself witnessing it, Offic. l. 2. c. 28
sold the very goods of the Church, the sacred vessels themselves, namely to
redeem the captives being in extreme and miserable servitude, wonderful
compassionate was he to the poor: and in that your Lordship rightly resembles
him therein, being an acceptable piece of service to God, worthily is it
presented indeed to your Lordship, and published in your name. Take therefore
for your Lps everlasting comfort, what that divine Father has, August. in
Lucam. Sermon. 3 5.
Qui sunt qui habebunt tabernacula aeterna nisi Sancti Dei? and qui sunt, qui
ab ipsis accipiendi sunt in tabernacula aeterna, nisi qui eorum indigentiae
serviunt, and quod eis opus est hilariter serviunt? In the mean time receive
this my travel of translation, I most humbly desire your good Lordship as a
(...).
pledge of my ancient love toward you, and true affection to honor that
special grace of Commiseration so eminent in your Lordship. And thus with my
heartiest petition to the God of all goodness for your Lordships long life,
and much happiness, to the further benefit of Church and Munisicentissimus
Episcopus tam pater est Patriae quam Ecclesiae.
Commonweal, I rest,

Your Lordships poor Orator in all humble duty Ri. Humfrey.

Cause rendered for the translation of the Fathers.
THeir authority is next to the sacred scriptures, and they are expositors of
them giving great light to them, neither are their interpretations, and
commentaries of small strength, and worth to persuade, that what sense they
give of them should not be neglected.

2. Their writings afford us a true chronology of the times, how they have
passed what has been done in each several age, what doctrines have been
maintained for orthodox, what rejected as erroneous, and heretical.

3. Their sweet and pithy sentences are of invaluable weight, proceeding from
the profoundest judgment, and rarest invention, conceived not with humane wit,
but by divine grace, which appears by this, that none in our days can attain
to the like excellency therein.

4. No examples of holy life be found since the Apostles comparable to theirs
for devout prayer, fasting, charity, care of the flock committed to them,
courage for the convincing of error arising in the Church, beating down sin
with the due punishment thereof, by their good discipline joined with decent
order, and reverend government.

5. The synods or Councels were called but they were assigned to be speakers,
presidents, chief pillars, and compilers of what soever therein was acted, and
effected.

6. The translating of them is a means to bring them out of the dust, and
dark corners wherein they lie rotting, and consumed with moths, and to set a
new coat, and flourish upon them, to reviue their blessed memory, to honor
them, and to give them their deserved comendation, more narrowly to sift out
their true tenets, and to discover their frailties: the one being a good mark
for imitation, the other for devitation.

Andreas Schottus published 600. Greek Epistles of Isidorus Pelasiotes out of
the Vatican Library An. Dom. 1628. whereof there was another edition the year
following in Greek and Latin which argues that the hands of the learned are ever
in action this way, and labors most acceptable to the Church of God.
7. This willbe as a spur to stir up to the reading of them, and to examine
how that which is translated accords with the original, will make them more
familiar, better known, bring them more easily to hand, to more frequent, and
certtaine use.

8. It has been accustomed in all ages to translate them, and if the Greek
fathers might be turned into the Latin tongue, why might not the Latin into
other Languages? Pisanus Burgandio presented as a worthy piece of work to the
council of Pope Alexander, the homilies of Saint Chrysostom translated into
Latin upon the Gospel of the Evangelist John, and said that he had done the
like in a great part of his homilies upon Genesis, not one of all the Greek
Fathers beside, but has been translated.

9. They which take not that course, yet what they commit to writing as their
own they extract out of their works, as Eusebius did his Ecclesiastical
history out of that famous library, which Bishop Alexander had erected in
Jerusalem.

10. Eusebius himself has many years sithence been turned into English by
Doctor Hanmer, S. Augustine de civitate Dei first perused by Mr. Chrashow,
afterward authorized, and set forth; and of late his confessions well approved.
B. Parrie seemed to take great felicity therein to the special benefit of the
Church of God, as in Vrsinus, and Doctor Rainolds conference out of English
into Latin, Chrysostom for some part is done into English with Zanchies
Calvin's institutions Philip of Morney L. du Plessis, Peter Martyrs common
places Virell with many more.
confessions.

11. Many humanity books are extant in our tongue, as Plutarchs lives, Pliny,
Homer Ovids Metamorphosis, Persius, with others almost innumerable in our, and
transmarine languages. Now can it be held as profitable for a common weal,
that the thus converting of humane authors should be allowed, that divine
writers of an inferior rank, and no way worthy to be compared with the
ancient Fathers, should be a thing beneficial to the Church of God, and not of
them? What is objected to the contray is of no weight, as that thereby the
common people shall be prompt in them as our selves. For we ought rather to be
of Moses meek and loving disposition, who hearing that Eldad, and Medad
prophesied in the host, wished that all the Number. 11.29.
people were endued with that divine gift bestowed upon them: and of our
Savior sweet, and humble affection, that when John Luke 9.49.
complained that one that accompanied not with them, cast out devils in his
name, replied with a joyful admission thereof, he that is not against me is
with me. Wherefore if it may be for the better edification of our country,
let us not spare any labor, but follow therein Bartholomew the Apostle, who as
he turned the Gospel of St. Matthew into the And as Queen Anne wife to K.
Richard the 2. had the Evangelists in our English tongue, and commended by the
then Archbishop.
Indian, so let us the Fathers into our speech. For it is not simply the words
of the sacred Scripture that make for our salvation, but the sense, which where
is it better given then by the fathers? Grant the one therefore, then of
necessity the other must be admitted. It is a thing commonly received as from
antiquity, that Ezra the Scribe invented the pricks for the more facile reading
of the Hebrew, and that afterward some other divided the Hebrew Bible into
chapters, and that Steven Langton Foxex Nich. Trivet in vita Henr. 3. page 55
or if not Langt. S. Hugo, Cardinalis who first made the Concordance.
Archbishop of Canterbury distinguished for the use of the Latin church so
into chapters viz. in that order, and number as we have it at this day, and
Robert Stephens into verses. Now if this had not been where had our accurrate
knowledge of quotation been, and equivalent almost to that exactness of the
Jews that grew to such perfection in the true reading of the bible, that there
was not so much as the least jota that could escape them?

Tenderness of conscience is another objection.

The Fathers may be by this means misconstrued, and corrupted. Archbishop
Vlshelme with other Bishops in the days of Ethelstan touched him well in the
point of conscience, when they drew him to proclaim, Ego Ethelstanus Rex mando
propositis meis in regno meo in nomine domini, et sanctorum omnium, vt imprimis
reddant de proprio meo decimas deo tam in vivente, quam in mortuis frugibus,
terrae et Episcopi mei similiter faciant de suo proprio, etc. And it follows
there, we must consider what is written in books if we will not offer our
tenths, from us nine parts shall be taken away, and only the tenth part shall
be left us. Antonius Pius the Emperors conscience was full of clemency, who
chose rather to save the life of one citizen, then to destroy a thousand of his
adversaries. In both these respects was necessary remorse of conscience not any
here at all. That saying of Menas the Martyr proceeded of a loving and tender
conscience indeed toward God, the whole world is not to be weighed with one
soul saved, but here the contrary is found, for many souls may be lost, or
not settled for want of the help of those greatest luminaries to strengthen
their judgment, and thrust out of their minds all scruple, when they see them
consent with us. Concerning In translating the same sense. not always easily
kept: and that according to St. Hieroms confession. So alleged against the
translation of the Bible, Constable. 7. of T. Arundell Archb. and against
Coverdalls by Bish. Gardener.
misconstruction, and corruption it might be as well alleged against that
honorable act of Ptolomie Philadelph, never to be forgotten, in causing the
labor of the Septuagints to be spent about that holy work of the old
Testament: neither can it possibly be (the prophetical and Apostolical only
accepted,) but that humane frailty in the best wits, and most sanctified
spirits must of necessity, as sorry unsavourie seed among the cleanest fanned
wheat discover it self. Finally if tenderness of conscience will permit to
produce the Fathers in pulpit, and to English them: (For otherwise the rule of
the Apostle is ^ Cor. 14.^
broken not to speak to the people in an unknown tongue) then much more may
it be done without any scruple that way, in case where we draw not so near to
God, neither do stand in so special manner in his holy presence.

The Argument.
THere were three Emperors called by the name of Valentinian, the first was
styled the elder succeeded in the Empire, Iovian who succeeded Julian the
Apostate, an He was stain together with Heraclius by certain soldiers of
Aetius through the treason of Maximus, Evagr. l. 2. C. 7.
other was created by Theodsius junior, who was son to Placidia his Aunt,
daughter to Theodosius Magnus; another styled the younger was son to the
elder, reigning He was stifled to death by the conspiracy of Eugenius and
Arbogastus Socra. l. 5. c. 25. which plainly evidenceth that they were diverse
one from the other, were there none other proofs.
immediately after him, and coming up to the Empire in the middle, as it were,
between them both. He was the son of Iustina a second wife, whom he
married, Severa his first wife being living: This was she, that being an Arian
wrought the exilement of St. Ambrose, but was withstood, and intercepted in the
execution thereof, through the singular affection of the people toward him.
This Valentinian her son, chosen by the soldiers, after the death of his
father it is, to whom St. Ambrose here writes, being young in years: yet now,
as it should seem, out of his minority, during which time, the prudent
Governor Probus the Consul ruled Italy. Here was the Empire first divided,
after the time of the three sons of Constantine the great, into three
several Dominions; Gratian his elder brother had the dominion over the East,
he over the West, Theodosius over Egypt, with the other parts of the South. To
him therefore Symmachus being Consul and head Senator of the city of Rome sent
this Epistle, laboring vehemently therein, (and he being of small judgment
might easily be seduced,) to obtain his grant, to receive aagaine into Rome
the old Ceremonies, and abominations of the Gentiles: which from the time of
Constantine the great, save only in the days of Julian the Apostate, who
reigned not three years, they had forsaken, and embraced the Christian
religion. Our renowned author Bishop of Millan the chief City of Insubria now
Lumbardie, lying in that part of Italy called Gallia Cisalpina; a man of great
fame in those days in the Church of God for his authority, learning, wisdom,
and courage: no sooner heard of this seditious Epistle, but straight way being
moved in zeal for the Christian cause wrought the former of these two Epistles
to the young Emperor, desiring him to send him the relation of Symmachus,
wherein in the mean time he meets stoutly, and sharply with the subject,
and when it was sent him fully and effectually replieth to it, worthily
convinces it in the second Epistle. Which also took so good effect, that the
relator prevailed not, though a man of rarest eloquence, and highest
estimation. Notwithstanding, such confidence had he in his oratorie joined
with his reputation (so presumptuous spirits, and hot-spurres are Satan's
proctors) that to bring his precious enterprise to pass, hoping Maximus the
Britain should have obtained the Empire, he gave another attempt. For
compiling a book in his praise, and pronouncing it before him with his best
elocution, he sought to draw him strongly to him, which was easily done, he
being a barbarous tyrant: specially when he saw this to serve as a bait to
bring Rome to him. But herein again he was deceived, and had not something
happened better then he deserved, he had been catched, and strangled in his
own snare. For Theodosius shortly after slew Maximus, and then was he charged
with treason for that libell of his, and had sufferd death, as his due guerdon,
had not Leontius the B. of the Novatian Church at Rome, he flying thither for
sanctuary, entreated Theodosius for him: who because he bare love to the
priesthood, and was a Prince full of clemency easily pardoned him. And whether
afterward he became a Christian convert the story shows not, but Socrat. l. 5.
c. 14.
there it appears that he wrote an Apology to Theodosius.

Plutarch de garrulitate.
(...).
The Prove. 16.9.
heart of man purposes his way, but the Lord does direct his steps.
Many Prove. 19.11.
devises are in a man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord shall stand.
(...), Or, A further explication of the same.
TO pass by without the same regard, the irruption of the Plutarch. in vita
Camilli, and Marcelli.
Gauls into the Roman dominions under Brennus, and thirteen years after that,
as at the first, when overcome by Camillus, and again under Britomarus their
King slain by Two hundred thousand of the Gauls joining in battle were slain
by Vindex, and Verginius. Plutarch in Galba.
Marcellus, neither of their rebellion, wherein they were vanquished by Caesar,
because these tumults were before this Monarchy became Christian: and to
insist upon times those Goths, even from the utmost Climat under the North
Pole, and fennes of Meotis, had in great multitudes broken into Italy, and
grievously infested the Roman In the time of Valentinian the elder the
Sarmatians troubled the Roman territories, and in the reign of Valens, the
Goths inhabiting beyond Ister. But the Hunnes overcomming them, when there was
peace between their two Captains, Phritigernes, and Athanarichus, they
crouching to Valens, and he thereupon placing them in Thracia, they rebelled
against him, Socr. Schol. lib. 4. c. 26. 27. 28.
Empire. Wherein when first P, Diacon. 9. lib. 12. ^. Oros. lib. 7.
Rhadagaisus a Scythian by stock and an Infidel, who having under him five
thousand had cried out with his retinue, that the city of Rome being destitute
of the aid of her Gods, which she had destroyed, could not be able to resist
him, and his mighty power protected by the strength of his Demonaick Gods, when
next True it is, that Alarichus became a Christian, and Vlphilas their Bishop
turned the Bible into the Gothicke tongue: yet Theodosius made him fly as a
molester of the Roman state. Idem lib. 4. cap. 27. and loco quo supra.
Alarichus had taken the city of Rome it self; thirdly, when Ataulphus had
devoured with his army, swarming like locusts, whatsoever the other had left;
and lastly, Maximus the tyrant a Pagan likewise, though of another Nation, had
now won no small part, and had climed up even to the very throne of the Empire
Symmachus a great Governor, and a great Orator inamoured with the love of
Paganism, rises up as one ravished with the joy of such news, and takes
occasion hereupon to defend the Religions of the old Romans, and their
flourishing idolatrous estate against the Christian faith. And therefore
eagerly moves, and with all his rhetoric persuades to procure the Altar of
victory taken down to be reedified, and to be adored, as of old, for a
Goddess, the stipends of the Vestall Virgins, as heretofore, to be repaid
them, all the rites of the Gods with their sacrifices, priests, and ministers
to be again revived. Against which his detestable, and pernicious errors, our
author for gravity, and authority a most eminent Divine, for wisdom, zeal,
and goodness of style, joined with all variety of learning, a man incomparable
opposes himself, the cause of religion now lying at the stake, and
necessarily requiring it in these his two Epistles: which may serve all
posterity, as two strong bulwarks, for Apology of the Christians faith
against Gentilisme, and all superstition. He it was that stood in the
forefront, abode the sorest brunt, and forced to silence that braving
prolocutor. Howbeit, the matter being of highest importance, needful it was
for succeeding times, his Hydra's head still springing up, that some should
come in as champions to cut it down: Wherefore Aurel. Prudentius a worthy Poet
inserting expressly this our Symmachus own words, beats him every where from
his hold in two books of heroicke verse. St. Hierome in many passages of his
works, but specially in his Epitaph upon Neopotian unnestles him in his couch.
For what is his stuff stripped of some little flourish? P. Diaconus, and P.
Orosius (St. Hieroms scholar, and set on work by St. Augustine) by their
pithy historical discourse pinched him on both sides to the hard bones. And at
last St. Augustine himself in that everlasting monument of his De Civitate Dei.
22. books has sifted him to the branne, hunted him out of all his starting
holes, and loosing the lists of his refined lines has quite, and clean, like
to a few Spiders webbes, swept them away with all their wiles. Thus you see,
that all these (and many more not now extant) as so many malls, are hammering
still upon this stithy, and though they batter it every one in his turn, yet
they never leave striking till they have driven it to powder.

But this was one of the least, not of the last of our prudent Fathers labors.
For he applied himself to profit posterity as long as he was able to handle
a pen. Every of the four, and he in the first place, had his excellency. He
in his Allegory, Gregory in Tropologie, Hierome in History, Augustine in
Anagogie. Each of these is doubtless for utilitie, if we had the like will,
and wisdom to use it accordingly. The Apostle bids Timothy bring with him his
2 Timothy 4.13.
books, specially his parchment. He being exraordinarily inspired, and his
time of dissolution now at hand, what should he do with books? As the
sacred, so other godly books in their degree, be for comfort, instruction,
strengthening the judgment, establishing in the truth, the day of reckoning
being come of principal use for preparation, and committed to parchment more
durable. But that the providence of God is wonderful for the benefit of his
Church, we might justly admire that the Fathers in their continual care of
government, of preaching, disputing, conferring, reading, had any time left
them at all to write, much more so many large volumes. Varro in his time was a
mirror to the Ethnicks, and our Author may be a Vsque ad ultimam aegritudinem
non cessavit scribere: unde scribens in illum psalmum, magnus Dominus, and
laudabilis nimis, etc. mortuus est. Th. Aquinas in Comment. in 2 Ep. ad Tim.
and cap. 4.
greater to us. For his Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 6. cap. 2.
commendation with some additament, may he justly challenge: Vir doctissimus
undecunque Ambrosius, qui tam multa legit, tam multa toties concionando locutus
est, ut aliquid ei scribere vacasse miremur, tam multa scripsit, eaque
brevitate, and difficultate ut vix quenquam legere, pauciores intelligere posse
credamus. But in so much pregnancy of wit as in our age, what use is there of
reading the Fathers themselves? Pijs Calvin. Comment. suo in 2. Epist. ad
Timoth. and cap. 4.2.1^.
omnibus commendatur Continual reading, from which they may reap profit, is
commended to all the godly. The fury also of fanaticall spirits is more
refuted thereby, who contemning books, and condemning all reading, boast only
of the strong inward motion of the holy Ghost, wherewith they are inflamed.
assidua lectio ex qua proficiant. Magis etiam refellitur fanaticorum hominum
furor, qui libris contemptis damnataque omni lectione solos suos (...) jactant.
And where may we profit more then here whose assiduity is a wonderment to the
world, and so great, that it had been unpossible for them to have undergone
it? but that Vicit amor Christi, fideique immensa cupido.

St. Ambrose to Valentinian the second, Socrat. Schol. l. 4. C. 26.
Valentinian the Emperor, earnestly craving, Ex lib. 5. Epist. Ep. 30.
and effectually dealing with him, that he would not at the Petition of the
Gentiles, be induced to grant his Imperial Decree, for the restoring of their
Altars; showing first by such a Decree, no small injury to redound to God, next
to his Valentinian the first, brother to Valens the Emperor.
Father, and Gratian the Emperor.
Brother.
AMbrose Bishop, to the most blessed and Christian Emperor This young Emperor
was very wavering in his religion, here our Author fears his turning Pagan,
elsewhere mentioning with Auxentius that he would altogether become Arian, as
Orat. de Basil. trad, Epist. ad Marcellin. soror. lib. 5. Epist. Ep. 32. and
Ep. 34 ad Theodos. Imp. to whom upon his decease he giving his testimony
plainly speaks it, Quod ego non pro recordatione injuriae erga me veteris,
deprompsi, sed pro testimonio conversionis. Illud enim alienum, hoc suum quod a
te infusum sibi, itatenuit vt matris persuasionem excluderet. Now his mother
was an Arian.
Valentinian. Forasmuch as all men living under the dominion of the Roman
Empire, do homage, and service to you Princes, and Potentates of the earth,
ye ought your selves in like manner to live under the command, and obedience
of the omnipotent God, and to fight likewise under his banner for the
maintenance of the holy faith. For otherwise the weal of no man can possibly
be in safety, unless he may be brought truly to worship the true God, which
rules all things by his power: And he only is the true God, who in his
devotion calls for the John 4.24. Psalm. 5^.6.
heart, and Not regarding what is outward, Micah 6.7.8.
inward affections. The Gods of the Gentiles, as says the Scripture, are (...)
juxta Sept. Psalm. 95.6.
Devils. Whosoever therefore takes up arms in the cause of the true God, and
sincerely embraces his holy service, he stays not upon dissimulation, and
connivency (incident to outward ceremony) but his whole care in all fidelity
consists in the employment of his mind upon the study of pure religion, and
godly devotion: Last of all, if these things be not performed, at the least
this must be done, that in no wise consent be showed to any idolatrous
service, and profane Profane, that is, wicked, not otherwise then chalelei in
Hebr. equally used for profane and polluted, Fraternas acies, Alternaque bella
profanis Decertata odijs, Stathius. He is properly profane, who is held with
no love of the Fane, or Temple: howbeit here used for that which is most
beastly and abominable. And is not idolatry abominable, when as the learned
of them which most strongly stands for it, confesses that revera Diabolus in
ipsis loquebatur? the Devil spoke out of their idols? Bellarmine apud, D.
Rainolds l. 2. de Idol. C. 3. Paragr. 8. which appears clearly to be so.
Lev. 17.7. That idols called Vanities, Ier. 14.22. because they bear the vain
images of the true God, or as Zach. 10.2. they speak vain things: these
express somewhat their dotage that run after them, but lay not open fully the
foul deformity of this filthy error.
worship of Ceremonies. For no man can deceive God, before whose eyes all
things, yea the very deepest secrets of the heart lie (...), Heb. 4 13.
open, and naked. Wherefore (most Christian Emperor) seeing faith to the true
God ought to be tendered, seeing for the preservation of the same faith, care,
caution, and devotion, ought to accrue. I much admire how it comes to pass,
that some there are which conceive hope to themselves, that it cannot otherwise
be, but that you must repair again, and reedifie by your mandate the altars
of the Gods of the Gentiles, and withal yield allowance for the use, and
maintenance of the profane sacrifices. For their hope is, that you will not
seem to cast the burden thereof upon them, but rather bestow what of late
has ^eene reserved, either for your Exchequer, or coffer, as of your own
proper cost on that behoof. And (see) what complaint they make of their
damages sustained by us, who never ceased to spill our blood, who spared not to
spoil the edifices themselves of our Churches. They petition likewise your
Highness, for the granting to them their privileges being such themselves, as
have denied us the common use of speaking, and teaching, by that their last law
in the time of Julian: the granting, and renewing, I say, of those very
privileges of theirs, whereby the Julian made a law, that the Christians
should not be trained up in profane literature, Socra. Schol. l. 3. c. 10.
Such inhibition is against the holy commandment, where willed to hold that is
good, 1 Thessal. 5.21. and Col. 2.8. to beware lest any circumvent through
philosophy, and vain deceit, which we shall not be able to do, unless we
possess the armor of the enemy, Socrat. Schol. l. 3. c. 14. where the use of
humane learning is worthily pressed.
Christians (ensnared through their crafty practices against them) were often
deceived. For they sought to entangle by those privileges, some unadvisedly,
some for that they avoided the trouble of public necessities, many because all
under trial are not found strong, few excepted, because the most part were
weak, and made relapse, and that under the regiment of Christian Princes
themselves. And were not those now abolished, I might confirm by manifold
arguments, that under your government they ought in right to be removed. But
whereas by the greater number of the former Princes throughout their dominions,
being Lords almost of the whole world have been inhibited, and interdicted,
but repealed, and quite abrogated, and that for the cause of true religion, by
your clemencyes brother Gratian of famous memory his rescripts given at Rome:
neither destroy you, I beseech you, his statutes for the defense thereof
faithfully enacted, nor pull you in pieces your brothers (royal) precepts
already divulged. In civil affairs if ought be established, no man thinks
it just to violate it, shall then a Precept concerning Religion be trampled
under foot? Let no man creeping into your bosom, and insinuating himself by
his sophistry beguile your tender years. Or else, be he a Gentile that
labors for it, he ought not to entangle your mind in the snares, and wrap you
in the bonds of his superstition; but, when he himself under so great a zeal
of truth is drawn to defend Vanity, ought out of his own desire teach and
admonish you in such sort, whereby as a duty belonging to your princely estate,
you might addict yourselfe to the study of the true faith. Something to be
ascribed to the Our Author clearly sets down his judgment concerning the
merits of the Saints, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. de Vocat. Gentium in these words, Quod ad
ipsam cognitionem Veritatis, and perceptionem salutis non quisquam suis meritis
sed open, and opere divinae gratiae perveniat. That no man comes to the
knowledge of the truth, and reaping of salvation by his own merits, but by the
aid, and work of divine grace, which he proves out of 1 Cor. 3.8. and 12.11.
and whereas the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.8. every one shall receive his reward
according to his own labor, he answers it thus, Datur ergo unicuique sine
merito. It is given to every one without desert, whereby he may go forward to
desert, and it is given before any labor, that every one may receive his
reward according to his labor, which appears in the distribution of the
talents, Math. 25.15. they were divided according to the proper and natural
possibility of the partakers thereof, not according to their proper merit. The
bestower foresaw the model of the capacity of every of these, and an unlike
number of talents was delivered to each of them, not as a remuneration of their
merit, but as matter for them to work upon, and if Erasmus exception against
this work be not unjust, because of the diversity of the style in his opinion,
take what he has upon Psalm. 119.10. where he first proves that works must
be voluntary from 1 Cor. 9.17. and then, when so, quod quisquis fecerit legis
judicia remuneratione donatur a Christo. Donum is that quod nulla juris
necessitate sed sponte praestatur, id est, a donation is that which is freely
given. Hereunto accord St. Austins descant upon our merits, quisquis tibi,
speaking to God in his confessions, enumerat vera merita sua, quid tibi
enumerat nisi munera tua? and St. Bernards Sermon. 54. sufficitad meritum, scire
quod non sufficiant merita.
deeds of famous men I do persuade my self, but God to have the preeminencie
therein it is out of question. In a consultation of War the sentence, and
advise of men therein exercised, ought to be expected; but when the cause of
religion is in hand, the mind of the Lord is to be thought upon. Injury is
done to no man, when the omnipotent God is put in the first place. In his power
it is to give sentence. Yea according to the matter of your government enforce
not the unwilling to such service as he likes not; take not to your self (O
noble Emperor) any further liberty, so shall every one patiently bear, what
is not extorted by his Emperor: when on the other side, it would be
grievously taken, should there be a desire in his Highness to extort, and
wring any way from him. The affection of privation, and betraying his cause, is
wont to be distasteful to the Gentile himself. For every one ought steadfastly
to defend, to the uttermost of his power, to preserve the faithful purpose of
his heart. If any, though in name Christians, think the decreeing of such a
matter to be good, let not that gay cloak under a bare and vain title dazzle
your eyes, and draw you into deceit. Whosoever persuades this, whosoever
determines this, sacrifices. Howbeit the sacrificing of one is more tolerable,
then the running of all into that sin. This whole Christian Senate is in
danger. If at this day some Gentile Emperor should set up an Altar to images,
which God forbid, and should compel the Christian assemblies to meet there,
to be present at the sacrifices, that the ashes This supposition in his other
Epistle is put down as an objection against Symmachus, hauriant omnes, inquit,
hauriant vel inviti fumum oculis, symphoniam auribus, cinerem faucibus, ^^us
naribus, and aversantium licet ora excitata foci^ nostris favilla respergat.
of the altar, the spark of the sacrilege, the smoke of the bodies burnt
might fill the breaths, and mouths of the faithful: should also give
judgment in that court where they of the jury might be compelled after oath
made before the altar of the image to give in their verdict (for they interpret
thus, placing it where the Court is filled for the greater number, with such as
are Christians, under that Sacrament to bring every assembly, so is their
thought, to seek unto it openly for counsel) every Christian compelled under
such a condition to come to the Senate, as for the most part he is, and that
injuriously, might well believe it to be a plain persecution. You therefore
being Emperor, shall the Christians be constrained to swear unto the altar?
To swear what else is it, but to testify him by whom thou swearest to be a
protector of the faith, and a divine power? You being Emperor, this is desired
and required, that you command an Altar to be erected, allowance to be given to
profane sacrifices. But this cannot be decreed without sacrilege. Hereupon
grows my humble supplication to you, that you would not be induced to permit
any such Decree, or constitution to pass, or to give way thereunto by your
subscription. I being Christ Bishop in his stead 2 Cor. 5.20.
convent you for the trust committed to you in the cause of religion. About
which matter we all bearing the name of Bishops might have met together, had
not that incredible, and sudden accident been divulged, that somewhat
derogatorie thereunto, was either suggested in your Consistory, or desired of
the Senate, and as for the Senate let it be far from it. Some few of the
Gentiles there were that usurped that common name of Senate. For two years
sithence almost, when they in like manner attempted to put in this Petition,
holy Damasus was B. of Rome in St. Ambroses time. He mentions him in his
Commentary upon 1 Timothy Ca. 3 Cujus Ecclesiae hodie rector est Demasus. John
Damascen somewhat near to him in name, lived in the time of Leo the Emperor,
Eutrop. lib. Rerum Roman. 21. differs greatly from him in judgment. For be
defends Images to be such as stir up to devotion the minds of beholders, lib.
de Orthod. fide cap. 10. This seems to have been a very golden age, when
Gratian, and Theod. the great, were Emp. this Damasus that wrought much, and
stood for the truth was B. of Rome, the Fathers of the Church, Ambrose,
Augustine, Hierome, Athanasius. But this is most memorable, that by this
Damasus a Council of 90. B. called to Rome, condemned Arius, Eunomius,
Macedonius, Photius, Ebion with their disciples. By whom also was confirmed
against the Greek Church the Holy Ghost to be of one substance with the
Father, and the Son, Tomo. 1. Council. Primus etiam Hieronyme^ siriptis
authoritatem dedit, cum prius 70. interpretum scripta tantumm modo in pretio
essent. Carranza Summa Council. page 196. I^ cum 90, Episc. in Council. Romans
congregatis profess sunt eandem fide quam tradiderunt patres in Council.
Nicaeno 1. and Council. Constantij 6. eo Papa decretum est, ut ea quae apud
Nicaeam statuta sunt, immota maneant, Cap. 1. ejasdem Consilij.
Damasus the elect of God over the Church of Rome sent me a libell which the
Christian Senators, and very many indeed, preferred, complaining that they
themselves never willed any such thing, joined not with the Gentiles in any
such Petitions, neither gave their consent to it, making also further
complaint, that if any the^ like matter were decreed, they resolved both
publicly and privately, that they would no more resort to the Court. Is this a
thing worthy your times, and the flourishing days of the Gospel, that the
authority of the Christian Senate should therefore be pulled down, that
thereby the purpose of the profane will of the Senate of the Gentiles might
prevail? I directed this libell to the brother of your Clemency. Whence it
appears the Senate to have given nothing in mandate to the Legates concerning
the maintenance of superstition. Objection.
But peradventure it may be objected, why were they not present at the Senate
held of late where this was desired? Reply.
They which were not present speak loud enough by their absence what they
desired, they who treated with the Emperor alone, spoke what was sufficient in
this behalf. Notwithstanding we marvel, though at Rome they take away from
private persons the freedom to resist the Senate, how it comes to pass, that
they will not have it free for you to forbid what you approve, nor to pass by
what in your opinion is not right. And therefore being mindful of your
Embassage last commanded me, I Non dubitat quin si ipse Verrem conveniat
aequitate causae commovere homine possit, Cic. in Verrem Act. 2.
convent you again in the point of your fidelity, I call into question your
mind, lest you should either think to answer according to such like Petition
of the Gentiles, or adjoyne to such answers the sacrilege of subscription.
Constantly refer your self to the Prince Theodosius your pious Father, whom
almost in all causes important you have accustomed to consult. Nothing is more
important then religion, nothing of higher moment then faith. If it were a
civil cause the answer ought to be reserved, until the coming in of the
adverse party. This is a cause of religion, I a Bishop convent you. Let me
have a copy of the relation sent, that both I may answer more fully, and so the
The Emperor Theodos. as before, a father to him for direction, and counsel,
and so he might well be, seeing both for his virtues, and valor styled Magnus.
Father of your clemency being consulted in all points, may vouchsafe his
answer. Verily, if any other thing be determined, we Bishops cannot endure, and
dissemble the same with patience, you may perchance come into the congregation,
but either shall you find no Bishop there, or if you do, you shall find him
refractary. What will you answer him, when he shall say to you, the Church
seeks no gifts at your hands, The Churches complaint against Valentinian,
should he fall away to the Gentiles.
because with them you have garnished the Temples of the Gentiles? The altar of
Christ refuses your oblations, because you have made an altar to images. For
your voice, your hand, and your subscription is your work. Your obedience
likewise, the Lord Jesus refuses, and rejects, because you have obeyed
idols. For he has said unto you, ye cannot serve two Math. 6.24.
masters. Your privileges the Virgins consecrated to God have not, and do the
Virgins of Vesta challenge them? Why do you seek to the Bishops and Priests of
God, when you have preferred before them those profane Petitions of the
Gentiles? We cannot receive the fellowship of a strange error. What will you
answer to these words; That you are a child, and so mistake your self? Every
age has its perfection Tenderness of age is not sufficient excuse, where true
religion has been before planted in such as fall into idolatry.
in Christ. All childhood replenished with faith is approved of God. Objection.
Even little children carried with an Daniel 3.16.18. 1 Mac. 2.20. 2 Mac. 7.2.
undaunted courage have confessed Christ against their persecutors. What will
you answer to your brother? will he not say to you, I thought not my self
brought under by Gratian his brother was slain by the wile of Adragathius the
Captain of Maximus the tyrant, Socra. Scholast. lib. 5. cap. 11.
treachery, because I left thee Emperor, I grieved not todye, because I had thee
mine heir, I mourned not to part with the Empire, because I believed my
commands, chiefly in the matter of divine religion should continue throughout
all ages. These titles of pious virtue had I erected, these spoils of triumphs
over the world, these trophies over the devil, that booty plucked from the
adversary of all mankind in which stands eternal victory had I offered up,
what more could my greatest enemy take from me? Thou have abrogated my Decrees,
which hitherto he which lifted up arms against me has not done. I receive in
my body a more grievous wound now, that my Statutes are condemned of a brother.
I am in danger by thee in the better part of my person. That before was the
death of the body, this the darkning of virtue. Now my Empire is abolished, and
which is more grievous, it is abolished by those near to thee, by those near
to me, and that is abolished which my adversaries said would come to pass in
me. If thou have willingly yielded, thou have condemned my faith, if
unwillingly thou have betrayed thine own. Therefore, which is more heavy, in
thee also am I in danger. The complaint of his Father Valentinian, who being in
great honor with Julian in his wars, rather then he would do sacrifice
flung away his sword girdle, Socrat. Schol. lib. 4. lib. 4. Cap. 1.
What likewise will you answer your Father, who in more bitterness of heart
will question you, saying? O my son, thou have judged too too much amiss of
me, imagining that I used connivency toward the Gentiles. No man durst bring me
such tidings that the heathenish Altar, was set up in the Roman Court. I never
believed so great an impiety hereafter possibly to be committed, that in that
common counsel of the Christians, and Gentiles, the Gentiles would be
permitted to sacrifice: that is, that the Gentiles would be suffered, the
Christians being in presence, to insult, and that the Christians should be
forced against their wills to be present at their sacrifices. Many, and sundry
crimes there were in the time of my reign, but whatsoever came to light I
punished. If there were some lurking in obscurity, whose deeds no man
discovered to me, may they be therefore said, to have had my approbation? Thou
wrongest me much in thy censure, if thou judge, that strange superstition, not
mine own faith has preserved the Empire. Wherefore seeing you manifestly
perceive (O Emperor) that if you shall suffer any such Decree to pass, no
small injury to be offered thereby, first to God, next to your renowned Father,
and brother, I desire you would take into your princely care, what you shall
understand may specially further your salvation with the Lord for the time to
come.

The Relation of A man of great estimation in the City of Rome for his
learning, and eloquence, Socrat. Schol. lib. 5. cap. 14. This is he whom that
worthy Archbishop Hutton styleth a famous Senator, but a sworn enemy to
Christian religion, in his Sermon preached at York, and printed Anno Dom. 1579.
Symmachus the Praefectus, or Lieutenant, he which in the absence of the
Emperor, and Consul had all authority granted him, and according to his
proper office had power to hear, and examine all causes of what nature soever,
within an hundred miles of Rome intra centesimum lapidem.
Governor of the City to the Emperors, persuading them, that the ancient
rites about the Worship of the Gods ought to be kept.
WHen first the most Honorable Senate, and always at your service, knew vices
to be under the censure of the laws, and saw the tumor of the last times to
be used to be launced by well devoted Princes following the authority of the
good age, it vented thereupon the grief wherewith it was long pressed,
commending to me again under their command the legation of their complaints.
To whom for that cause, was the audience of the chief Prince denied heretofore
by the malignant, that your justice, Lord Emperors, Valentinian, Theodosius
Arcadius famous victors, and triumphers always Sovereign.
Augusti (jointly concurring) might not afterward be wanting. Wherefore
performing a double office, I do both as your Leiutenant over the City,
further inform of her public affairs, and as her ambassador manage her
imposed charge. There is here no disagreement of wills, because now men desist
to give any credit to Viz. to the Court Maxim, that dissension among Princes
servants, is a great means of the Princes profit.
it, and if there happen to be a dissent, the ministers of some Cineas King
Pyrrus Ambassador told his Master, that the Roman Senate appeared to him a
Councel-house of many kings. Plutarch. An allegatio^ of the love of the
Gentiles among themselves.
Kings are enjoined with their best endeavor to accord the same. To be loved,
reverenced, is more worth then an Empire. Who can endure (such an opinion) that
the private emulation (of virtue) is against the good of the Commonweal? The
Senate does deservedly pursue them who prefer their own power before the
reputation of the Prince. But our travel does attend with continual care on
your Clemencies renown. For to what is it more commodious, that we defend the
customs of our Ancestors, the rites, and destinies of our country, then to
the glory of the times of your Empire? Which is then greater when ye
acknowledge nothing to be lawful, that crosses the manner of your parents
proceedings. We require again therefore the form of religions, which for a
long season were profitable to the state. Surely let the Princes of both sects,
of both opinions be numbered, and ye shall find, that he which reigned
immediately before, embraced the Ceremonies of his fathers, and that he which
came up next after him removed Allegation for the connivency of Christian
Princes at the Ceremonies of the Gentiles which is answered by St. Ambrose in
the conclusion of the ensuing Epistle.
them not.

If the Religion of the ancient make not an example, let the connivency of
their successors make it good. Who among the Barbarians is so free from
ambition, See what advantage is taken, because not utterly removed.
but that he requires the erecting of the altar of Victory? We are wary,
because of the time to come, and does avoid the ostentation of such things.
Howbeit Or let us honor the name, though the power, and deity be denied.
that honor, which is denied to the divine power, let it at least be given to
the name. Your eternity owes many things to the Goddess Allegation for the
defense of the Goddess Victory, which is not answered, because not so
important as some other points, until toward the end of the Reply. Mars,
Bellona, and Victoria were called Dij communes.
Victory, and shall yet owe more. Let them be against this power to whom it
has brought no profit, but continue ye your friendly patronage to triumphs.
This power tyeth every one by vow, let no man deny that to be had in adoration
which he professes to be in his vow, and optation. If so be that likewise
there be no just avoydance of all this, it is meet at least, that there be
forbearance from the promotions of the Court. Perform I pray you that what we
received being children, the same being old men, we may leave to our
posterity. Great is the love of custom. Very deservedly was it, that the deed
of Constantius, the Father of Constantine the Great, was singularly affected
toward Gods word. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. cap. 14. was no partener with the
enemy Maximinus in the persecution of the Church, but a preserver thereof.
Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 19. but he is not here meant. There was another
Constantius, who had to wife Placidia, the daughter of Theodosius Magnus, by
whom he had Valentinian the third of that name Emperor, he was made Emperor
by Honorius, neither does Symmachus mean him, for he dyed almost immediately
after his creation. Socrat. Schol. lib. 7. cap. 24. But Constantius the son
of Constantine the Great, who was, and dealt against the Ethnic sacrifices,
and for that cause was bitterly hated of such sacrificers, Socrat. Schol. lib.
3. cap. 1. Though he were an Arian, and an enemy to such as held the clause of
one substance, yet was he likewise an enemy to Paganism. He therefore is the
Prince, the Relater here girdeth. And whereas, that seems opposite hereunto,
when Ambrose in his reply reports him nondum sacris initia tum mysterijs, is
thus to be understood, that though he were not as yet baptized, yet could he
not abide to see the contamination of thr Ethnic altar. And concerning
Baptism he followed therein his father, and was not baptized until a little
before his death, Socrat. Schol. lib. 3. cap. 37.
Constantius stood not long. You are to avoid all examples which in your own
knowledge were soon after removed. We have a care so to eternize your name,
and fame, that the future age may find no cause therein of any correction.
Where shall we swear to your laws, and words? with what religion shall a
false heart be terrified, that he ly not in his testimony? All places are
filled with the Majesty of God, neither is there any place safe to the
perfidious: but to affright from offending the presence of religion avails
much. That Altar it is, that holds all men in concord, that Altar it is, that
makes the faith of all men agree in one, neither does any thing bring more
authority to our sentences, then an orderly proceeding by oath, which
determines all things. Shall therefore the civil seat, lie open to perjury?
and shall my famous Princes, whose persons by public sacrament remain secure,
think this allowable? But divine Constantius is reported to have done the
same. Let us follow that Prince rather in matters of less consequence. If some
others This vain speaker fears not to gird the good Emperor Constantine the
great himself, as Rabshekeh did Ezechiah, Is. 36. the Athenians Paul, Acts 17.
had not erred before him, he had never attempted any such thing. Allegations
in former page and this that legally bound to keep the Gentile Sacraments, 2.
concerning Constantius, 3 of Gods presence by setting up an idol, 4 of the
power of the Altar, and Gods of the Gentiles for their meetings.
For the fall of the former stays up him that follows, the reprehension of
the antecedent example is the emendation of him that succeeds. And as for the
His father Valentinian was of a mild disposition, molested not the Arrians,
though he himself held the faith of one substance. Socra. Schol. lib. 4. cap.
1 nor the Ethnicks, as it should seem, but took this course to reverence, and
advance those of his own profession.
father of your Clemency it had been pardonable, if in a matter then newly set
abroach, he had little regarded the breath of some envious persons. Is it fit
that we should make the same defense for our selves, and shunning the envy of
men, imitate him in that which is disallowed? Let your eternity take rather the
deeds of the same Prince, which you may more worthily draw into use. He took
away nothing from the privileges of the holy Virgins, he filled the
priesthoods with nobles, he denied not expenses to the Roman ceremonies, and
through all the passages of the eternal City he followed the joyful Senate,
he saw with a pleasing countenance the places of the images, he read the
titles of their Gods set on high, demanded the original of their Temples,
admired the founders of such monuments. And whereas himself followed other
religions, these he reserved for the Empire. For every one has his own
custom, every one has his own rites. The divine Id est, God, the first
mover, as Aristotle, the first beginning, as Plato teaches, of all goodness.
mind bestows Dij patrij, sive tutelares.
upon the cities diverse keepers, diverse kinds of worship. As souls to
children in the womb: so the fatal (...), Meander. Quique suos patitus manes,
Virg.
Genij good, or bad Angels are assigned to the people of the world as their
gardians. To Allegation of Vtility, and prosperity.
this may we add utility, and profit which above all things ties the Gods, and
men together. For since the causes, and reasons of things are obscure, whence
shall we suppose the knowledge of God was most commended to us, but by the
records and monuments of prosperity? Now if antiquity brings Pagans are wont
to allege antiquity in defense of their superstition. It was so with Romanus
the Martyr by Galerius his captain, which made him make an apology for the
eternity of Christ, Foxes Monum. 125.
authority to religions, the religion preserved for so many ages is to be kept,
and our fathers, who prosperously imitated their forefathers, are to be
followed. And now let us admit the famous, and eternal city of Rome to be by,
and to deal with you in this manner. Noble Princes, Fathers of your country
come, and do your reverence to my gray The like speech of his is mentioned by
Prud. lib. 2. Silonga aetas authoritatem religionibus faciat, servanda est tot
seculis fides, and sequendi sunt nobis parents que foeliciter secuti suos. He
means since the time of Numa 1000. years at least. But this to be examined,
whether among the old ways this were the good way? Ier. 6.16.
hairs, to the which under the use of the first, and farthest Ceremonies of
our Ancestors pious rite has brought me. Neither does it repent me, being an
enfranchised City, to live after mine own customs.

This worship has brought the world under my laws: these sacred things have
repulsed Hannibal from my wall, those The Gauls which came of the Celtae, a
people of that which is now called France, being driven to seek an other
habitation, their own being overcharged with the multitude of them, and
seating themselves between the Pirenaean mountains, and the Alps, and near
to the Senones were so named, Plut. in Came. for novell institution.

Objection.

Reply.


Senones of the French from my Capitol. Am I reserved intyre to these times for
this, that being full of years I should be thus entreated? Is it to be
thought, that I may now see better what ought to be taught, and maintained? The
emendation of old age to be too late, full of contumely, and contempt goes for
a maxim. Therefore we sue for peace to be granted to our country A strong
argument fetched from farthest antiquity, but shrunk in the wetting.
Gods, and our tutelar. What all profess must needs to be confessed to be He
could not choose hut hear of that Tenet of Christianity; The Church of God to
be one, John 10.16. Ephesians. 1.10. Gal 3.28. John 17.21. Cant. 6.9. which makes him
perhaps labor to prove it in the religion of the Gentiles.
one, we Allegation of uniformity in Religion. Allegation against the sudden
finding out of the truth.
all see the same stars, the same heaven is common to us all, the same world
does involve us all. What avails it, that in these days every one searches
into the truth with the greatest wisdom? A secret of so much worth cannot be
lightly gained, it is a matter of more then one days travel to find out
truth. But none but idle Pharaohs reason against Isr. Papists against Protest.
jumps with this.
brains busy themselves about such disputes. We now for our parts See in
this proctor the policy of all obstinate, and arrogant spirits, until they
have gained their cause they humble themselves to the dust.
entreat, strive not, contest not. What has accrewed to your sacred Exchequer
by taking away the privilege of the Allegation the high praise of Vestals.
Vestals? The poorest Emperors have enlarged, and the He seems to touch
Constantine.
richest lessened the same. The honor of chastity in that their stipend, as it
were, is solely intended. As their ribands are an The praise of Vestals raised
from their pride, just as the Poets Lanea dum nivea circundatur infula Vitta,
etc. Virgil. gay for an Infidel to gaze upon, but taxed by the Prophet. Es.
3.20. and Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.3. Allegation against the abuse of things given to
pious uses, or of such as pull from the Church to enrich the Crown, or
Commonweal.
ornament to their heads: so to be free from bribes, is the honor of their
sacrifice. Their safety lying under poverty, and loss, they require no more
then the bare name of immunity. Therefore they add more to their praise, who
detract somewhat from their maintenance. For Virginity dedicated to the public
utility of a kingdom grows great in merit, when wages is wanting. This short
allowance, let it be far from the integrity of your Aerarium is the common
treasury.
treasury, the augmentation of the Fiscus the kings private coffers, which he
confounds. Public officers privy thieves, though the poor subject feels it,
yet can it hardly be discovered in whom the fault lies.
revenew of good Princes, is not by the damage of Priests, but by spoils of
enemies. Do ye recompense the profit, ye reap by them, by repining at them?
And because avarice is not found in your noble dispositions, so much the worse
is their condition, who are deprived of your wonted relief. For such as are
under you Emperors, who abstain from wrong your selves, and suppress
covetousness, what moves not the desire of the extortioner This may easily be
perceived in Zachaeus, Luke. 19.8.
is exempted solely, and no more from the injury of loss to the subject. The
Allegation that their Priests deprived of maintenance.
Exchequer in like sort holds back the fields given in legacy by the will of
the dead to the Virgins, and ministers of the Altar; I beseech you, O ye (...)
He argues well for the restitution of whatsoever has been consecrated to the
service of the true God. Neither can I perceive why he may not in this his
obtestation comprehend the Bish. of Rome Damasus, and the rest of the Clergy
there, and elsewhere within the Empire. The very Gentiles upon their deathbed
gave much to holy uses, which to subvert they deemed an heinous offense.
Imagining some reward to follow upon it, being at the point of death, they
received thereby discomfort.
priests of justice, that where private incroachment has been made upon the
Consecrate things of the city there may be restitution. Let men securely make
their Wills, and let them know, that under Princes not given to covetousness,
whatsoever men bequeath shall stand strong; this happiness of mankind, be it
to your good liking, and delight: That very president of frustrating the
bequests to the Vestals, and Priests begins already to trouble those that dye.

What (say they) do not therefore Their Priests were privileged from their
service in all wars, except only in civil tumults, and likewise their
pensions freed from all charges, Cic. Philip. 8. and pro Font.
Roman religions depend upon Roman laws? The taking away of goods, and
possessions, which no law, no casualtie has made void, what appellation shall
we give it? Such as were lately bondmen are capable of legacies, to servants
the due benefit arising from testaments is not denied, only noble Virgins, and
the ministers devoted to Destinies holy service are excluded from their farms,
which they ought to enjoy as their inheritance. What does it profit to
consecrate a chaste body for the public safety, and to support with divine
succors the eternity of the Empire, to apply to your blazoned arms, your
honorable Eagles, the ensigns of Rome, the friendly virtues, to make
effectual prayers for all men, and not to have the immunity of the laws with
all men? Therefore the condition of bondage bestowed upon Vassals is much
better. 3. Branch of the general division. The Commonweal is hurt by the
profanation of what is hallowed.
But by this ingratitude we hurt the Weal public, which has never found it
expedient for her to be unthankful: yet here let no man suppose that I
undertake only the patronage of the cause of Religions. All the discommodities,
and damages of the Roman Progeny proceed from the disastrous Such accusations
of the Ethnicks are frequently to be found in the writings of the Fathers, and
histories of the Church. Whereunto Tertul. in his Apology contra Scap. page
81. and Cyprian contra Demetr. reply that in truth the shedding of the
innocent blood of the Christians was the true cause thereof. And Eusebius
gives an instance in Maximinus, lib. 9. cap. 8. who sending out an arrogant
Edict against them and promising to the servers of Jupiter, and Mars plenty,
was pinched himself with his Pagans with an unheard of famine even to the
utter perishing of many of them, insomuch that had not the Christians
themselves taken compassion, on them, they had in a manner all perished.
dealing. The law of our parents had honored the Vestals, and ministers of the
Gods with spare diet, and just Privileges.

The state stood intyre until the time of the growing up of those base
Trapezitae, mensarij: not quaestores aerarij, public treasurers, nor tribuni
aerarij. Martial treasurers, whose collections were laid up aede Saturni,
aerario sancto, or aerario militari, but put into the hands of some persons of
inferior rank deputed to bestow them. For then in likelihood he would not
speak so broadly; howbeith he touches before that filling the Exchequer with
the spoils of the enemies, and so as may be conjectured, the abuse of the
Vestals portion in his opinion is by the Martial treasurers and their bajuli.
bankers grown out of kind: who have converted the provision of this sacred
chastity into the pay of paltrie bawling porters, A public famine followed
this deed, and a pinching harvest frustrated the expectation of all the
Provinces. This defect is not of the earth, we impute it not to the stars.
Neither has blasting hurt the standing corn, nor wild oats been noisome to
the good grain, but plainly Allegations against Christians as sacrilegious
persons for that abuse. His exclamation that plague and penury follows
hereupon, is a threadbare imputation, taken up from the mouth of the vulgar,
and ignorant, and little for the credit of so rare an Orator.
sacrilege has been the bane of the fruits of this year. For what is denied
to the religions must needs be lost to all. Surely, if any the like examples of
so strange event can be given, then we attribute so great famine to the
vicissitude of the revolution of times, grievous scorching blast, binding the
womb of the earth has brought this barrenness, men's lives are maintained by
wild, and Forest fruits, the necessity of the country people make them flock
and fly together, as of old, to the To the Dodonaean trees the oak, the Beech
whereof Jupiter is said to be the founder, growing thick in the forest
Dodona. Symmachus imitateth, Virg. lib. 1. Georg. Cum jam glandes, atque arbuta
sacrae Deficerent sylvae, ^r Victum Dodonanegaret.
woods for Akornes. Did the Princes ever suffer the like penury, when public
honor had a care to foster the Ministers of religions? When were akornes
beaten from the oaks for to feed men? when were the roots of grass pulled up
for diet, the people, and sacred Virgins having their common provision
supplied? when did the mutual fecunditie of the regions cease to help each
others deserts? The allowance of the Nuns made for the commendation of the
abundance of the fruits of the earth, and was a remedy rather against want,
then any occasion of wastfulnesse.

Can it be doubted, but that this was given ever to remain, for to bring in
the plenty of all things, which now the He harpes upon the same string as
before, that not the Ethnic, but the Christian profession cause of famine, and
all penury. The Jews of old given over to idolatry, were sick of this
disease, Ier. 44.17.18. To accuse the times without weighing the causes of
evil, is condemned of folly, Eccl. 7.12.
penury of all things (which is the profession of the Christians) has
claimed? Some man will say, the common charges of kingdom ought to be denied
to the maintenance of a strange religion: Let this be far from good Princes
to conceive, that, what of old was given to certain by common consent, should
now be in the right, and power of the It appears from hence, and page 32. that
the stipends of the Vestals came to the Emperors Fiscus or private coffers,
and to the hands of the Quaestores aerarij first, and so might perhaps from
them go to the Tribuni aerarij, Martial treasurers or Clerks of the Band,
which did receive the soldiers pay, Sig. de jure, Romans 1.2. c. 8. These this
Lieutenant of the City might happily ironice term trapezitae, and the common
soldiers bajuli.
Exchequer to dispose. When the Weal public does consist of several persons,
what arises from it, every of those has a propriety therein. Your dominion is
over all, but so that ye preserve in safety to every one what is his own, and
that the rule of justice do sway more with you then the liberty of your own
wills. Consult truly your own magnificence, whether your bounty would permit
those things to be esteemed as public donations which ye have transferred
Allegation against the prerogative of Princes as unjust, in turning over, what
was given by way of superstition to other better uses.
upon others then was intended. The Grants of Princes in writing under seal
for ratifying of gifts bestowed to pious uses are termed compendia: in like
manner as those with us upon relief for losses out of the Clemency of the King
are called Breiffs. (...) an anticipation to preoccupate their fear of envy.
compendies, sometime imparted by certain well affected to the honor of the
City, cease any longer to go under the name of the donors: and what from the
original was a benefit, or gift, by use, and continuance is made a debt. If
any one therefore shall challenge your care of conscience toward the bestowers
of these, unless ye your selves shall be contended to undergo with courage
the envy of the detractors thereof, he goes about to strike a needless terror
into your divine, and undaunted spirits. Let the secret aids of all sects
incline to your Clemencies, and those above all, who have assisted your
Ancestors, let them assist and guard you, let them be regarded, and reverenced
of us. We desire the continuance of the state of those religions, which
settled the Imperial Diadem upon the divine head of your Though he speaks,
generally to the 3. Emperors, yet here to Valentinian as the chiefest, and
whom he stands in most hope to gain to him.
Highness Father, which provided for him, so happy a Prince, lawful heirs
to succeed him. That renowned Senior now numbered among the Gods (...).
beholds from the tower of his brightest constellation the lamentable tears
of the Priests, and (...).
holds it for a foul aspersion to him, that what worship he willingly
observed, he should be said of some wilfully to violate. Perform you also the
office of a good brother in correcting the deed of your divine brother induced
by the counsel of others, cover it, because he knew not that it displeased
the The Senate decreeing that M. Antonius images should be thrown down, and
his memory deprived of all honors, yet had they the consent of Augustus: and
howbeit it judged Galbae an enemy, yet was he made Emperor: albeit therefore
their number of 300. might be continued, yet their power was diminished. Plut.
in Vit. Cicer. and Galbae.
Senate. For it is evident the legation sent to him, never to have been
permitted to come to his knowledge, lest so it might have drawn upon him
public judgment. It is for the credit (...). Christianissime Principum,
gloriosissime, divino elect judicio, perfidorum ora clausisti, Ambroses
testimony of Gratian, Ep. lib. 5. cap. 26.
of former times, that you spare not to abolish what is probable, not to have
proceeded from the Prince.

The Epistle of St. Ambrose to Valentinian the Emperor, Ex Lib. 5. Epist. Ep.
31^.
wherein he answers, and with most fit, and forcible arguments Evagrius
Scholasticus his invective against the slanders of Zozimus against Constantine,
is notable to this purpose. lib. 3. cap. 1.
convinces Symmachus his Relation of falsehood.
AMbrose Bishop to the most blessed Prince, and full of all Clemency, the
Emperor Valentinian Augustus. When Symmachus the Governor of the City, a man
of great renown had made request to your Clemency that the Altar, which had
been taken from the Court of the City of Rome, might be restored again to
the same place, and you (O Emperor) albeit as yet in your minority, and green
years, well confirmed notwithstanding through the power of faith in your true
profession, would not give your approbation to the supplications of the
Gentiles: in the same moment when I found it, I addressed a bill, wherein,
although I comprehended, what in all likelihood they must needs suggest,
howbeit so, that I required a sight of the Relation it self. Wherefore, not as
one doubting of the steadfastness of your faith, but provident for you with a
godly caution, most assured also of the just examination of what is herein
contained, I reply to that is maintained in the Relation: requesting only you
would consider, that in so weighty a cause as this, not the ornament of words,
but the importance of things is to be expected. For golden, as the divine
Prove. 10.20. Job 28.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Scripture teaches, is the tongue of the wise literate, which enriched with
refined speeches, and resulting with a certain glistering reflection of the
brightness of eloquence, as of some precious color, does under the
resemblance of rarest beauty ravish the eyes of the mind, and dazzle the sight.
But Vulcan cast it into the fire, esteeming it no better then brass, when he
made Achilles armor (...). Hom. Iliad. lib. 18. Virgill styles it shining but
soft, Discolor unde auri per ramos aura refulsit; Talis erat species auri etc.
corripit Aeneas ex templo, avidusque refrirgit. Cunctantem, Aeneid. lib. 6.
Pleny mentions it as of small regard, Eruitur aurum and chrysocolla juxta, auri
argentique nimium fuit, ferrum auro gratius inter bella, caedesque, Imus in
viscera, terrae and in sede Manium opes quaerimus. Vtinam posset e vita in
totum abaicari aurum proscissum convitijs, aboptimis quibuscunque, and ad
perniciem vitae repertum, Not. Hist. lib. 33. cap. 1. 2.

The general division, Triplex.


gold carefully considered of for the matter, though outwardly it show rich,
what is it more truly then metal?

Search and sift, I pray you, the sect of the Gentiles, which sound out with
the greatest applause, and for things of most precious account, their
superstitions, when they are indeed such as are barren, and devoid of all
truth. God is in their talk, but they adore a dead idol, take their practice,
not their speech for your rule. The famous Governor of the City in his
Relation has proposed three things, as very strong bulwarks in his opinion,
for their patronage. First, that Rome does justly vendicate them as her ancient
worship, next, that the emoluments, and profits of their ministers the Priests
and Vestals ought in right to be restored. And that upon denying them the
same, public famine has insued. In the first proposition Rome is introduced
with her cheeks besmeered with tears, and breaking forth into lamentable
complaint, requiring again her old manner of Ceremonies. These, says he,
observed repulsed Hannibal from the walls, the Hannibal set up a pillar of
triumph, in which his noble Victories against the Romans were engraven in the
Punick and Greek tongues, Plut. in vita Hannibalis.
Senones from the Cpitoll. Thus, while he pretends the power of the sacred
rites, he marvellously bewraieth the weakness of them. For Hannibal did long
insult over these, and their Gods fighting against him, winning, and getting
still from them, until he came The Gauls remaining between the Pirenaean
mountains, and the Alps, near to the Senones were so called, Plutarch in
Camill. See page. 29.
braving them, even to the very gates of Rome. Why did they suffer themselves
to be besieged for whom the armor of their Gods did march in field?

Allegations under one head confuted, viz. That no superstitious Ceremonies,
but warlike prowes, and policy that advanced the Roman Empire.
What shall I say of the Senones, whom the Roman relics had not been able to
withstand, when they passed through into the secrets of the Capitol, had not a
goose with its fearful gagling discovered them? See what presidents the Roman
Temples have to watch over them. Where then was Jupiter? did he speak in the
goose? But why do I deny the sacred rites to have fought for the Romans? For
did not Hannibal also worship the same Gods? Let them be here at their choice,
which they will take. Dido confirms it. Jupiter (hospitibus na^ te dare jura
loquuntur) Hunc laetum Tyrijsque diem, Troiaque profectis, Esse velis etc.
Adsit laetitiae Bacchus dator, and bona Juno Virgil. Aneid.
If in the Romans the holy things overcame, then were they overcome in the
Carthaginians: if they were triumphed over in the Carthaginians, then were they
no aid to the Romans. Dilemma.
Let therefore that envious complaint of the people of Rome cease.

(...) or the City of Rome in this her speech justly requiting the Gentile.
The City of Rome has not commanded these things. She interrupts them, crying
out with these other complaints. Why do you cast this imputation upon me,
that I imbrue my hands daily in the wast blood of the innocent flock looking
thence after the success of battle? For the trophies of your victories are
raised not upon your divinations from the intrails of beasts, but from the
strength of your Warriors. I have subdued the world with other discipline.
Camillus encountered the Gauls, forced them with their Ensigns from the
Capitol, and slaying the insulters upon the rock Tarpeia, bare away the glory
of the day: Here prowes removed that evil which religion could not do. What
shall I speak of Attilius, who made his life a prey to purchase good to his
country? Africanus found matter of triumph not among the Altars of the
Capitol, bur among the Armies of Hannibal. What do ye bring me the examples
of old times? I hate the rites of Nero is a Sabin word, and signifies strength
Gell. lib. 2. There were diverse Emperors that were of that family, as Tiberius
son to Nero, and Iulia Augusta, which came of the Claudij a noble house among
the Sabins, and famous for their fortitude, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero that
first, and most bloody persecutor, styled for his bloody practices, an enemy to
mankind, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Nero. What should I speak of two Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, reigned all
three but sixteen months, Evagr. Schol. lib. 3. Cap. 41.
months upstart Emperors, who acting their Tragedies a little upon the
Theater vanished away, and of 30. Tyrants were slain in one day in Athens by
Theramenes, Thrasibulus, and Archippus, and the Roman Kings were but seven in
all. Caeteri aut reges populi Romani excepto N. Pompilio and Anco Marcio, qui
morbo interierunt, quam horrendos exitus habuerant, Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 3.
cap. 15.
Kings, who entering into, and ending their reigns vent forth their first, and
last breath in a moment? Or perhaps that is news that the 200000. of the Goths
under their king Rhadagaisus which happened somewhat before this time, Valens
reigning, Alaricus brake into Italy in Honorius time, and Ataulphus his
successor, who married Placida Honorius sister afterward, the Gauls, and
Brennus before, who made Rome tributarie Funct. Chron. Flor. Histor. So that
the Barbarians invaded their territories, as well before, when the Altar of
Victory stood, as now.
Barbarians should come out of their own borders, and molest us? Were they
Christians also by whose miserable, and unheard of example, one Emperor was
made captive, and under the He seems to parallel that of Pompey and Caesar
with this accident now of Gratian, and Maximus when Gratian was slain by
Maximus the Tyrant, this Tyrant made a cruel massacre of the Christians: for
were not all Ceremonies consulted, and was not the Altar of Victory prepared
for Pompie? Iusque datum sceleri canimus, Luca. And if it be doubted how Pompie
was Imperator, he was so in the wars, and so called by Crassus, Plutarch in
the life of Crassus. 1. He that had the managing of an Army. 2. He that being
L. General had slain one thousand of the enemies. 3. The Monarchs in latter
times were saluted by this name. Allegations drawn from antiquity confuted.
other the world became captive, did not here their own Ceremonies deceive
them, promising them victory? Was there not then the Altar of victory? I am
much grieved that I have thus long run into error, mine old hoary head
troubled at it, has dyed my face with Vermilion. Yet need I not be ashamed
though old and withered, when all the world is grown to that, to become
converts. No age so far spent but may learn, and blush likewise for
mispending so many years. And where these be, and none amendment, let him be
ashamed now at the length, in whom is no power of such performance. Not white
hairs, but white manners are commendable, for ancientnesse to fall off from
folly is no blemish. The Barbarians and I were alike culpable of this one
crime, that we were both of us sometimes ignorant of the true God. It is a rite
used in your sacrifice, to be sprinkled with the blood of beasts, why do ye
so? and why do ye seek out divinations from their intralls? Come, and learn
not to be thus earthly minded, but in earth to make heavenly warfare. Here in
earth we live the life of the body, there in the heavenly race we wage the
war of the spirit. Let God himself who made me, teach me, not man, E coelo
descendit (...) Iuvenal.
who knows not what himself is, the heavenly mystery: whom shall I rather
believe concerning God, then God himself? How can I believe you, who confess
your selves to be ignorant what you worship? By one journey (says he) so great
a secret cannot be attained unto. Allegation of the new entrance of Christian
Religion confuted. Plauti jocus minuit in Casina; Vnus tibi hic dum propitius
sit Jupiter.


What ye know not, that we by the voice of God come to know: what ye seek ye
get by guess only, and conjecture, we from the wisdom, and truth of God upon
infallible certainty. There is therefore no congruity between us in our ground
of religion: Ye petition of the Emperors peace for your Gods, we of Christ
peace for the Emperors: ye adore the works of your own hands, we hold it,
once to imagine to put what is made, in the place of God (who made us, and
these Inistos minutos cave Deos flocci feceris. Et Lucilij apud Lactantium,
lib. 1. cap. 22. Vt pueri infantes credunt signa omnia ahenea vivere, and esse
homines: sic isti omnia ficta vera putant, credunt, siquis cor inesse ahenis.
Vnde Calv. nec ita stupidi Ethnici credendi sunt, ut non intelligerent Deum
alium esse quam signa, and lapides. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 11. Sect. 9. citatis
excusationibus idolal. ex August. in Psalm. 113. Conc. 2. That possessed their
hearts at this day which that pestilent impostor Simon Magus first vented
ficte, and putative tantum, non vere Christum passum esse, as St. Austin
gathers out of the Comments of Eusebius. and Epiph. and Danaeus observes from
him, Cap. 1. Catalogi Haeres. Cujus Titulus Simoniani, unde dicti Basilides
more plainly, apud Iren. lib. 1. adversus Haeres. Cap. 23. nempe Simonem
Cyraenem ejus vice passum esse. Allegation for restoring old Ethnic Altars,
and other rites confuted.
materials) an extreme injury to him. The everliving God abhorres it as
abominable, and will not abide that his most honorable service to be tendered
to dead stocks, and stones. What can be said more? your very own Philosophers
themselves have derided this your folly.

Wherefore if ye deny Christ therefore to be God, because ye do not
believe him to q have died, as being ignorant that the death of his to have
been of the flesh, not of his Deity, and causing that no believer should dye
eternally, what can be more unwise then you in this, when you condescend to
worship that, which is to be scorned, and had in vilest reproach, and derogate
from that which is to be had in highest honor? For you think your piece of
wood to be God: O reverence full of scorn, and reproach! you do not believe
that Christ could die: O honorable obstinacy! (indeed not to believe him so
to die to be subject to corruption.) But the old Altars, says he, ought to be
restored to the images, and the ornaments to the Temples. Let him require these
things to be done again of him that is confederate with him in superstition,
the Christian Emperor has learned to honor the Revel. 8.3. Heb. 13.10. And
it is frequent among the ancient Writers, and Fathers so to style the communion
table, Socrat. Schol. lib. 1. Cap. 20. and 25. August. Tract. in John 26. multi
inquit de altari accipiunt, and moriuntur, Chrysostom sermon de Euchar.
Theophil. in priore Epist. ad Cor. cap. 11. Calvin renders the reason hereof
Elegans est anagoge a veteri legis ritu ad praesentem Ecclesiae statum.
Altar of Christ only. Why do they compel pious hands, and believing mouths
to exhibit their service to their sacriledges? Let the voice of our Emperor
resound, and ring out with a cheerful Echo Christ: and his opinion being
settled upon him, let him in a word make profession of him only, because the
Prove. 21.12.
heart of the King is in the hand of God; (His deed already speaks for him)
for were the Emperor a Gentile would he have erected an Altar to Christ? While
they require again what sometime they had, they admonish the Christian
Emperors by their example, what reverence they ought to bring to that religion
they follow (being infallible:) because they themselves bestow together with
all reverence, their chiefest revenew upon their forged superstitions. Now we
have begun, join we squarely with them. We for the Christian cause glory in
the effusion of our own blood, A Collation between Ethnic, and Christian
religion.
the least loss sustained for their imaginary moves them to discontent. That
The effusion of our blood.
from them we esteem in the place of victory, this The least loss.
from us they account as a disgrace and injury.

Nay, we may truly say they never did us a greater pleasure, when they
commanded us stripes, proscription, and present death. Thus truth has made
that a reward, which falsehood a punishment. Judge where be magnanimous spirits;
we under injury, poverty, torments believe: they believe it not to be possible
for their ceremonies any longer to subsist then they bring them in lucre. Let
2. Head of the General division: That old emoluments, and provision for
Vestals ought to be restored, which also is confuted.
the Vestals, says he, enjoy their Exemption from taxations. Other privileges
also were given them by Numa, as to make their Testaments without consent of
parents, after they were once elected, which was between six, and eleven
years of age. 2. To do all things without a guardian. 3. Going abroad to have
a Mace carried before them for their honor. 4. When meeting the greatest
offender, to have power to pardon him. Plutarch in Numa.
immunity; Let them speak this that know not how to give credit to it for a
truth, that Virginity may be freest without reward, such as have their virtues
in suspicion, let them tempt them with gifts, yet how few virgins have, as some
satisfaction to their benefactors, made good their promises, and vows
undertaken? Scarcely Numa assigned at the first but two, Servius Tullus
afterward four Their office was to keep the holy fire in the temple of the
Goddess Vesta. And Vesta eadem. est and terra subest Vigil ignis utrique Ovid.
lib. 6. Fast. The same to go out was thought ominous, and therefore they were
set to keep it. Reconciliation was another piece of their office, by their
mediation Syllas atonement was made with Caesar, Sueton in Iulio. A comparison
between the Vestals and the Christian Virgins.
among them have seven young Vestals been made choice of. Behold the whole
number whom the pontifical Mitres with ribands of price for the head, the
richest purple garments, the pomp of an horse-litter with the train of
attendants on every side, greatest privileges, invaluable gains, with the
prescribed times of the high honor of chastity have gathered together. But now
let them lift up the eyes of their mind, and body, and see among us an army of
chastity, an ocean of integrity, a world of virginity. Here among our Virgins
is no ornament of goodly riband for the head, but a poor veyle, yet precious
for the use of a pure life, no curious setting out upon all advantages, but a
careless regard of beauty: here are none of those purple robes, none of those
dishes of feasting, and delicacy, but in coorse habit the frequency of fasting,
no privileges, no rewards: but rather all things so entertained, as if whilst
they practice chastity, they meant to extinguish in all others the care of it.
Howbeit, whilst they so seriously exercise this duty, their care is not drawn
away, but provoked, and drawn on to the performance of other employments
accompanying this their calling, and the same accumulated with sundry
disasters, and losses (these, and nothing but these are the profits they
reap.) For it is not Virginity, which is purchased upon a price, but taken up
upon love of Virtue. It is not integrity, which, as it were at a Fair, or
public sale, is for a time hired for a sum of money. Chastities first
triumph is in the subduing of worldly lusts, because the desire of lucre makes
the strongest assault against the fort of shamefastness. But let us admit that
the aid of augmentation ought to be bestowed upon their Virgins, were they
many in number, what then will the surplusage be for the Christian Virgins,
what treasury will accordingly suffice for so great expenses? Or if they
suppose what is given ought to be conferred upon the Vestals only, will it not
turn to their open shame, that they which challenged the whole under Gentile
Emperors, should now under Christian Princes think to abridge us, and that
against common humanity, from sharing with them in public benevolence?

They complain also, Allegation, that their Priests are deprived of their
maintenance confuted.
that their Priests with their ministers are deprived of their public relief.
What a tumultuous noise of words does here break forth? Contrariwise we, when
by their novell constitutions, we are deprived of the benefit of our own
private succession into the proper possession of our fathers, do not so much
as once open our mouths. For, how great an injury soever, we judge it none at
all, because Hebr. 10.34. Phil. 1.21.
nothing grieved at the loss. If a Priest of our order do seek by some
privilege to be eased of the burden of paiments imposed by law upon the
Commons, he cannot be heard, and if he deny it, A Comparison between the
Gentile priests, and the Christian in respect of the privileges.
he must forsake whatsoever possession his father, and grandfather left him.
What an aggravating of complaints, would there be in the Gentile should his
Priest purchase himself leisure, and means with the loss of his patrimony
to practice his ministry: and being a private person should buy the use of
all public service with the expense of all his own commodities, watching for
the common good should comfort himself with the recompense of poverty, neither
should sell his ministry, but bring credit to it by preaching freely. Lay our
condition with yours. Ye will excuse a public officer among you from public
burden, but for any of us of the Clergy, ye will admit in that case no excuse.
The servants belonging to your Temples are permitted to make their Testaments,
none so profane, none so base, none so prodigal of his continency, but he is
allowed to do it, only among all men, we that belong to the Church, are
debarred from enjoying that law of making our Testaments, which yet we alone in
public place pray for all, we alone execute all holy duties for the benefit
of all, beside no legacies, no donations, no not so much as of the gravest
widows are suffered by their last will and testament, to be conferred upon us.
Nay, such is our hardy condition, that where no fault can be found in our
conversation, there a mult is laid upon our function. And which is more, what a
Christian widow, and whom we have converted to the faith, shall bequeath to the
Priests of your phane stands strong in law, what to our Church is of no
validity. Which I mention not by way of complaint, but that they may know what
it is that I complain not of. Complaint causlesse an effect of the defect of
grace.
For this is that, which I do much desire in you (and might take it up as a
just complaint of your error on the contrary) that you would beg less for
gain, and more for grace, less for favorers of falsehood, Allegation for
deprivation of allowance by Churches of Christians confuted.
then of the truth. But they rejoyne, that what was bestowed any way on our
Church, they wronged us not therein, neither interverted, nor unhallowed the
use of the same. Let them tell me which of us have taken away at any time the
goods of their Temples, and let them deny it, if Pompey Eusebius. lib. 1. Cap. 7.
who ransacked Ierusal. and the temple, and carried Aristobulus the high Priest
to Rome. Histories are full of such presid. Nabuchadnez. Baltas. Titus Vesp.
Dioclesian Julian, Licinius Maximinus, Maximus, and a world beside. But that of
the mentioned Maximinus is most punctual, who by convulsions of grievous
diseases, was constrained to send out his proclamation in the behalf of the
Christians, wherein was inserted these words, We thought good to extend our
favorable Clemency that the Christians may be tolerated again, and that they
repair again the places where they may meet together, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 18.
and of Nero, that of Orosius, lib. 7. ipse Primus Romae Christianos supplicijs,
and mortibus exposuit, and per omnes provincias excruciari praecepit. The
Apostle speaks not only of the spoiling of the goods of Christians, and the
resisting unto blood of some, Heb. 12.4. but of their wandering in wildernesses,
etc. Heb. 11.38. which why was it, but that their Oratories were destroyed?
they can, that they took them away from time to time from our Christian
Churches. Which had it been done to you Gentiles by us, the wrong had not
been so soon offered, as requited, and repaid us home to the double.

Where was the sentence of justice, and equity then I pray you, when taking
away violently the goods of the Christians, ye did repine at the very vital
breath of their nostrils, and did deny, which never was heard of among the most
brutish Savages, the commerce of common Eusebius lib. 8. Cap. 24. and 25. Psalm.
79.3.
burial? The Gentiles hurled their bodies not only dead, but living too
without all mercy into the devouring seas, yet behold this merciless element
became more compassionate then they, and restored them Ibid. chap. 6. in the
bloody persecution of Dioclesian, which was the 10. cruellest of all the rest,
and nearest to these times were many thrown away wilfully upon the seas, and
not unlikely, but some of these might escape with life as did Jonas.
to land. This is the victory of 1 John 5.4.
faith. And beside, they now themselves carpe at the deeds of their own
fathers, but to seek for relief out of their gifts, whose acts they condemn,
what makes this for the bettering of their cause? Allegation that Christian
Princes took away ought given under the name only of holy uses, refuted.
Notwithstanding no man has denied them what has been given to their
Temples, as to an holy use, or by legacy to their Soothsayers, only their
farms were taken away, because though they defended them to belong to them by
right of religion, yet they used them not religiously. They which do make use
of our example, why did they not use their Office to the right imploiment of
them? The Church has nothing in possession save faith, and trust. This is her
portion, no other rents, no When our Author thus speaks, he excludes not
decimas jure morali, and Gentium debitas, but claims these, as the Churches
right in his Commentaries upon 1 Cor. 9. and upon Galat. 6.
other profits do accrue to her. The possessions of the Church are the portion
of the There were 3. kinds of Tithes in the old Testam. the first were commons
given to the Levites in recompense of the twelfth part of the earth, Levit.
27.30 2. Decimae decimarum, which the Levites paid ex decimis to the priests
Numb. 18.29. 3 Decimae pauperum, which every three year the earth did yield,
not only to the Levites, but were common together with them to the poor
widows, fatherless and strangers, Deuteronomy. 14.28. Gregory's Decree to Austen the
Monk, was no more then for the fourth partition. The story of Laurence the
Deacon, and Martyr, is very remarkable herein, who when the tyrant Galienus
sought to get away the treasure of the Church, brought forth the poor crying
out, These are the precious treasure of the Church. But that example of the
first Christian Emperor is worthy eternal memory, who remitted the fourth
part of his revenew to the relief of the poor.
poor. Let the accounts be cast up, how many captives your Temples have
redeemed, how much alms they have bestowed, to how many exuls they have given
maintenance, and thereby it will appear that their farms were intercepted
only, and the right not detracted.

But 3. Branch of the division general, viz. that Christian religion, the
cause of famine refuted.
behold what a fact, what an heavy offense, and which cannot be expiated: for a
public famine, say they, is broken in as a revenge, because what was appointed
for the benefit of the Priests, now begins to be converted to the use of the
whole body politic. This is the cause therefore, as they report, that the
mouths of the feeble people, are feign to lick the very shrubbes when their
bark is scorched away, which is a miserable kind of food. This is the cause,
that they changing Frugem in our Author is taken for Cerealiaarma, or frumenta
corn, Frugesque, receptas, and torrere parant flammis, and frangere saxo,
Virg. lib. 1. Aeneid. neither ought Chaoniam to be joined with frugem, but with
glande (viz. Chaonia) as an Epithet to it, Virg. lib. 1. Georg. Vestro si
muneretellus Chaoniam pingui glandem mutavit arista.
corn for akornes are called back again to feed with beasts, and to the diet
of coorse fare. For the shaking of an oak was the best comfort they had to
refresh them in their In this again he imitates Virgil, in whom for his
better expression, he seems to take felicity. Concussaque famem in sylvis
solabere quercu.
famine. That Responsio ad objectionem Symmachi dicentis famem ingruisse
propter cultum Christianum.
is to say, (to speak as the truth is) when the Gentile superstition was
eagerly followed in the world of all people, then were there such new, and
strange affrightments of monstrous apparitions, as never happened upon the
earth before.

And in very deed when before that time did the deceitful croppe of wild oats
in stead of good grain even in the best furrows of the fields frustrate the
hope of the greedy husbandman, and fill his hand with such base baggage? And
He replies here to Symmachus, objecting the feeding upon Akornes as a
punishment, the same to have been reputed in former ages, of the Greeks, and
other nations as a great benefit, viz. when they enjoyed them in much plenty.
whence was it that to the Greeks their oaks were had for Oracles, but
because they thought their help for nourishment growing out of the Woods to be
the gift of holy religion? For they believed increase of their fruits to
proceed from the favor of their Gods. Who Dodona is a wood where many oaks
grow, and that way famous being in Chaonia, which is one of the chiefest parts
of Epirus, Pyrrhus his country: tertio Europae sinu, inquit Plinius, lib. 3
Cap. 1o. So called from Dodone Jupiters daughter, and because of his Oracle
seated there. Dodonaeus is an Epithete of his, and one of his appellations.
Therefore also is his Oracle placed among multitudes of oaks, because this
tree is principally dedicated to him.
save the people of the Gentiles, did adore? who save they, did honor this
coorse food of the sacred wood of Dodona? It is not likely therefore that their
Gods disdaining that which they were wont, being pacified, to present them
withal as a reward, namely the fruit of this tree, should be now inflicted as
a punishment upon them.

But to grant them this, though utterly void of all reason, what equity is
there in this, that maintenance being denied to a few Priests, the gods
displeased therewith should deny sustenance to all the world? For this were to
make the payment exceed the trespass. It is not fit therefore, that the hope
of the year grown up to maturity in her new crop, should notwithstanding as a
thing bound under so great punishment, for the sake of the deceiving world
suddenly wither away, and perish, to the hurt of all. And verily many years
are now passed over their heads, since the abrogation of the rites of their
Temples. Does it now, and did it never before enter into the minds The Oracles
of the Gentiles became dumb upon the first shining forth of Christian Religion:
yet this Rhetorician thinks to raise up again, being long ago dead, his God
Pan: and therefore our Author meets with him in a pious derision.
of their gods to quit, and avenge their old quarrel? Has therefore the
Egyptian river Nilus in his sevenfold streams, not swelled a longtime over his
accustomed banks, to vindicate his own, and shall he now break his bounds
to wreake his fury, for the revenge of the losses of the Priests of the City
of Rome?

But let it be, that the former year they thought the wrongs of their gods
sufficiently vindicated, why this present year are they contemned? For now
neither do the country people pull up the grass by the roots, to feed upon,
nor make narrow search for the berries of the Woods to comfort, The third
General part; allegation of an universal famine convinced to be false in
respect of continuance.
nor snatch off the sloes from the thorns to sustain them: but rejoicing in
their happy labor, and standing in admiration of their harvest, have satisfied
their hunger according to their hearts desire, from the fruits of the earth,
and receive their own again with advantage. Where therefore is there such a
novelist to be found, that stands amazed at the A Document drawn from
experience, that there is an intercourse of natures burden.
vicissitude of times? Howbeit, the former year also in our Gods providence
for his Church is such, that when the fruits of their own country fail, he
furnishes them from an other place: so that this relator is proved a false
reporter.
knowledge, most of the Provinces abounded with increase.

What shall I speak of the three I understand him speaking in the plural
number, as Pliny, lib. 2 cap. 80. Ideo Galliae, and Aegyptus minime quatiunt,
quoniam hoc aestatis causa obstat, illic hyemis. In tria populorum genera
dividitur Gallia, Pliny, lib. 4. cap. 17. which by other Cosmogr. more
expressly are called Coniata, Braccata, Togata.
parts of Gallia more rich then usually? What of The lower part of it is now
named Hungary.
Pannonia, which had to sell over and above for food and provision, to serve
her own use? Fruitful Incolis Alpium contermini Rheti, Thuscorum prolem
arbitrantur, Plin. lib. 3. cap. 20. The latter Cosmograph. make it a piece of
Germany.
Rhetia knows how much she was then envied for her fecunditie. For she,
which was wont to have fasting for her defense, then by her feasting provoked
the enemy against her. In Insubria now Lumbardie in Gallia Cisalpina, the
country wherein Millan stood, St. Ambroses seat, could not be far from
this Liguria, because he being here Praeses Consularis, was easily brought
thither to make reconcilement: and therefore Symmachus bruting abroad an
universal famine, especially when plenty abounded so near, is found the more
untrue.
Liguria, and Venice, their Autumn brought forth such a croppe, as astonished
the beholders. Wherefore it is not so, that by our sacrilege committed against
your consecrated things, the fruits of that other year withered away: and it
is so, that by the fruits of our faith this present year thus flourishes. Can
they deny that the Vines bear their burden in the largest measure? Therefore
we enjoy both an harvest bringing us in much advantage, and possess also the
profits of a more liberal vintage. (If plenty then be a witness of the truth,
here it is in all plenitude.) The Allegation against the prerogative of Princes
as unjust, in turning what was given to superstitious to other uses, convinced.
last, and chiefest proposition remains as yet unexamined, whether of that
our Emperors sometimes bestowed to the relief of the Vestals, and Priests,
and is now converted to the benefit of the Empire, there ought restitution to
be made? For he says, Let them defend Objected, that Ethnic Ceremonies be a
defense of the Empire, and here answered. They argue thus, if they be a
defense. then to be restored. Objected, that all things under the Gentile rites
prospered better, and therefore to be kept, but resolved to the contrary.
you, and be adored of us.

This is that impiety (Princes rightly renowned for your constancy in the
Christian faith) which when they speak it to our reproach we cannot bear,
namely that they supplicate to their Gods in your names, and thereby, when you
command it not, interpreting your connivency for your consent, commit
detestable sacrilege. Let them keep their Gods for their own gardians, if
they have any power, let them preserve it, to protect their own vassals. Where
is no might to defend their own suppliants, were it not madness in us to
expect it? But he objecteth that the right of Ancestors ought to be observed.
For as he affirms, these duly kept, all things thereupon prospered much
better. Did not the world it self, which either at the first, the seed of the
elements being coacted our of the Per inane the text, Genesis 1.2. has tohu
Vebohu solitude, and inanity, which the Septuagints call (...) Philosophers
(...), which is not to be thought to intimate vacuity, which nature admits
not, but to show that the state of things was first confused, until the Lord
in the consequence of his work gave them form.
wast, grew together to a tender orb, or else a confused horror of an
indigested work in the beginning darkening it, receive afterward, a difference
being made between the elements of the air, the sea, and the earth, (with the
fire,) the forms of things for an ornament?

When the earth had cast off the moist garment of black obscurity, how did it
stand amazed at the appearing of the new Sun in his brightness? But this
great Genesis 1.14, 15.
luminarie shines not in the beginning, Not the creature the Sun, but the
Creator, which is God himself, is the fountain of light, Genesis 1.3
first the light breaks forth, afterward through the increase of light it
shows it self in its beauty, and through the increase of heat in its nature
of burning. The other, and lesser eye of the world the Moon, which, according
to prophetical Oracles, is a figure of the Church, at its first arising
labors after the repairing its monthly strength, but has its head soon
covered over with the darkness of the night: yet by little, and little,
filling up its horns, or, For that in natural course nothing stands at a
stay, no marvel is it, that in religion the state of things alter. Hither
tends this discourse of the two lights, the Sun, and the Moon, of
husbandry, of the seasons of the year, and of the changings of the conditions
of man's life. And this is the only way to deal with an Ethnic, and unbeleever
to produce against him natural reasons for his conviction.
being in a Diameter to the Sun, by virtue of his rays, making complete its
body, glistereth very goodly with the glory of his orient beams. Men knew not
at the first how to inure themselves in tillage, at length the careful
husbandman began to get the mastery over the stubborn earth, to put a new
coat upon the wast ground, and to cloth it with Vineyards, so was the
wildness thereof mollified, and made pliant to his hand. The year in his
prime, which has dyed us with the like tincture in use, and with the like
inclination in generation (puts on green array) then buds, and blossoms
consequently follow, and fall away, but at last proceeds to the maturity of
fruits. We also our selves being of green age, and rude, have our senses
exercised after the manner of 1 Cor. 13.11. and 3.2. Ephesians. 4.14.
infants years coming upon us, we apply not our wits to theirs, but reject the
rudiments reaching no further then to them. Let them then speak, would they
have all things rest in their own beginnings? would they the world to be
overwhelmed still with darkness? and because the Sun inlighteneth, and
disperseth the mists of blindness with his splendour, would they have it
known, that nothing displeases them more then this? And how much more
acceptable ought it to be, that not the darkness of the body, but of the mind
has been scattered, and that the illustrous brightness, not of the Sun,
but of the syncerity of faith has thrust forth her beams?

Wherefore also the first beginnings of the world, as of all things else, have
changed their course, that we might understand the venerable age of hoary
headed faith to have followed likewise that way to come to her ripeness. They
whom this distasteth, let them grow to displeasure against the harvest, because
it brings plenty late in, against the vintage, because its fruit is not ready
until the fall of the leaf, against the fatness of the Olive it self, the
Olivae non antefavonij afflatum increscentes, hoc est ad 6. Idus febr. tunc
arbitrantur eas maturescere, Plin. lib. 5. cap. 3. Semper virentis olivae
Horat. Viriditas enim perpetua causa est, qua succus exhauritur, and inde
infirmior redditur ad fruges edendas. He grows here to debate the controversy
between the Christian, and Gentile concerning the true religion.
slowest of all other before it fills the cruse. Therefore also our Harvest is
the faith of the soul, the grace of the the Church, the vintage of good
Works, which from the beginning of the world was green in the Saints, in this
last age has diffused it self more largely over the people, that all may
observe the faith of Christ never to have entered into the rude, and unmanured
ground of men's hearts, and void of true knowledge. For there is no crown of
John 5.4.
victory (which is of faith) without an adversary (which is the rude world)
but the opinion of the adversary being put down, which prevailed before that,
whcih was grounded upon true knowledge was rightly preferred. If your ancient
rites delighted you so much, why did your city of Rome worship the Gods of
other Nations, and succeed them in their Ceremonies? I pass by her streets,
poor and naked before, now covered over with pavement of price, and her plain
pastoral cottages in times past, now glistering with gold, which Romae non
fuit aurum nisi exiguum longo tempore, Plin. lib. 32. cap. 1. He disproves the
Gentile Ceremonies because of their mutabilitie.
clean degenerateth from her old custom. But that I may more punctually
answer their complaint, why were they so emulous of the superstition of other
Nations, that when they had conquered them, they evermore received into the
Capitol the images, sacred customs, and Gods which they overcame? Whence is
that example that Cybele is the same with Ops, Vesta, Pales, Berecynthia,
Terra, Rhea, Pessinuntia, under the first, and fourth we read of her in Virg.
Aeneid, lib. 3. 6. 9. 10. In the sixth book the glory of the Roman stock is set
out under her name, Invehitur curru Phrygias turrita pro urbes, in the tenth
that she has the command of the seas, and waters, Nymphas Alma Cybele Numen
habere maris, etc. jusserat. It should seem therefore, that 1. from her was
given the honor of the Vestals; 2. The renown of the Empire, and the extent
of her dominion, no less by sea then by land. But our Author slips by this
fond ceremony as fabulous. For as is the river Almo merely feigned: so is all
the residue. Yet for all that, see how she is extolled by the said Poet for her
antiquity, Ipsa deum fertur genetrix Berecynthia, and as the first that had the
honor of worship. Hinc matter cultrix Cybele, lib. 3. Aeneid. Jupiter himself
is her son, and none but she is sought to, to petition to him for the
preservation of Aeneas ships, and her Petition is so far available with him,
that thereby they are kept from fiering by Turnus, Aeneid lib. 9.
Cybele washes her chariots in the feigned river of Almo? Whence that the
Phrygian prophets, and Gods of unjust Carthage, always hateful to the Romans
(were admitted into the city of Rome?) In the diversity of the name, not in the
variety of divine power, stands the difference, that Goddess which the
Africans worshipping, called Vnicuique provinciae suus Deus est: Syriae
Astartes, Arabiae Disures, Noricae Belenus, Africae Coelestis. Tertull.
Apologet.
Caelestis, the Persians called Mithras, the common people by the name of
Venus. Likewise, they believed Victory to be a Allegation that Victory is a
Goddess confuted.
Goddess, not because she had any power, or dominion of her self, or any
sovereignty over Religion, but because they judged the same obtained against an
enemy, to be to themselves a Trajan though an heathen Emperor, said well, that
to give battle appertained to men, but to give victory was the work of God.
favor, and liberal gift, and to their legions a grace, and credit. Surely
that is a great Goddess, which either the multitude of soldiers claim to
themselves, or the event of wars does bring forth. Her Altar it is they
desire now to be set up in the place of the Common Pleas of the city of Rome:
that is, there where many Christians, as well as others, have occasion to meet.
In all their Temples they have their Altars, an Altar also have they in the
Temple of His petition pressing the sacrificing upon this altar of Victory
standing in the Court, answered.
Victories: when they are delighted in the number, no marvel their sacrifices
being celebrated every where to be without number. There is no question but
that St. Ambrose knew these to be Symmachus own words, and uttered in some
public assembly. In his former Epistle he mentions the like, Vt oppleret
anhelitus, and ora cinis ex ara, favilla de sacrilegio, fumus de buslo. Which
how audacious are they even to astonishment, how incredibly odious in such a
man, in such a matter, but that idolaters are mad for their abominations?
But why do they now challenge the sacrificing upon this one Altar, and upon
no more, is it not of purpose to insult over our faith? Is this a thing
tolerable indeed, that whiles a Gentile sacrifices, a Christian must stand by?
Let them all draw, let them draw, says he, though never so unwilling, smoke
into their eyes, the harmony of music into their ears, ashes into their
jaws, frankincense into their nostrils, and how averse soever; let the sparkle
arising from our chimneyes flash in their faces. Their bathing Nullus in urbe
locus Baijs praelucet amaenis, Horat. Pleasantness cause of increasing
idolatry. Hos. 10.1. According to the goodness of their land they have made
fair images.
places, their porches, their streets are every where pestered with all manner
of Idols, yet this satisfies them not: yea, is it thus, that in a place of
Common council, there shall not be permitted a common condition? Shall the
well devoted part of the Senate be tied to your manner of obtestations, and
adjurations in their suffrages, and dispositions? When if Dilemma.
the same (be in judgment) against what is done, that bewrayes That is, both
falsehood, and sacrilege, which is done under sacrament contrary to knowledge,
Quid est jurare, nisi ejus quem testare fidei tuae praesulem, divinam potentiam
confiteri? This is an holy oath, the contrary is sacrilege.
falsehood, if Where is an outward profession of true religion, and no more, to
submit to superstition, is in our Authors construction in his other Epistle
likewise sacrilege. Te Imperatore, says he, hoc petitur and postulatur ut
aram jubeas clevari, etc. Sed hoc non potest sine sacrilegio decerni.
yields unto it, in this confession is made of sacrilege.

Where, Vbi in leges vestras, and verba jurabimus qua religione men's falsa
terrebitur, ne in testimonijs mentiatur? These are Symmachus full words in his
own Epistle, which though St. Ambrose repeating but in part as sufficient,
because then well known: yet we must now for the better opening the place,
supply. The laws for Gentile rites abolished.
says he, shall we swear to your laws, and words (of obligation) with what
religion shall a false heart be terrified, that he lie not in his testimony?
Therefore does he collect the extent included in the laws, to involve under
the tenor thereof, a suffrage to the ceremonies of the Gentiles, and now to
bind not only the faith of such as are present, but such likewise which are He
seems to gather this from these words following in his relation, omnia Deo
plena sunt, nec vllus perfidis tutus est locus.
absent? which if it be so, his project reaches further, and heaveth at (O
Emperors) even your faith also. For your commands be coactions (and restraints
no less to your Trajan the Emperor is commended for a great observer of
justice; and for that he commanded not only the sword to be drawn out against
other offenders, but if he did unjustly, even against his own person. The
deed of Constantius answered. How God is present, John 4.24. What belongs to
the Senate.
selves then to others.)

Constantius of famous memory, not as yet baptized. thought it a contamination
to his royal person once to look upon that Altar of yours. He commanded it
to be taken away, commanded it not to be placed there again. The one bears
the authority of a deed done, the other has not so much as the force of a
Precept for the doing it at all.

Let no man flatter himself concerning Gods presence, he is then present, when
he planteth himself in the heart, not when he is placed before the eyes. It is
more to be affianced to him in mind, then to be coupled to him in body. The
Senate attributes to you supreme power to summon a Council, meets at your
command, tenders their oath not to the Gods of the Gentiles, but to you,
preferres you even before their own children, but reserves their faith to God
entire. This is their love toward you, then the which nothing can be more
desired, this is their love, which is to be valewed above the Empire it self:
namely, if the Christian faith under your Scepter, which preserves the same, be
kept in safety. But perhaps some man may be here This Ethnic Relator seems
to bite at Theodosius Magnus, the rarest Prince of all other, next to
Constantine Magnus.
moved to bemone our estate, for that so faithful a Prince, as were to be
desired, is now wanting: what is this else, but to measure the price of the
merit of religion, with the vading, and variable condition of the present
government? For what wise man does not understand the state of humane affairs
to be placed in a certain orb, and round circuit of many returns, and
wherein the successes of things follow not always alike, The prospering of
things under the Gentile government answered as untrue.
but under very much vicissitude, and mutability. Whom did the Roman Temples
send forth with more happiness then Cneus Pompeius? But he, when after his
compassing the world with his puissant army, had thrice gloriously triumphed,
was at last beaten out of the field, forced to fly the battle like a
fugitive, and standing in the state of a poor exul driven out of the utmost
skirts of his own Empire, had his head that had been mounted so high taken
off by none other champion, then an Ptolomie a young man being King of Egypt at
this time Photinus an Eunuch, and groom of his chamber governing the kingdom
under him, assigned Achillas to kill Pompie the great, but Septimius, who was
appointed with Salvius, and certain soldiers to assist him, a man that had
been sometimes under Pompey, was the first that thrust him through with his
sword, Plutarch in vita Pomp. This Author mentions the taking off his head,
which by all likelihood was done by Achillas, to whom the charge of his death
was committed.
Egyptian Eunuch. Whom did the Gods of Persia make more noble then Cyrus,
bestowing upon him the whole Monarchy of the Eastern world? yet he also when
he had overcome the most mighty Princes his opposites, and being overcome, held
them under captivity, was himself by silly women unfit to bear weapon, put to
flight, and slain. And that king likewise, who had rewarded them, whom he had
overcome with honorable enlargement, his head being chopped off, and thrown
into a bottle full of blood, was bid glut himself with that, which he so much
thirsted after. Thus in this man's race, not like for like, but much unlike
measure was repaid him. No man was more devoted to sacrifice, then Hamilcar the
Captain of the Carthaginean host, who when he was placed during the whole fight
between the murdering armies, and busied himself there in making sacrifice,
after he knew part of his army to be overthrown, threw himself headlong into
the burning fire, which he kindled for that purpose, to the end, because they
profited him nothing, he might utterly extinguish them with his blood.

What shall I say of Julian the Apostate hearkening to Soothsayers, took not
the offer made by the Persians of yielding him a part of their kingdom, but
dreaming through their conjectures of a golden world, marching forward in
insulting wise did miserably perish, Socrat. lib. 3. Cap. 18.
Julian? Who giving too much credit to the soothsayers deprived himself of the
opportunity offered him, whereby he might have returned home in peace.
Wherefore in the common Meaning that all as well good as bad are under
afflictions, yet in a diverse manner, the good for their trial, the bad for
their offenses: or for that the godly are not to be discerned from the
ungodly, nor true religion from superstition by outward casualties, and events,
Eccles. 2.14, 25, 16. Job 21.23.15. Ierem. 12.1. Psalm. 27.1. Hab. 1.2, 3, 4.
Gedaliahs Ierem. 41.2. With Iosiahs examples, 2. Chro. 35. and Ezech. captivity
show it to be so.
calamity of things, the cause of offense is not alike. Therefore (thus
rejoicing in our full answer) we have deluded no man in our The cause of these
words is the promise he made, Detur mihi exemplum missae relationis, ut ego
before respondeam Ep. sua superiore ad Valent.
promise. Wherein I have replied to the provokers in their challenge with that
moderation, I trust, as one nothing provoked to passion. For my care has been
more to refell by strength of argument, the weakness of the relation, then to
lay open to opprobrie, the foulness of their superstition. Howbeit (O
Emperor) let this their relation (or rather prevarication) bring your Clemency
to be more cautious. For when he had annexed this of the ancienter Princes,
that the former The connivencie or toleration in Christian Princes toward the
Ceremonies of the Gentiles answered. Symmachus words are these, Corrigit
sequentem lapsus prioris, and de reprehensione antecedent is exempli nascitur
emendatio.
number of them embraced the ceremonies of the Fathers, the latter removed them
not, and had added withal, if the Religion of the elder sort make not an
example, let the connivency of the next following them do it: he has clearly
taught you, which also you owe to your Christian faith, that in no wise you
follow the pattern of the Gentile rites, and that, which you owe likewise to
your Christian piety, you violate not the Which in effect were doubtless
agreeable to that is written of the Decrees of the Ancyran Council. Continet
Canones generales 24 contra eos, qui inviti vel Dijs thurificabant, vel
immolabant.
Statutes of your His great zeal for establishing the truth appears, by
sending for St. Ambrose to come to him, to confirm the holy Ghost to be God,
Lib. Epist. 50. v. 25. and. 26. and for choosing Theodosius so religious a
Prince, as a worthy assistant to him in governing the Empire. In the time of
these two Emperors was the sixth Council at Constantinople, one of the 4.
principal, and the next best to the ^. Nicene, and whatsoever was decreed
therein, and the Ancyran ratified.
Brother. For if they only in their own respects have published to the world
the connivency of those Princes, who being Christians, yet have not removed the
Decrees of the Gentiles, how much more ought they to attribute it to your love
to your Brother, whose part it is: Yea, were it so, that there were
peradventure something which you approved, not to pass by it, lest otherwise
you might derogate from his Statutes, and from that you now maintain, and
judge both agreeable to your own faith, and to the nearest, and dearest bond
of tendrest regard you owe to your worthiest Christian Brother.

FINIS.

