A brief and most pleasant Epitomye of the whole art of Phisiognomie, gathered
out of Aristotle, Rasis, Formica, Loxius, Phylemo^, Palemo^, Consiliator,
Morbeth the Cardinal and others many more, by that learned chyrurgian Cocles:
and englished by Thomas Hill Londoner.

Imprinted at London by John Waylande.

Cum priuilegio per septennium.

To the right worshipful Master George keable Esquier, Thomas Hill wysheth
prosperytye.
THe kindness which, I have found at your friendly hands, ioynte with your
knowledge and love of good letters, has moved me to dedicate these my
labors, unto your mastershyp: which I have attempted to put in prynt,
rather to show what I wyshe to be done, than what I can do. The argument is
not only plesante but also necessary, and that for all kinds of men to be
skylled in. And that right well knew the auncyente Philosophers, which would
receive no Skolers nor bye any scruau^tes, whose shape answered not their
knowledge in this science. But what need I declare this unto you, who know it
already much better than my self: wherefore no longer to trouble you with my
rude letters, I heartily beseech you to take in good part my good will, and with
your authority to protecte my doings. Thus I pray god to keep you.

yours most bounden Thomas Hill.

The Preface To the Reader.
IF it be true (gentle Reader) that the chief point in knowledge is to know
God, the second to know our self, the third (which is also the first part
of prudence) to know al other men, tha^ must it needs follow that such menes as
lead us to the nerest perceiving of any of these three, must needs be both
good, profitable and necessary. What folly is than in those heads which
condemn or despise natural Philosophy, which as Saint. Paul affirms,
leodeth us to the first, and as King Solomon says, dryueth us to the
second. And as the whole consent of all that have been learned bears
wytnes, does thoroughly instruct us in the third. For the excellencye of the
creatures as heaven (whose course and effects Arithmeticke and Astronomy
declare) and earth, (whose compass, scituacion, and alteracion Geometry and
Physic publysheth) cause men to grant not only the excellency but also the
almyghtynes of their maker and ruler. The use and effects of natural reason
whose truth and pleasantnes logic and rethoricke do plainly set forth,
teach us how we differ from other creatures, for what end we were created, and
how we may behave us to come to that end: for about this last point moral
Philosophy is only occupied, teaching what is just, what honest, what cumly,
and what profitable. And as the excellencye of the creature makes us know the
creator, whose name be blessed for ever, and as the use of Reason in us does
cause us to know our seiues: so does the effects and wurkyng of nature,
comprehended by reason, teach us to know and judge of al other things, As
first of the elements and of their powers in in them selves severally
vnnixed, secondlye of their myxture in things, thirdlye of the effects caused
through their mixtures, which be plainly set forth in Phisiognomie, that is to
say knowledge of bodies. This Phisiologie is learned two ways: by meditacion
or by appearance. Meditacyon is a conceyuyng in the mind of such things as
cannot be perceyueo by any sense, as the substance of souls, spirits, and
virtues. Apparaunce is the judgment which the senses have of such things
as are objected against them: as the felyng, of substaunces: the hearing of
mouynges, the taste and smelling of qualities and mixtures, the syghte, of
forrmes and Colors. Which senses although they be all excellent in their
kinds for us to judge and discern things by, yet the chefest truest and most
ready is the sight, which is chiefly occupied about Phisiognomie, as we may call
it in englysh, body skyl, or the knowledge of the temperaunce of bodies by
their shape and fourmes, Which although it be of al creatures, both stones,
plants, verbes, fish foul, beasts and men, whose inward prop r^yes and
difference are known by the outward shapes: yet be cause that of all the rest
man is most excellent, therefore it specially belongs to him. And of his
nature the Philosophers have chefely sought, and that because man is not only
the chefest good to manne, but also the chefest evil both to man and al other
things. Which causes Tully in his book de natura deorum, to call Reason
(which is the excelle^test creature that god ever made) the wurst of al other
creatures: because that only by man (the only possessour thereof) al ki^des of
iniquities and sins against nature are divised, and committed. But to leave
Tully in his error til an other time because he distinguishes not lust and
reason, but attributes the effects of the one to the other, we will come to the
matter concerning Phisiognomy chefely in man, which teaches the third part
of wysdom, and first of prudence, that is: how to discern the disposicions of
al men by their form and shape, whereby we may know whom to make our
friends and familiers, whom to preserve from being our foes, and whom to avoid
as dangerous to have to do with all. Al these points are marked by nature in
the proporcion and liniamentes of man's body, with diverse other more secret,
which are well known to as many as know the art, and specially in the face
and hands, which as it should seem, god has made open and vncouerable
because al men might at all times see and perceive them. And to the end no man
should think this incredible (as the gross heads do of all things which
they cannot comprehend) I will counsel them by things more evident, to
credit such as be more obscure, yet not obscure of them selves but hidden from
us for lack of search. Can not we know by a man's countenance when he is
merye, when sad, when angry, when fearful, when ashamed, and when shameless?
and that by new and so dayne alteracions of the visage? Do we not by the
colors and making judge and not fail of stomach and properties of horses,
dogs, Cocks, and other creatures? Do not the Phisicions likewise judge the
temperamentes, crasis, and diseases of the body by the color and alteracion of
the qualities and quantyties of parts? And how are all these things known
but by considering what elemente is strongest and what weakest in the
composicion. For the elements wurke the same or much like effects in
composicions of bodies where they rule, as they have in themselves simply, and
so cause the proporcyons both of members and liniamentes, and bring forth the
like conditions and propertyes. Which what they be, and how they differ, the
best learned me from time to time have searched, noted and put in writing.
Wherein as they are to be commended, with al other which have followed their
good example, so of al other nacyons I am forced most to disprayse mine own
country men, which have leaft no monumente of their skill therein. For there are
few other nations but have in their own tongue diverse treatises thereof set
forth in print, whereas we (so far as I have seen), have never a word thereof.
And although I know that no begynnynges can lack disprayse, yet to set other
on wurke therein, I have with blind bayarde adventured to turn into Inglish,
that which I have found in other tounges, written by the best learned in that
art as Hermes, Aristotle, Rasis, Formica, Locius, Philemon, Palemon,
Conciliator and other, wishing that al me^ at vacant times might occupye their
wits therein. And one thing I warn (as I my self am warned) not to Judge by
any one part alone, but by all (or at the least) by many together: so shall we
be sure not to be deceived. I mean we shall not be deceived to know the
truth of the natural disposicion, and yet we may fail of the man's
conditions, which Socrates himself well declared. For when he with his
disciples about him, asked of a Phisiognomer what conditions he perceived to be
in him, Ah Socrates (quoth the Phisiognomer) thou art a great ^eachour, a
craftye fellow, subtyle, and given to all wyckednes. This answereso vexed
Socrates Scolets, who know the contrary to be most true, that they rayled at
the Phisiognomer, and would with strypes have recompensed his pains, had not
Socrates stayed them. For it is all true that he says (quoth Socrates) for
such I am by nature, but I have (as al other me^ may have if they will) a reason
and grace that rules about nature. By this it is evident that reason and grace
man bridle nature or turn the prouocacions thereof unto goodness. For the
choleric or irefull man may either by grace repress his lust, or else use it
well in correctyng of vices. The malicious man may by gra^ assuage his lust,
or else turn it against the wicked and so forth of al other natural
inclinacions. And therefore although a man may perfitly by Phisiognomy declare
the natural inclinacions of any man, y^ may he not perfectly judge him except
he know whither he have grace or no. And the lack of this consi^raunce has
brought this science to be thought fals^ because grace brydeleth or uses well
the natural ^^clinacions of man. This well remembered, the boo^ may be safely
read, and thou (good Reader) thereby may infallibly judge the state and
conditions of any manne. For the better knowledge whereof, I entende shortly to
set forth palmestrye, In the mean ryme I beseech thee to take in good part
this my rude endeavors.

A brief Epitome of the whole art of Phisiognomie, touching generally all the
members of man.
Of the signs of healthful and sick bodies, by the part of the four
compleccions. First the signs of the body of a hot compleccion.
The first Chapter.


BOdies naturally hot, do spedily and well increase, as appears in young
children, and wax fat, much dry, their veins apparaunte in their places,
their breath strong, their voice loud, mighty, and great, mighty in
coeatyng, and much desiring or lusting thereto, They feed, digest and bear
their meat well, having aboundauncy or plenty of hear on the head, and in
such places as it should naturally grow, which partly be thick bristled of
hear of the breast, which comes by much heat of the heart as perfectly
appears in the lion and cock.

The signs of the body of a cold compleccyon. The. ii. Chapter.
Bodies naturally cold, do slowlye increase, and wax fat, their veins appear
great and manifest, their breath small to be hard, (or as it were in dark
manner) their voice subtle in the hearing or shrill, feeble in coeatyng, and
seldom desiring thereto, eating litell, digesting, and bearyng their meat
evil, white of skin, or rosy of color, their hear deape and long after
suffisaunce whether it be black or white, and they be subtle, fearyng, and
trem blyng of a light cause, and weak to labor.

The signs of the body of a moist compleccyon. The. iii. Chapter.
Bodies naturally moist, be soft, and light in the flesh, their Joyntes hid
and of small fortytude, whereby they may endure but a while to labor, they
fear and tremble in manner at every matter sleaping euilly, often moved to
coeate or to the lust of the body, naked and thin of hear, their eyes often
watery or distilling, y^ hear of their head, and in the other places, long and
thin having a good or forward wit to learn.

The signs of the body of a dry compleccyon. The. iiii. Chapter.


BOdies naturally dry, be thought rough in the fealing, lene in flesh, strong
and durable in labor, willingly, and conveniently they eat, the iointes of
their members be manifest and apparaunt, the hear of their head, and in the
other natural places, great, roughe, and courled.

The signs of a temperate and healthful body. The. v. Chapter.
TEmperate and healful bodies, eat and drink well, after their conuenience of
nature, digest and dispose, things to the^ be sauerye, they hunger in
conueniente hours, they joy with them that be merry, they sleep their full
slepes, they think them self light of body, and go lightly on the ground they
sweat sone, seldom or never snese, they wax meanelye fat, colored in the
face, hot in the fealyng, in them the five senses have conueuiente force, after
congruency of age, body, and hour.



The signs of a distemperate, and vnhealthful body. The. vi. Chapter,
DIstemperate and vnhealthful bodies, in all things be unlike to bodies
temperate and healthefull, wherefore they eat euilly or very little, they pass
not to drink, they dygest and dispole or bear their meat euilly, things to
the^ be not sauery, they hungre not in congruente hours, they give not them
selves fully to be cheerful and merry, in ^eioising at them that laugh and be
meary, but be always as it were sad, and continue sad, they sleep their
slepes euilly, they judge and think them selves heau^, and go heavily on the
ground, they seldom sweat, or sweat nothing at all, they gape or often
snese, streachynge their arms out and abroad, pale in the face, or over high
or much colored, their. v. senses be weak, they may not long sustain or
endure labor, they soon forget matters, spiring much their nostrylles always
full of fi^th, their body therow out as it were fat, their flesh blown ly^e
the nose, and their hands, fyngers, and eyes sweatie and distill lyng.

The signs of a good nature and memory. The. vii. Chapter.


HE is of a singular memory and understanding, and well fathoned in nature,
which has moist and soft fleash, mean between roughnes and lenity, mean of
stature, having a ruddie counten aunce suffused with whitnes, having also age^
til and friendly look, whose hear of the head is plain thorowout: having eyes
meanly big, and declynyng to a roundenes, the head meanly great with an
equality, the neck well fashioned, and the shoulders declining downwardes, or
shoulders ready to declyne, not fleashlier about his shankes and knees, having
a mean voice between great and shrill, having the palms long with long
fingers declining to subtunes, mean in laughing or of laughter, whose
countenance looks joyous and meary.

The significacyons of hot and dry bodies after Rasis. The. viii. Chapter.


THese bodies be thick, bushye of hear on the head, and else where, lean
also, and in the felyng hot, and the skin thycke and roughe, and strong
sinews, having the veins bones and iointes, much apparau^t, a low voice,
their pulces very swifte, and moauing or beating the like, they be also hot
in the fealyng, very bold, and obstinate, these hitherto be Rasis words.

The significations of cold and moyst^ bodies after Rasis. The. ix. Chapter.


THese bodies be thought saft in y^ feling, and naked of hear, and having
gentle or saft hear on the head, their veins narrow, and Jointes hyd, having
corpulent bodies, much fat, sleping weakly or unquietly, slow of moving and
slower in their pace going.

Of the hear of the head. The. x. Chapter.
THe hear of the head, plain and long and whitshe like or flaxen in color,
if they be thin and soft, declare that man yuery to be naturallye fearful
in heart, weak in strength, peasable in sosietyes, every where congruente,
reformable, benign, and gentle.

The hear gross, bristled and short, declare that man to be naturally
strong, without care, bold, unquiet, a maker of lies or envious, (and of sum
named vayn) an often deceauer, desyryng fayer things to the eye, and more
simple then wise, although for tune may favor or fawn on him.

The hear much kurled, declares that man to be dull of wit, or of much
simplicity, or else both a like.



The hear aboundaunte on the temples of the face, and on the forehead, by
which the forehead may well be judged heary: declare that man to be simple,
vayn, seacherous, soon credityng other, in manners and talk rusticall, and
gross of wit.

The hear much bristlyng, and standing up in a bushe writhingly, declare that
man to be much simple, bold, proud, of a dull capacity, sone angrye, a
liar, leacherouse, maliciouse, and in evil presumptuouse.

The hear feakyng up on the corner of the forehead, and all the rest standing
up, or but part of them and that the forehead thereby appears balde, declare
that man to be simple, and partly maliciouse, with a wittines or circumspeccio^
of order, or manners therein.

The hear much aboundaunte on the head, that is, thick, bushing over all the
head, declare that man to be leacherous, and of good digestion, vain or a
liar, lightly fierce and rigorouse, slow in doing things, evil of memory,
desiryng or coveting fayer things and unfortunate.

The hear of the head read in color, declare that man to be enuiouse, much
irefull, full of inward deceit, full of rancore or poison, which we term com
monly venimouse, a deceauer, proud, and an evil talker by one behind his
back, and flatteryng to his face.

The hear of the head very brown to the color of the chesnutte, declare
that man to be congruente to all things, loving or desiryng honor, dooyng
justice, having a haut mind, and vain pride or gloryin himself.

The hear of the head very black declare that man to be congruente to all
things more to the good the^ to the evil, in ockupacion and labor studious,
secret faithful, and not well fortunate.

The hear of the head to flaxen or cleishe color, declare that man to be of
a good condition, and congruente to all things, fearful, chaste or
shame^ast, weak, and of a good wit, of a tender capacity, having a hard and
cruel fortune.

The hear of the head mean in quantity, and co loure, declare that man to be
congruente, and more te^ dyng to the good, then to the evil, loving a
peaceable life, loving clenlynes, and good manners.

The hear of the head, in Juueniute or young age, h^ry, and balde, declare
that man to be often moved, and desiryng to coeat, vayn or a liar, bold,
unstable, and talketyue.

Of the head. The. xi. Chapter.
THe head big, and sufficient round through out: declares that man to be
secrecte, witty, and circumspect in his doings, ingenious, discrete, of a
great imaginacion, or a great imaginour, laborious, stable or steadfast, and
faithful in promis or otherwise, for the more part.

That head that has a great throat with the neck which declyneth to the
earth ward: declares that man to be ware or witty, a nigarde, peaceable,
secret: following very much his own sensuality and mind, and stable in
doing matters.

That head which is long, having the face long and big, and deformable:
declares that man to be a fool maliciouse, or very simple, vain or a liar,
sone believing the thing heard or told him, a caryer or teller of news, and
also envious or hateful.

That head which is very voluble, or lightly turning here and there: declares
that man to be a fool, simple, vain, a lier, deceitful, presumtuouse,
unstable, dull of capacity or understanding, of an evil wit, of a tender
capacity, sumwhat prodigal or wastfull, and a bearer or teller of news.

That head which is great having a large face: declares that man to be
suspiciouse, stout and hardye, couetyng beutifull things, wary, simple,
gross of fedyng, secret, bold, and not sufficient shamefast.

That head which is great and not congruentlye shapen, having a short throat
and great neck: declares that man to be sufficient witty, to himself wary,
secret, Ingenius, of a stable Imaginacion, faithful, tellyng troth, and in
many things or matters tractable.

That head which is small, having a thin and long throat: declares that man
to be very Weak, folyshe, long angry, fearful, a little feader, apt to learn
or to be taught, and not well fortunated, and for the smalnes of the head, apt
to fall into lickenesses.



That head which is very great, and the neck with the sinowes and bones small:
declares an evil condition or quality of the brain, and that man to be a
dullarde and fool, compared to the ass.

That head which is great propercyoned to the body, and especially with the
neck, so that the neck be strong and meanly great, with strong and great
sinowes: declares a laudable conuersacyon and honesty in that persons, apt to
study good arts and to be an upright dealer with all men for the more part.

That head which is like to a pineapple, that is great beneath, and sharp
round up to the crown: declares that man to be alwey without shame, a gready
catcher, and universally Irefull and bold.

That head which moves fast as though it quauereth: declares that man to be
unstable, bold and Irefull through the cause of the heat of the brain.

That head which is very round as a boule or compass round: declares that
man to promise many things and perform none, a babbler, double to^ged,
importunate, covetous, enuiouse, and co^sidereth not of that paste nor coming,
but that present, and that very sle^derly: And there be also of them which
rob and murder by the high way, which if they cum to be rulers, they be
tirauntes, cruel, importunate and indiscreet, whose companyes be to be avoided
and eschewed, as fro thy enemies as Conciltator says.

The head very long and fashioned bygge and small to an organe pype: declares
unshamefastness.

The head soft and plain, or flat: declares arrogantnes and dissolucion in
that person.

The head appearyng dentid in hollow (in a certain manner) in the fore part
thereof: declares that man to be deceatfull and Iracundious.

The head great with a largenes of the forehead and countenance like to a
gyaunte: declares that manne to be slow, gentle, strong, dull and unapt to
learning, compared to the ox.

The head long and flat as a beatyll: declares that manne to be
circumspecte, and a foresear in his doings: And for the more part many of
the swichers and fleaminges have the like head.

Of the forehead The.xii. Chapter.


THe forehead very high and round declares that man to be liberal to his
frindes and acquaintanuce, meary, of a good understanding, tractable to other,
and in many graces virtuous.

The forhead plain or smothe in skin and bone and without wrynkles,
declares that man to vary for a light cause, vain or a liar, deceatful, more
simple then wise.

The forhead over small and narrow through ou^ declares that man to be simple,
sone styrred to Ire, lightly furious or cruel, a desyrer of bewtiful things to
be a courtyer or a seruinge man, foolyshe, unapt to learning, a poluter, an
over great feader and a gloto^.

The forehead sufficient round, in the angles of the temples that the bones
appear as it were, and naked of hear, declares yt man to be of a good wit
and parfyt understanding, of much boldness, a lyare in evil stout and hardy, a
delyrer of bewtiful mundanes, and of honor.

The foreheade very great, declares that man to be slow and a heavy goer on
the earth, a dullard and folyshe, compared to the Ox.

The forehead sharp pointing out in the angels or corners of the temples, that
the boones appear as they were standing without, declares that man to be
vayn or a liar, unstable, weak in all his doings, simple, of a tender
capacity, and a glutton often times.

The forehead in the temples as it were blown with the grosnes of the flesh,
that is that it has the cheke bones filled with flesh, declares that manne to
be diverse or of a sundry mind, Phlegmatic, proud, Ira cu^diouse, of a gross
and dull wit, and has also a great head and evil fashioned, leacherous or
unshamefast, en uyeth long, couetouse and a backbyter.

The foreheade full of wryncles declares that man to be iresul: And the
forehead plain without wryncles after a sad manner, declares that man to be
sad and sorrowful always in a manner.



The forehead wrinkled, and a falling of the wrincles fro the middle as it were
so that it apeareth double as it were in the face of the nose, whether it has
or makes a valley or no valley, declares that manne to be simple, stout and
hardye, of a great wit, and to have a sharp and cruel fortune.



The foreheade great througheoute and somewhat round throughout, bare of hear
or somewhat balde, or sufficientlye, declares that man to be bold, of a good
wit and understanding, wary, malicious, stout and heady, long continewyng
angry, faynedly faithful, and therefore he will lyghtlye lie.

The forehead very long and high round, so that the face to the chynne
appears figured sharp out, declares that man to be simple, feable,
congruently faithful, and to have hard fortune.

The temples of the forehead bearyng out round and heary: declares that man
to have a worthy wit, desiryng honor, arrogante and always stout and hardy
in his doings.

The forehead very great, round and heary: declares that man to be bold,
hardye and a liar.

Of the ouerbrowes, of the cies. The.xiii. Chapter.


THe over brows as Aristotle says much heary, declare that manne to be
perverse in talk talkatyue, ungracious or wicked, and rude manered.

The hear of the over brows extendinge to the temples, declare that manne to
be envious, proud and lecherous, unshamefast and haulte of stomach or mind.

The over brows thynne of hear in congruent quantity of length and shortness,
declare that man to have a ready wit, and facile in understanding.

The ouerbrowes growyng thick and long to the rote of the nose: declare that
man to be of a melancolyke nature or otherwise of an evil nature, and sum
such like, to be thieves, but always deceivers, murderers, and maintayners of
harlottes, flearing, catchers, dissemblers and malicious, and these when the
ouerbrowes by the herines join: and universally be thinckers of all
mischefes: and not unlike be they too these which have but one eye, which be
heaped in vices, contumelious deceitful and wicked.

The hear of the over brows growing from the rote of the nose upward, and
fro the Temples downward, declare him to be leacherous and of a dull wit.

The hear of the nether part of the ouerbrowes to the nose growinge douneward,
and the upper part growyng upward, so that thereby they appear broad, declare
him to be unshamefast, enuyouse, a dullarde a fool, and insatiable, compared to
the hog.

The hear of the ouerbrowes descending by incur uacion by the part of the
noose, declare that manne to have a sharp and an ingenious wit in unhappy and
wicked busynesses.

The hear of the ouerbrowes growyng even straight lyned alonge, declare that
man to be evil, weak and of a feminate mind or stomach, compared to the
woman.

The hear of the ouerbrowes growing so bendynglye that they almost join
with the nose, declare that manne to be subtle and ingenious, and also
studyous.

The hear of the ouerbrowes thyn and great in breadth, declare that man to be
facile in understanding and of a ready wit.

The ouerbrowes much herye and long, declare that man to be one which
willinglye seeks and desires to be much prayed and entreated in any matter.

Of the eye lyddes. The. xiiii. Chapter.


THe eye lyddes much wrinkled and which by often moving eleuate on high:
declare that man to be proud, stout and hardy, vain glorious, bold, a
threatner, a desirer of bew tifull things, and congruente to good and evil.

The eye lyddes declyning downwarde, when he speaks to one or beholds one
(as it were wrinklig lie) declare that man to be very maliciouse or a deceauer,
a liar, a betrayer, a niggarde, slow of pace or otherwise, secret, and of
few words.

The eye lyddes thynne of hear: declare that man to be simple, vain, weak,
lightly or for a small cause cruel, and in friendship or company sufficiently
congruente.

The nether eye lydde bonching out as it were blown and red in color:
declares that manne to be a notable drunckarde, especially if the lyddes
appear dry.

The eye lyddes that naturally fold downewardes as they were wrinkled, and
read or not read: declare that man to be unshamefast, slow in pace or
otherwise suspiciouse, a niggarde, enuiouse, and a light or a sleyght deceauer
in many things.

The eye lyddes very short or narrow and in color white or brown: declare
that man to be as he were congruent to all things, weak, fearful, easily and
soon crediting other, more simple then wise, and conuertible to good and evil.

Of the spaces between the eye brows. The. xv. Chapter.
THe spaces between the eye brows near joining together: declare that man to
be a nyggarde, enuiouse, secret, very much desireful of beawtiful things,
having a vain fortune, and more cruel or fierce, then delectable.

The spaces between the eye brows, very long, declare that man to be sumwhat
dull of capacity, of a subtle understanding, of much boldness, very
faithful, and of a perfyt, and vpryghte frendshyp.

Of the eyes. The. xvi. Chapter.


THe eyes great, that is gross, and much apparaunte: declare that man to be
commonly slow, and sumtyme bold, enuyouse, partly shamefaste, and partlye not
secret, congruente, a niggarde, ^ain lightlye lying, long a^grye, of an evil
memory or remembrance of a gross wit an^ of a small understanding, and
less sapyente then h^reakenc^h himself to be.

The eyes deep in the head, as they were hid that is* hollow in and the
syghte far in, declar that man to be suspiciouse, maliciouse, long angry o^
much Ireful, of a perverse manner, perfyt of memory, bo^de, cruel, lyghtlye
lying, a threatner, a vycyouse leacherer, proud, en^^ouse, and a deceauer.

The eyes situated (as in length): declare that manne to be a wyly begyler of
men, enuiouse, and a deceauer of deceauers, having his delyghte therein.

The eyes standing very far out: declare that manne to be simple, or a
fool, somewhat shamefaste, sumwhat large in expenses, wyllyngly to be bound,
to serve, or to be a prentise, of a gross understanding and wit, talketyue,
and lyghtlye leadde to good or evil.

The eyes that behold sharpelye, and with the eye lyddes studyous^ye
declyning, declare that manne to be maliciouse, and an often deceauer, very
false, often lying, enuiouse, a thief, a nyggarde, secret, wicked, and fayntly
faithful.

The eyes very small: declare that manne to be a fool, weak in strength,
applying in manners to the ape: that is, to be fearful, and a deceauer.

The eyes congruentlye small, and round: declare that manne to be shamefaste,
weak, simple* soon beleauyng an other man's sayings, of a gross wit, and
dull understanding, and often having a sharp or cruel fortune, lyberall to
other, and decently shamefaste.

The eyes little, and wrinkled: declare that manne to have an unhappy forewarde
wit, to do unhappy deeds, compared in his life to the ape.

That manne which has a chyides look with him: declares to be one, that
bethynketh not on hard or diffuse matters, and lives long after nature.



The eyes ob^yque, or lookyng crokedly: declare that man to be a deceauer,
wytty, a niggard, enuiouse, Ireful, a liar, and in many things malicyous, and
shall have also a sharp fever, whereof he shall spedely dye upon.

The eyes diverse or not a like, and in beholdynge waver up and down, or to
and fro, declare that man to be an often liar, bayne, simple, leacherouse, a
deceauer, soon credityng one, envious, stout and hardy a desirer of fayer
things, and easily brought to good or evil.

That man which is varyable, graye, and whitishe ^yed, is for the more part
borne to be a Philosopher and a searcher of dark and hid secrets.

The eyes that ^winkle often, and move before and after: declare that manne to
be leacherous, unstable, often lying, lyghtlye or soon false, a betraier
unfaithful, presumptuous, hard in beleuyng^ one.

The eyes that move swiftlye, and the syghte appearyng sharp: declare that man
to be full o^ disce^t, wyly, a thief, and unfaithful: which Cocles found
true in sundry parsons.

That manne which ^oketh or beholds with the eyes as though he always
laugheth: declares him to be a flatterer, leacherouse, unshamefast, and a
deceauer.

The white of the eyes somewhat cit^ine in color, declare that manne to be
simple, often lying to one, and reasonable, secret, very seife wylled, and
long angry, or Ireful.

The eyes that move fast or slow, or slowlye beholding but yet sharplye, with
a reclinacyon of the fleashe of the eye lyddes: declare that man to be very
maliciouse in many things, vain, slow in pace, or otherwise, a liar,
unfaithful, enuiouse, and a brauler.

That man which has white or black, or read spots like blood about the
eyes, is to be forsaken of al good and honest company.

The eyes which be as they were read, or filthy, by tears, or blood,
declare that man to be Ireful, arrogante or proud, disdaynful, cruel,
unshamefast, unfaithful, a liar, obstinate, vain, simple, of a tender
capacity, a deceauer, and may easily be brought godly, or virtuous.

The eyes very great, lokyng upward, like to ^xe eyes, and that they appear
readdysh: declare that man to be mischeuouse, folyshe, and a fool, dull of
understanding, of an evil remembrance, a drunkarde, and a gross feder.



THe eyes mean inform, tendynge to the celestial color, or to blackenes:
declare that manne to be reasonably, ^easeable, gentle, faith full, of a good
wit, of a synguler understanding, and congruentlye wyllyng to be bound to
serve one* or to be a prentyse or a courtyer.

The eyes which be mattery, and one while ru^ne and another while cease
runnyng: declare that manne to be deceatfull, rash, a robber by the high way,
and like to cum to an evil death, unless almightye god pleases the contrary.

They which have dry matter, or fylth, shining before the eyes, declare that
manne to be a great sleaper, and lover of sleep: And he also which has filth
hanging on the eyes, is a lover of wine, and a great drynker: he which has
the whytnes of the eyes tendyng to blackenes: declares him to be a great man
living or being in honor: And the whytnes, yealowish, to be a cruel manne,
and a deceauer.

The eyes great, and the ouerbrowes long: declare that manne to be short
lived: And the eyes also long, with the ouerbrowes long: declares that man
that he shall be learned, but short lived, he which shall have the eyes
oblique having that time a sharp fever on him, shall soon after dye.

The upper eye lydde* coueryng as it were the nether: declare that man, to be
long lived after nature: he which has sinal and round eyes, declares him to
renew again wyllyngly to do evil, especyally, if he be pa^e faced.

The eyes of measurable or competente greatness moist and clear shyning, to be
stout and bold, th^n king and intendyng or doing mighty matters, and sumtyme
they declare that man to be Iracundyouse, a wine bybber, a braller or
clatterer, geauyn to most ^^^^c^able glottony.

The eyes having as it were like to a pearl, compasyng the syghte of the eyes:
declare that manne to be enuyouse, full of words, fearful and mischeuouse.

Of the nose. The. xvii. Chapter.
THe nose long, and somewhat thin, declares that manne to be boulde,
curiouse in his doings, Irefull, vain, soon persuaded to good or evil,
weak, and soon geuynge creadite to one.

The nose long, and extensed having the typpe declyning downwarde to the
mouth: declares that manne to be warye, secret, content to serve, and
congruentlye faithful to one, modest in his doings, and a supplanter or
deceauer.

The nose that moves, with the mouyng of the muscles, and cheke bones:
declares that manne to be Irefull, and hastye, and not far unlike in
condicyon is he, which has the nose bendynge upward.

The nose stretching to the mouth: declares that manne to be of a hot
compleccyon thorowelye, and by the consequente, gives him to be honest manered
and bold.



The nose flat, declares that manne to be violente or hastye in his wrath,
vain or enuyouse, a liar, leacherouse, weak, unstable, soon credityng one,
and conuertible to good or evil.

The nose broad in the middle, and denteth or bends to the top thereof,
declares that man to lie, knauysh or malapert, diverse or variable, lecherous,
cruel, full of words, wanton, reprocheful, proud, ready to do wrong, and
having a hard fortune: wherefore keep the out of his company.

The nose throughout great, and sufficient long, declares that man to be a
desyrer of bewtifull things, in good matters simple, and in evil sapient,
congruently well fortunated, a fayner in those things or matters which he
desires or c^^eteth to keep secret, and knowing much less, then he reakneth
him self to know.

The nosethrilles great and large: declare that man to have great testicles,
leacherous, a betrayer or vtterer of secrettes, false, bold* ^lyar, enuyouse,
covetous, of a gross capacity, having a slendre wit, and fearful.

Note, that of the gross humores, is engendered the grossnes and magnytude of
the members, and by the consequence, the spirittes gross, as witnesses
Aristotle in his second book and fourth Chapter, de partibus animalium.

The nose very sharp at the end or typpe, and mean, between long and
short, great and thin: declares that man to be soon angry, much self
wyllde, lykely brawlyng, disdaynful, wary, weak, maly cyouse, a deceauer, a
threatner, and of a good memory or remembrance, and coleryke of compleccyon.

The nose very round at the end with small nosethrelles: declares that man
to be haut or proud, a gross feader, having a ready mind and will to
venereouse acts, sone credityng, vain, large in expenses and faithful.

Note that the nose expresses the quality of the heart: wherefore the nose
great, declares the caliditie of the heart, which causes such a person to
be Irefuli, and to have a great yard.

The nose ouerlong, and at the end more thynne then gross, and congruently
round, declares that man to be bold in talk, modeste in his doings, lightly
iniuriouse, a deceauer, enuiouse, a niggarde, in faith secret, a coueter of
other men's goods, and in many manners covertly maliciouse. Note, that thou may
not take or understand singly, these sayings, because sum other membre evil
shaped may contradicte the same, therefore consydre this, as a worthy note*
into this art.

The nose retorte and crokyng upward, and long, having the end congruently
gross: declares that man to be bold, proud, a niggarde, enuyouse,
couerouse, Ireful, leacherouse, a liar, a deceauer, vain gloryouse,
unfaithful, a stryuer, and a brawler.



The nose very high elevated in the middle which we name a copped nose:
declares that man to be an often liar, vain, unstable, leacherouse, sone or
lightly credytyng, importunate, having a good wit, gross in feadyng, and
more simple then wise, and malycyouse.

The nose ruddye in quality, more than any others, or has pustles here and
there on the nose. declares that manne to be couetouse, a bybber, wicked, a
drunkarde, leacherouse, much and often thirstye, a fayner of goodness, gross
of feadyng, and wit, and of a tender capacity.

The nose short, and the mouth small and the teath short and great:
declares that manne to be cold, and moist of compleccyon.

The nose congruentlye gross, or great thorowoute, and at the end somewhat or
a little flat, declares that man to be peaseable, gentel, faithful and
laborious, secret and of a good understanding.

The nose that croketh, like to the byl of the Egle, declares that man to be
choleric, couragyous, bold a gredy rauener and cruel.

The nose somewhat heary on the end, and congruently great through out, and
in the ioininge of the foreheade somewhat thynne, declares that manne to be of
a good condition in all things, and lyghtlye brought, or led, to good or evil.

The nose thorough out great, having large nostrylles, declares that man to
be of a gross wytt, and more simple then wise, a lyare, unapt to learning,
deceitful, cautelous, a braller, leacherous, enuiouse and vain glorious.

Of the mouth. The. xviii. Chapter,


THe mouth great and large, both in the closing and openyng, declares that
manne to be boulde, unshamefast, lightly fighting, or to be a warrior, a
lyare, full of words, a bearer or teller of news, a gluttonouse feader,
vnclenlye or nastye, of a gross wit, a niggarde and very folyshe.

The mouth small, both in the closing, and opening, declares that man to be
peasable, modeste, fearful, faithful, secret, shamefaste, asparer, sobre,
sometime large in expensis, apt to be taught or tolerne, and a little feader.

The mouth standinge far out, and round, by mean of the thicknes of the
lyppes, and the mouth somewhat wrythinge withal: declares that manne to be
vnclenlye or nastie, a fool, fierce or churlysh, compared to the hog.

That mouth that sauoreth ill, or stinketh in the breathinge, declares that
manne to be corrupt in the liver, an often lyare, vain, lasciuiouse,
deceatfull, of a tender capacity, and gross understanding, a seducer,
enuiouse, couetouse, or a coueter of other men's goods, and congruentlye
lyberall to one, a bearer and teller of news, soon credytyng one, and more
simple then wise.

The mouth having the quantity thus with the lyppes small, and the closyng
small, and the eyes with the reast of the face, loking smilingly, such a
person after Conciliator is leacherous, or libidinous, and a liar.

The mouth that sauourethe sweet in the breathing: declares that man to be
congruent or reformable, sapient in geuynge, and warye in reteynynge, secret,
a coueter of bewtifull mundanes, faithful, sone crediting one, and conuertible
to good or evil.

The mouth little, having thyn lyppes, declares that man to be weak of mind
and stomach, deceatfull, and malycious.

The comlyest condicioned mouth, is when it is not over moist, for the
moystnes or waterishnesse of the mouth and lyppes: declares fearefulnes and
malignitie. As Albertus affirms.

Of the lyppes. The.xix. Chapter.


The lips of the mouth very great, or over much folding outward (which
we name blabered) declare that man to be more simple, then wise, soon
creadetinge one, a gross feader, and congruente to good or evil, a dullarde,
talketyue, bold, leacherous, inconstant, and vnmanered.

The lips fair, and cheerful, and the countenance cheerful or smylinge
also, declare that man to be leachearous, or to appear lybidinouse, leake to
the wanton geldinge, but sum such be deceauers, thieves, and full of gieles or
caute lous: as Cocles noted it in a countriman of his, which was the like.

The lips with the gummes bearing or bunching up above the tethe, declare
that man to be wicked, an unquiet talker, Iracundious, and inclined to do
injuries, properly compared to y^ dog, as Palemo^ says.

The lips well colored, and more subtyle then great, declare that man to be
of a good condition in all things, and lightly conuertible to good or evil,
and rather to virtues, then to vicis: as Mychael the Scot faieth, and there
Jubiter is represented.

The lips not sufficient equal thoroughe out. To that the one is greater
the^ the other, declares that man to be more simple, then sapiente, of a
gross wit, and dull understanding, having a diverse or variable fortune, as
the autentikes affirm.

The upper lyppe thin, and sumwhat elevated or turmnge up (as Ptholome
says) declares that man to be very talkatiue, an accusare, and very envious.

The upper lip turning or folding up, and the neither lip down, declare
to that man, a miserable life, and to be vnseamite manered: and this Cocles
noted in certain, and neady poor parsones.

The Philosopher Ptholome also says, that if the lyppes be thin, and that
the upper lyppe foldeth up, and the nether down, declare that man to be a
deceauer, and a thief.

The lyppes great, like the dog, declare that man to be a deceyuar and an
accuser.

The nether lyppe of the woman, large, hanging and very ruddy: declares a most
earneste will to coeate, and sometime to be a harlote.

The lyppes congruently thin, and not much folding outward, declare that man
to be secret in all his doings or in all things (commonly) wary,
Iracundious, and of a synguler wit.

Of the Teathe. The.xx. Chapter.
THe teathe small and weak in chewyng, and thynne set, and short, declare
that man to be weak, of a good wit, of a tender capacity, gentle,
faithful, trusty, secret, fearful, of short life, and congruente to good,
or evil.

The ththe not equipolent or all alyke, in quantity, and in the standing of the
gummes, certain be shall narrow, certain large, certain thynne, and certain
thyck set, declare that manne to be warye, of a good wit, bold, dysdaynfull
envious, and lyghtlye or easily brought to good or evil.

The tethe very long, and as they were sharp, and sumwhat thynne set, and
strong in the chewynge, declare that man to be enuyous: wicked, a gluttone,
bold, and as he were unshamefast, a lyare, false or deceatfull, unfaithful,
and suspicious.

The teathe cytryne, or brown in color, whether they be short, or long:
declare that man to be more foollyshe then wise, a gross feder, soon
crediting, of a trubled or an encombred understanding, often deceatfull, a
lyare, envious, a coueter of other men's goods, and suspicious.



The teathe great, and large, whether they declyne or bear out, or in, whether
they be thynne, or thick set, declare that man to be vain or envious,
lascivious, of a gross feading; soon crediting, simple, deceatfull, a lyare,
and of a tender capacity: and wyttyd to the Ox.

The teathe strong, and thycke set: declare that manne to live long by
nature, a desyrer of bewtyfull things, of a dull capacytye, and gross wit,
stout and hardye, much self wylled, or a follower to much of his own
reasone ^ a bearer or teller of news, and soon credyting to one.

The teathe weak set, small, thin, and slendre, declare that man to be
weak, of short life, warye or wyttie, of a good capacity, soon crediting,
common lie shamefaste, tractable, gentle, and faithful.

The teathe strong, and thick set, declare that man to live tongue,
leachearous, a riotous waster of his proper goods, bold, strong, dyscrete,
and self willed.

The teathe long like dogs teathe, and strong set and properly bearinge
outward, declare that man to be a very gluttonous person and fierce, angrye,
compared to the dog, or bore: such Cokles knew to be deuourers of their own
substance, great hau^ters to tauernes, and ale houses, deceuars, horehunters
or maynteiners of hores, and sometime murderers espectiallye if any other
proportion strengthens the same.

The teathe weak set, thynne, and very small, declare the hole body thorough
out to be weak as Rasis affirms.

The teathe of a person sick, most dry, with out any moystenes in them,
declare a most sure token or sign of death: because the radical moystnes in
him is consumed: and such bodies, be like to a laumpe without oyte.

Of the tongue. The. xxi. Chapter.


THe tongue over swyft to speak, declares that man to be more simple, then
wise, of a gross wit, and dull vndrestanding, sone creadyting, and lightly
conuertible to good, or evil.

The tongue that stutteth or stamereth in speakinge, declares that manne to be
very simple, vain or a lyare, unstable, iracundious, soon conuer tible fro
anger, willing to sarue, and weak.

The tongue very great and roughe, declares that man to be wary, malicious,
congruentlye willing to sarue, vain or a liar, dysdaynfull, secret, a
betraier, a bearer or teller of news, fearful, wicked, ungracious, having
congruentlye sufficient of many things.

The toungue subtyl or thyn, declares that man to be very ingenious,
lyghtlie or for a light cause fearful, soon creditynge, and conuertyble to
good or evil.

The tongue that lyspeth or stamereth: declares that person to fear, to
drink wine: and sumtyme he susteyneth debilitie of the brain, and thereof it
comes, that the drounke do stammer, stut, or lyspe, because the vapoures of
the wine drunk in, into that part of the tongue named the sponge, enlarge the
same, and change it fro his natural state and form.

Hypocras in his secrettes says, that the heaviness of the tongue in a young
man, after his lightenes, declares sudden death: if God permit the same.

The tongue great and large: declares that man to have a rude wit: and that
phlegmatic humores reaste in the brain, or in the rest of his body: as
Cocles many times noted it.

Conciliator says that, that person, that speaks his words at twyse, or
pronounces them with great difficulty, declares a melancholicke quality.

The tongue come swyfte by mouynge, and corruptnes, causyng a repeatynge of
words: declares that manne to be a fool, violente or hasty in wrath, and
Iracundious: for the mouablenes and caliditie of the spyryttes, festinating or
hastininge the pronou^ciation* without consideracion.

The tongue in manner immouable, like to a stone, declares that manne to be
slow in his pase, and in his worckes or doings. And the tongue subtle,
represents a subtyle wit: for the decente matter, that is, of the humore
and spyryte, although it declares a hot, and perauenture a cholerycke
complextion.

Ptholome the philosopher says, that the tongue long and read, declares
that person to be wyttye, because it declares laudable humors, and in
kysses may much be conceived herin: for Cocles consyderinge a certain
creature, felt the tongue put fourth most pleasant, to a branch, whereof
he knew that the virtue of the musckles is voluntary.

Ptholome also says, that the tongue white of color: declares poverty, and
misery to that person.

The tongue in the natural color infected, declares an infection, and evil
dysposition especially of the breast and bellye, as Conciliator affyrmeth.

The tongue long, great, and round, and that it may lick the nose therewith,
declares that parsone to follow the nature of the Ox: as Cocles noted the
same, by a neighbor of his.

Of the sygnyfycacion of the voice. The. xxii. Chapter.
HEre Aristotle does Physiognomate by the voice, affirming a doble knowledge,
after the doble diposition of the voice: for says he, the voice may be
heavy and dyscensed, or high, that is great, to a basse orgayne pype: and
such a voice (says he) declares that manne to be strong: or if it may
be small and low that is not great, but soft, which declares such a
parsone to be ferfull: And the causes of these sygnifycationes be taken by the
complextion or quality of the heart, and lunges, in the hotnes and coldness of
them: For these members when they be hot, cause or make large and sounding
pippes, and much breath by the largenes of those fynewes: Wherefore much
breathe, in such large and great sounding pypes, make a great and gross or
base voice, like to a large, and great, or base or gane pype blown, which
sounds very big, and baselie, and econtratio. When these members be
cold, they make those synewes or vain pypes, small, and narrow, and little
breathe, by the which is caused a high and shryll voice: as the like appears
in small organe pypes, which blowe^, make a shryll sound: and the like
knowledge of this is in men, and little women, the me^ for their hotnes, and
women for their coldness, and this well appears by Auerois, where he writes (de
signis temperantie pulmonis) saying that the fortitude of the voice does
ensewe like the largenes of the veins, and the largenes declares the hotnes
of the complexcion or quality of the lunges, and the causeis, that the
fortytude of the voice declares necessarilye hotenes, but the cold
complexion, declares straytnes of the ways, that is, of the veins, and
debilitie of the voice: The Philosopher, in an other distinctyon says also,
that they which speak great, be Injurious, compared to the ass: And they
which sore call, be foolish: in a basse manner, and end small, be
iracundyo^us, and to be pleased, compared to the Ox, and to the co^lines of
the voice. And they that speak small, safte, fayntlye or weryedlie, speak
fearfullye, and compared to women, and to the decentnes of the voice: they
which call in a big or basse voice not parplexed, be compared to bandagges,
and to the comlines thereof. They that call saftlie, without any tension or
reaching out, be gentle, compared to the sheep: They which call small and
fearcilie, be Iracundious, compared to the go^tes. These hitherto, be after
the mind and judgment of Aristotle, and the same like affirms Albertus, and
Conciliat^r, and Hieronimus de: Manfredis, a bononiane, but yet Cocles writes
of the same in a more ample manner, and with other words as after shall appear,
bringing in a contrary reason to these before First Cocles says, that he which
has a great, high, and sounding voice, declares to be bold, eloquente, and
a warrioure. The voice mean in subtilnes, and grosnes, declares such a
parsone, to be sapiente, for saying, true, and just: for the contrary cause,
he which speaks or talks fast, especially having a small or shryll voice
declares such a parsone to be obstinate or malaparte, a fool, importunate,
and a lyare. The voice also great, to be iracundious, and of an evil nature.
The voice sweet (or fawningly as I may nameit) is enuyous, and suspicious The
pleasantnes or bewtyfulnes of the voice, declares folishnes, cochebraynes, and
stoutnes. The swiftnes of talk, declares a hot complextione, and the same
affermeth, Albertus, Loxius, Palemon, Phylemon, and Conciliator, under those
words. Again the voice great, to be iracundious, peruerce and of an evil
nature, and the reason is, for the intemperate caliditie. He that speaks
hastily, having a shril voice, declares to be froward, obstinate, or
malaparte, a fool, importunate, a liar, irefull, and always evil condicioned.
The voice alper, like the crane, to be envious, teteyning rancoure, and
secret hatred in the heart, and aboundinge in melancholic humores: He that
speaks his words cuttedlye, not with a long breathe: declares a vileness or
infection of nature, through the coldness of the heart, and perauenture with
moystnes applicated. And he also which has a heavy voice, is servant to his
proper belly: the reason is, because the voice heavy, proceeds of the
debylitie of the virtue, which can not breathe out plentifulnes of air to
move the muscles of the breaste, by which proceadith slouggyshnes, so that the
wit cannot be applied in study, nor labor with the body, or use bodily
labor. They that speak big inflexible, by the commotion of the breast: be
manlye, unapt to be taught or to learn, and hardy, compared to the lions.
They which have a slow and basse voice, be peasable, and joyous or merry: and
certain of these parsones, be just and affable manered. And they which speak
and sound their words thorough the nosethrelles, be babblers, liars,
malycious, and envious, and of them there be which joy in evil, and such
follow the nature of the Ducke, as Cocles by experience found true.

These few examples gentle reader, of the sygnyficacions of the voice, for
this time suffice here: which I shall desire thee to accept in good part,
bearyng with my grossenes in the traunslation of them, such as they be: And
in so dooynge, I have my hearts desire.

Of the breath. The. xiii. Chapter.
Much breathe and wind, argues aboundancye of spyrite, and the contrary is
after two manners: as the tone by smalnes or lack of the lunges, and the other
by the straytnes of the breast: and therefore a beast much breathyng, is of
much fortytude, and might, by reasone of the caliditie resoluyng the
moisture, and especially the dew moisture: ordinate breathe, between great
and small, being a mean, declares quietness of the heart and to be a man well
to be pleased: and to breathe loud without cause, and to make huge and long
syghes, witnesses a most melancholic qualytie to be, and when the breath is
cut between, being ordinate, and at the last with the straytnes or parplexity
of the mind comes out troubled with syghyng: declares that parsone to be
encombred and detented with thought and vexacion of the mind: and to some, to
be immixte with evil, especially, if the head quauer or shake much withal.
And look, when with bewaylinge or syghing he brings or casts the eyes
crokedly or wrythingly, he then soroweth for that comes into mind, searching
or deuisi^g with himself the manner how that he may best handle and do the
same. He that breaths with a certain noise in the delayinge or stoppinge of
the nosethrelles, declares cruelty, brutish furiousnes, and violence or
hastines: which delaying also is referred to the passion, in which the
troubled spirit and thycke rests: as though it were accidental caused by
running or laboryng: and then they be violent or hasty and iracundious. when
the breath shall be short, and thycke, and by a much cutting of, stopped between,
is Judged fearful and weak. And he which with the syghing and countenance,
is berest with a certain godliness, and inspyratione, such a parsone is named,
to be taken and wrapped, in furious love. Aristotle in his secre^ces to
Alexander says, that when thou shall see a parlone much and often behold
the, and when thou regardest him, fears, and of this blusheth or is a shamed,
and especyally if against his will he sygheth, and the tears appear standing
in his eyes, this parsone (says he) loves, and fears thee. And if it be
contrary, he shall be enuyous, and contem^ne the. The breath loud cut between,
with the syghing like, declares sorrow, and sadness for things lost. Certain
of the worthy Physicians affirm, that the breathe passing out cold, by the
mouth and nosethrelles: declarethe death at hand, or shortelye after. The
Philosopher Ptholomie also says, that he which wepeth for nothing, or for
light cause, shall be always poor, and neadye.

Of laughter. The. xxiiii. chapter.


A Fool much, and often laugheth, and they also, which have the mylte great:
and econuerso. The bellows of the mouth that lightly laugheth, declares that
man to be simple, vain, unstable soon crediting, of a gross wit, and
fedinge, willing to sarue, but not secret.

The bellowse, or hollow of the cheke that seldom laugheth, and soon has
done, declares that man to be stable, a niggarde, or sparer, warye or wittye,
of a parfyt understanding, secret, faithful and glorious.

The hollow of the cheke, hardly moved to laugh declares that man to be
sapiente, much or very self wylled, wary, ingenious, patiente, a niggarde,
studious of his art, iracundious, and a surmyser.

The hallowe of the cheke, or bellowse that lightlye laugheth, and in laughing
often cougheth or ga^eth or wryeth the head, declares that manne to be
varyable or diverse, envious, soon creditinge* and co^uertible to good or evil.

The hollow of the cheke, or bellowse that wryeth in the laughing, with
derision of an other: declares that man to be arrogante, false or deceatfull,
hard to be moved, Iracundious, a lyare, and sumwhat given to be an vtterer of
secrettes, or a betrayer.

He which sufficiently laugheth; is benign, beloved with all men, endamaged or
grieved lyghtlye, and passes very little of, or for any: and he is of an
apparent comlynes, compared to sanguine parsones, or to Jouiall.

If they sufficiently laughe, it declares iocundi^^c, and a good complextion
in that manne, and they much joy in coeating, especially when the lies look
cheerful and merely. But yet to much laughter (as Aristotle to Alexander
wry^teth) remoueth reueren^y, and causes old age: suerly with them, is no
assured fellow ship to be had, because there is no stability, nor secretenes in
them, worthy the* trustinge to, although they ^e saruisable, after certain.

He which laugheth loud or with a certain noise is inucrieu^d^ous, and
Conciliator says, that he which in laughing cougheth* or susteyneth
difficultnes of breath, is judged inuericundious, and a tirant: and this Cocles
found most true in a certain prince

Whose bellouse of the mouth often smyleth or co uertly laugheth: declares an
evil mind, and perverse cogitacion, and a lyare, and such universally, be
malicious, and dyssemblers: and there is no trust in the^, or to be given to
them: especially when it is conjoined with the accydentes of the mind: and if
their eye liddes fold to a cloud, they be sleares of men, thieves and
robbers by the high way, or pirates, as Cocles many* times. noted it. To
smyle or laughe couertlye to himself, in speaking or talkinge, declares
foolyshnes in such a person, as Cocles noted the same, in a certain
countriman of his: and such says he abound in the melancholicke quality.

Of the chynne. The. xxv. chapter.


THe chynne large and great with much (...), declares that man to be
peaseable; of a mean capacity and gross wit* faithful, secret, and lightly
conuertible to good or evil.

The chynne sharp, and congruentlye full with flesh, declares that man to be
of a good understanding, of a high heart or arrogaunt, and suffycyent
laudable of fedyng.

The chynne as it were double, by a certain vale or hollow dentinge in,
declares that man to be peasable, of a gross wit, vain, soon creaditing,
congruently saruisable to one, and a very surmyser, and secret of his doings.

The chyn sharp, and subtle or thynne in flesh: declares that man to be
bold, a warryer or fyghter, Ireful, disdainful, fearful at times, weak, and
somewhat content to sarue.

The chynne recuruate, with a vale or hollow, in the ioyninge or knyttyng of
the Jaws, and in flesh lean, as it were sharp, declares that man to be
most wicked or ungracious, simple, bold proud or hautie, a threatner,
enuyous, wary in expenses, deceatefull, soon angrye. Iracundious, a betrayer
or traytoure, a thief, and a surmyser.

Note that Physiognomie and ^awmestrye do more declare by experience* then
reasone, but yet (says Cocles) somewhat may be judged in the pryncypaller
members which give or express the magnytude and smalnes of matter fro the
beginning of generation.

The chinne long declares aboundauncie of matter: and by reason of the
caliditie, it is over much lengthened out: yea they be Iracundyous, aspere,
and cruel, as Dalemon, and Constantyne affirm.

The chynne small, and short, declares that man to be full of naughtynes, and
vices, and one whose company is utterly to be eschewed, being a man most
envious and vncurtyous: and this manne Palemon applies to the venomous
serpent. The chin round, declares that parsone to be effeminate* conditioned
like the woman: as Pythagoras writes. And if there be aboundauncie of flesh
under the chynne, reachynge to the throat: declares that man to be most
luxurious, especially if either hole be found in the the chekes. The chynne
very long descendynge: declares that manne to be full of wyles and
deceates. And if in the myddle division of the chynne it be not much de^e ^^at,
^t is a toke^ of venereousnes, and that with me^ such shall win grace and
favor: as Cocles many times noted the same in them which haunted hatlottes.
The chynne curuate, that the ^y^^^s be as it were in a va^ye, declares rudenes
of wit* and to be most wicked manered or condicioned; unfaithful: and of these
there be, which b^ the^es, (as certain say) unless old age cause this, for
the loss of teathe. Aristotle also says, that they become less balde th^^
other* which have the chynne divided as it were in two parts.

Of the nature of the bearde. The. xxvi. chapter.


THe bearde in the masculyne, grows after fourten years, by little and
little, fro Day to day, and then after spryng the thyghes fast: and note, that
such hear soryngeth of the superfluity of meat, proceeding through the
fumosities: which superascende unto the parts of the chekes or Jaws as a fume
passing out of the holes or chi^kes of an oven, or furnace, until the ways or
passages be stopped, that they may no more ascend, and so like issewe out the
hears in man, which make the bearde: The color of the bearde sometime,
expresses the qualities, and quantities of the humors, but yet Cocles never
saw a bearde in color like to Juorye, because the phlegmatic humor is not
mighty to generate hears in color like, for the lack of caliditie,
eleuatyng the matter congruente to the generation of hears.

Some may argue, and say, that we see sometime women have beardes or bearded,
and yet they be of a phlegmatic complexcion: This happens says Cocles
because the humors be so subtle, that by nature they be hot, that of them
also spryng hears sometime on the cheakes or Jaws, and properly about the
mouth where the more heat abounds: and this woman is named bearded,
understand that such a woman is very luxuriouse, through her hot and moist
co^plexcion, and that she is of a strong nature, and virill or manly
condicioned: but the woman sufficiently naked and bare of hear, especially
about the mouth* (after phisiognomie) is named to be of a good complexcyon,
that is fearful, chaste, shamefast, weak, gentil, and obedient for the more
part: but the bearded women be contrary, as above appears: here rises a
doubt, why women have no beardes as well as men. To this Don't may be answered,
when it is demanded, why (...) have beardes and not women, that this cause may
be by the especial workyng and by the material and final cause, because it
is as an ornamente to the man. Note that in every kind, the male is bewtifuller
th^n the female, and the bearde is also as a defensione to the Jaws, the which
the woman needs not so much as the man, because the fences and fealyng is
stronger or mightier in me^, whereby they may the better endure to go bare
headed, and barefoted in the sharp winter without harm to them, which very
few women can do: and understand also* y^ al women in a manner have no
beardes: and why because all the humors in which ma^s bearde is engre^dred, in
women runs to the me^sture the which is in them, by a certain passage, and
runnynge, after the age, or increase and decrease of the Moon: as sumtyme once
and twyse in the month: whose issue out is named to be the flux, or
superfluous fume, but this runs, when the woman is not with child, and in
them that be past. xii. years older and this ^enstrue sometime in women is
altered and changed to milk in the breasts or pappes. By the aforesaid
appears, that the thycknes of the beard, and much hear: nes universally, is
judged of the substaunciall heat, and moisture, and of the natural vygorte or
strength. Here it may be say^d, that me^ children be hot, and moist, and
yet be not bearded: and the reason is because the fumositie and superfluity,
which is the matter of the hears of the head and else wheare, runs to the
nurishinge and increasinge of them as all these very well appear by
Constantine. Wherefore how much the more heat, and so much the more
aboundauncie of hear on the head: therefore beware of them which have to much
hear on the head, especially when he is of an aduste complextion. Beware of
them espetially, which have a red bearde, because they represent the
aboundauncie of adustion and caliditie, and such be luxurious, deceauers, and
stars, and in whom the principal heap of vices test. Whose bearde is
comlye, and well fashioned* declares that manne to be of a good nature, and of
a reasonable condition* and congruente to all things, and manered after h^s
bringing up: but in the contrary manner it is of them, which have the bearde
ill fashioned, as appears in gealded parsones, which after they have lost
both their testycles, be very much changed fro the nature of men* into the
nature o^ women, as Arystotle says. Undrestande, that Cocles saw many which
wearing long beardes, came to ^ melancholicke madness, or folyshnes. And Cocles
saw also, many parsones with him, that after the full growth of their long
beardes, were throwe^ headlonge into myseries, and kept under: and also pry^ces
having the like beardes, driven out of their bomynyons: and of the bearde
which comes soon horie, he pronounces the like* because their nature
draws nere to the feminine.

Of the face* The. xxvii. chapter.


THe face which often sweateth of a light moving: declares that man to be of
a hoar nature, vain or enuiouse, luxuriouse, of a gross wit and gluttonous.

The face very fleshye, declares that man to be ferefull, congruentlye merye,
large in expenses, discrete, luxuriouse, of an evil memory, sone credityng
things hard, sufficiently faithful to one, of an importunate will in
desyryng vain and impossible things in (vnwished hap) enuiouse or froward,
and sufficiently conuertible to good or evil, and very presumptuouse or haute
of mind.

The face lean declares that man to be warye or witty, circumspect in his
doings, fatigable, of a good understanding as the mercuriales have: more
cruel or enuiouse, then godly, of a tender capacity, and dysdaynfull.

The face very small, and round, declares figuratively that man to be simple,
fearful, weak, of a gross fedynge, and of an evil memory.

That face which is belpekled, or otherwise to a dronkarde: declares that man
to be a drinker of good wine after the choice of the nose, as the proverb is,
luxuriouse, vain or a liar, strong, and one that will lightly or very sone be
drunk.

That face which is like to an Irefull countenance: declares that man that
he will lyghtlye and sone be angrye, and retain anger long in mind.

The face long, and lean, declares that man to be very bold, in tongue, and
dead, simple, a braller, proud, en^uriouse, deceatfull, gross or hard
manered, godly and congruently luxuriouse.

The face commune between long and round, lean and gross: declares that man
to be cogruente to all things, but sooner to good then evil.

The face very gross, and large, declares that man to be more simple then
wise, of a gross wit, and dull understanding, dull in doing matters, often
vayn gloriouse, sone crediting, conuertible to al things, luxuriouse, vain,
obliuiouse or forgeatfull, in evil false or crafty, an ill reporter or
slanderer byhynde ones back, and a supplanter or surmiser.

The face very flat, or plain, without very high puffyng or bearyng up:
declares that man to be of a good condition, having a sufficient love to all
things, seruiseable to one, or content to serve one, sone credityng, not
very warye, sufficient faithful; and more simple then witty, and commonly
quiet, and well bearyng the loss of weighty things, by misfortune.

That face which denteth somewhat in, and is more lean then gross, declares
that man to be iniuriouse, enuiouse, deceatfull, a liar, bold, a chyde^ or
braaller, cruel, laboriouse, of a gross wit, vain, very simple, and of a dull
understanding, and sometime a murderer, especially if he be adust wanne or
yelowesh in color as Cocles knew the like.

The face mean to the disposicion of the others before but more fat, then
lean: declares that man to be true in talk, willing to be bound to serve,
commonly ingeniouse, wary and pertitie of memory.

The face very crooked, long, and lean: declares that man to be of a gross
wit, (as it were to all good things) simple, of a dull understanding, not
faithful, enuiouse, and of a light occasyon malicious.



The face larger fro the forehead downewarde to the joining, or knitting of the
cheke bones or Jaws, and higher then after or behind, declares that man to
be simple in doing matters, in talk enuiouse, partly fearful, partly bold,
sometime sparinge, a ly are, vain, deceatfull, stout of mind, a braller,
weak, a gross seder, and of an evil wit.

The face well disposed or fashioned in flesh, color, and in his parts, as
in the eyes, and eye lyddes, in which is a pleasauntnes and comlines: declares
that man generallye, to be well dysposed to do both vices, and virtues.

The face pale in color, declares that manne to be parfytlye healthefull,
very malicious, a betrayer or vtterer of secrets, a lyare, proud, vain,
luxuryous, sumwhat sparynge, envious, presumptuous, a gros feder, not
sufficient faithful, nor trusty.

The face well cou^oured: declares that manne to be of a laudable dysposicion,
in his or after his complextion merye, soon creditynge, congruentlye
saruisable to other, of a good understanding, and lightlye conuertyble to all
things.

The face hollow, that is, fro the beginning of the forehead unto the end of
the chynne, that the nose and mouth be, as it were in a vallye, argues that
man to be evil manered, especially if the face be aduste, or wanne in color:
Cocles saw such, to be murderers, robbers by the high way or pirates and
thieves: and this was his judgment often in such parsones.

The face small, and yelowyshe in color, argues that man to be ungracious,
vicious, a deceauer, and often given to be drunk, as Cocles many times noted
it.

The face as it were fiery red incouloure, especially with many read
spots, like to little pustles, declares that manne to have a very craftye
and wily wit.

Of the sygnyfycacyon of the ears. The. xxviii. Chapter.


TThe ears express the temperaunce, and the proporcion of the principal
members and specially the brain, which experience certifieth us, because the
brain sometime sends out an intoxicate matter very fulsum behind the ears,
where is engendered an impostome, after the diversities of the humors.

The ears great, and thick, declare that man to be simple or a fool,
slothful, a gross feader, of an evil memory, and of a dull capacity, and
long lived.

The ears very small, and thynne: declare that man to be of a good wit,
understanding, and wysdom, secret, peaceable, warye, fearful, honest, clenly,
somewhat sparyng, shamefast, vayn gloriouse, bold or hardy, of a good memory,
and sufficiently content to serve.

The ears somewhat over long, that is, above the commune form, or large by an
ouerthwarte manner, declare that man to be bold, unshamefast, vayn, slothful,
folyshe, content to serve, and may endure but a while to labor, and a great
feader.

And in a manner, al they which have great or big ears (as Cocles has noted
it) have a short neck, a well facioned head, and they be sanguyne, and for
the more part tendyng to choler, or to gross sanguyne somewhat aduste: and
these persons be impacyent, and sone or for a light cause angrye, and for that
Aristotle nemeth them nidiottes, but that they be of a good condition, after
their fury past, and also of good memory and long lived, because in them is a
good proporcion between hot and moist: and he that is a mean is temperate in
his doings. The ears great and rysyng high or long, declare folyshnes and a
babbler.

They which have over small ears, be condicioned to the ape, and great ears,
after the ass, whose properties both of the axe, and ass, be well known:
Ptholomie the Philosopher says, that the, ears great bowyng downward, argue
riches, and when the ears be very small, it signifies paucitie of matter, and
the weak virtue of the brain, and it argues also a choleryke matter, of the
which be caused subtyl spirits, and therefore such be wittye in ungracious
works, and be thieves, nidiottes, (and so couetouse) that they desire all
things, and through their concupiscence, they be luxuriouse, and peradventure
understood of the immoderate desires, and not by the power or virtue of the
matter. The ears bearyng or hangyng very great out, (as Palemon says)
declare foolyshues and garrulitie, and to be also couetouse. The ears also as
they were cutted, and very short: declare (as Loxius says) a dyuerle
dysceate. The ears fashyoned, that the connexed lines semicircularlye, be i^
the mydle sumwhat flat toward the center, and of mean bygnes, which may
agree decently to the head, do witness a goodness of nature in that person. And
the ears over round: declare that person to be unapt to learn or to be
taught. The ears long and narrow: declare enuiousnes. The ears hanging flat
to the head: declare dulnes, and slouthfulnes, as Albertus affirms: note
also, that small ears declare short life. and to be perfect of hearing, through
the virtue of heat. The ears very great and far bearyng out as Consiliator
says, declare foolyshnes, garrulitie, and imprudencie. And Ptholomie the
Philosopher says, that he which has thynne and dry ears, shall never have
substance or be rich, and it deciadeth a very choleric complexion, of
which proceeds an exhauste intencion in congruente operacyons, and argues
also most instabilitie.

Of the throat. The. xxix. Chapter.
THe throat clear, whether it be lean, or fat, declares that manne to be
vain glorious, envious, fearful, lascivious, lyghtlye lying, congruently
wary, much Irefull, and long dysdaynfull.

The throat lean, and thynne, and in which the veins appear: declares that
man to be of an evil fortune, weak, slouthful, a gross feder. soon
crediting, and conuertyble to good or evil.

Of the sygnyfycacions of the neck. The. xxx. chapter.
First the neck great, not by reason of the fleshines, but by reason of the
bygnes of the bones and sinowes: be strong. lykened to the masculyne kind
(after the manners of the mind he vndrestandeth) because the male in his kind,
has a great neck, and lively: The neck mean, between long and short,
declares a hot complexion, and boldness. The neck long, and slendre, lykened
to the femynine kind: when the neck is great and lyueliy, as I have above
said argues fortitude of the brain, and by the consequente, caliditie of the
heart, like as there be men, in their kind.



The neck great by fleshines, and not by reason of the magnitude of the
sinowes, and bones, and as. Rasys adds to, stiff and strong, be
Iracundiouse: and likened to the apparante congruencie in Irefull bulls
chafed, which then inspeciall have such a disposicion of the neck: and as
Rasis adds to, be also hasty in their doings. The neck sufficiently bygge,
not by reason of the fleashlynes, but by reason of the sinowes and bones, and
congruente long also, be hardy, compared to the lion, and this is especially
true, when the head, and neck be proporcioned so, that it is also of a mean
magnitude, as the same Constantine affirms. The four me of the head, if it
shall be of mean bygnes. and the neck somewhat great, declares the goodness of
the complexcyon and disposicio^, but if the head shall be small, and neck
great, declares abundance of matter, and his superfluousnes, and the lack
also of the informatyue virtue and such a head as it is said is fatigated, by
much pain, and unquietness of the head.

The neck very long, and thynne, be fearful, compared to the heart, but yet
that man which has assender and long neck, bearyng it up strayghte, is not,
so much fearful, as the heart. The neck very short be deceitful and wyly
begilers or full of wyles, compared to the wolf. And this sign is taken, by
the mane^r apparante in men, and beasts, for men entending to go closely in a
matter not to be seen, draw in the neacke, and so appear the shorter: as the
like may be considered in the catte, when she steals upon the mouse Some say
also that the neck long, declares long feate, and the neck slender, slendre
fete, wherefore the^ neck hollow and flat, declares debilitie of the
sinowes, and sickenesses, after the conioyning, but the neacke much fieashie
declares him to be a liar, vsyng most fylthy excess, and the neacke mean,
witnesses goddnes: And the nape of the neck next the head, when it shall be
heary, witnesses that man to be strong, and hardye, because it declares
caliditie. The neck longhauyng a middle part, declares malice in that
parson: and they say also, to be a fool, weak, fearful, and a loud
clatterer, but great with a certain proliritie not very fleashlye, argues
that person to be strong, and stout. The neck styffe, and strong, to be
Iracun diouse, hasty, unapt to be taught, and the virtue of the mind, and the
humanity also negatiuely (they say)* to concur to such an operacyon. The
neck weak or lose, that it seems to hang, unable to endamage and to be
deceatful it declares. The neck great and fleashie, with a certain shortness,
declares him to be a ^oole, and a great feader. and when between the
conioyninge of the shouldr^ points, and beginning of the neck, shall be a
certain berynge or bunchynge up, as of the knottes growing sharp, Cocles noted
those parsones to be proud and haute of stomach, for the more part. The neck
declinynge: un apt to be taught. And bearyng the neck to much vpryght,
declares him not alonly unapt to be taught, but also high minded, and
disobedient, receiving no admonicion. The neke bending upward, to be haute or
proud, stubburne or ungentle, and void of a^ honesty. The neck bending to
the parts of the breaste, declares that man to be much encombred with the
thoughts and cares of the mind: but su^^ime with nigardshyp, and sumtime with
malygnitye: of the neck shall decline to the left part: to be a ^hurl and
doggysh. The neck styffe, and great whether it be long, and that it styfiye
bends: argues him to be a gready catcher. The neck crooked after the
latytude of the body, fro the right or leafte side, argues him to be
deceatfull, a wary talker, and unfaithful: as Arystotle affyrmeth, eschew
utterly his company, which is wrye necked down to the Joining of the
shoulder points, for such be ungracious, disse^blers and deceateful, as Cocles
noted the same in melancholicke parso^es. The neck meant between long and
short, be endued with algood virtues. The neck long, declares that man to be
simple, not secretee, fearful, weak, enuyous, a lyare, deceatfull,
indoctrynall, and soon conuer^yble to good or cuyll. The neck short,
declares that man to be wary, somewhat sparynge, deceatfull, secret, stable
discrete, ita cundyous, ingenious, of a great understanding, congruently
strong, loving peace or quietness, and government, and fearful in all things.

Of the color of the hole body. The. xxxi. Chapter.
ANd that which we have spoken or declared of the me^bres, is the like to be
judged of the hole body. For if thou considre the body in the feling thou
shalt promptly know the quality, or co^pleccyon thereof. Wherefore the body
safte and slender, and the skin clear with softnes of the flesh,
especially, if somewhat ruddye about the knees, declares that person to be
sanguyne of complexcyon The body white, fleashy, and saft, declares that
person to be Phlegmatic of complexcio^. The body fuskyshe or swart or
reddyshe, declares that person to be choleric of complexcyon. The body
bleke, blackishe, pale or palishe, declares a mela^cholyke quality, or ad ust
choler: Even so the body wrincled, having great or many sinews, and thycke
skynned, declares that person also, to be of a choleryke complexcyon. The body
slender, and the skin thyn, and white, to be phlegmatike, and weak. Further
of the knowledge of diverse complexcyons. The color white, and as it were
inward clear and reddyshe, declares equally a common quality, and such a
color ought to be (as it were) through out the hole body, naturally, well
dysposed. There be three places in which ye virtue of color is showed. First in
the face, secondly in the hands, and thyrdly in the breaste. If such a
color be fierte red, declares him to be Idle, especially if his eyes move
fast. If such a rednes be fuskishe or swarte in color, declares a gross
blood, and to be a deceauer: such a color of Albertus is named (^nopos),
which is a fiery, dark read:* but such a color may very well be named a
deuelyshe color as the like was noted in one. If such a read color* draw
nere to grennes or as it were to graynes more the^ to whitnes, declares black
c^ole^, and his qualityes: and* if to subtle cit^innes (as it were to
whyttynesse) which is wont commonly to be in healthful persons, and this
without great matter, declares the sheading of nature, with the loss of the
spirits (and especially this) if the eyes be, or stand deape, and moveable,
such then be taken or ravished with the passion of love, which undoubtedly (as
Locles says) is a greuouse sickness. The virtue of such love is this, that
it ex^incteth virtues, and dulleth or darcke^^th understanding, causing
leacherye, making the fearful bold,* and the sobre in manner frantyke And if
whi^nes shall abound, and that readnes so little that it can scarsely be seen,
declares a Phlegmatycke condition, and such a color was wont of the
autent^ckes to be named a clayishe color. And if to this color, be redu^s
^dmixt to, declares an evil Phlegmatic, and his condicio^s: and this color
is named a leadyshe color, comixt with swartyshe and grenishe color, and this
is the outwardest degree of a maliciouse complexcyon, that is, that heat
declares the mortificacion natural. The fealyng temperate and good cosysteth
in the dew proporsyon of the first qualities, and more approaches to
caliditie and ienyty, the^ to coldness or aspernes, and more to fleashynes, then
to leannes: such a felyng verily argues the goodness of the complexcyon, y^
is, the equal complexcyon with the goodness of the wyite, and understanding.

The veins very large and apparante, declare a cho^crycke parson, and his
conditions. The veins narrow, and as they were flat, and sometime leadish in
color, declare a melancholic nature or complexcion. The veins deep in the
body, seem to declare a Phlegmatic nature. The veins in due proporcion
apparante and notable, declare a sanguyne nature

Of the shoulder points.
THe shoulder points lean and small: declare that man to be weak, fearful,
peaseable, and may not endure to labor, sone credytyng, and to all things
conuertible.

The shoulder points large and great, declare that man to be strong, to much
constante or hard to be moved, faithful, of a gross wit, and feadyng,
simple, a paynful laborer, sufficiently feadig, and soue quieted.

The shoulder points crokyng inward: declare that man to be wary, slothful,
secret, ingeniouse, and a surmiser.

The shoulder points flat and broad, declare that man to be simple, a sparer
or niggarde, laboryouse, modeste in all his doings, especially in tongue and
feadyng, quyete, sone credyting, and conuertyble to good or evil.

The shoulder points unequal, as the one greater then the other, declare that
man to be slouthful, of a dull vnderstandig* of a gross wit and feadyng* sipie,
of a dull capacity, faithful, bold, a niggard or one hard to be moved, and
somtymes an vtterer of secrets, false, and not credityng one.

The shoulder points very high standing up, declare that man to be in manners
of an open life, enuiouse, simple, vain, a liar, unstable, bold,
inuerycundiouse, and a braller or quareier.

Of the Phisiognomye of the arms. The. xxxii. Chapter.
OF the arms needs not much to speak seeing there is none so slendre wytted
(as I Judge) but that can readily say, and Judge those men to be mighty and
strong, which have well brawned arms, or great sinews and many: which make a
body strong. Contrary, the skin fleshie, and the senowes not so diverse land
many to be seen, declare such to be Phlegmatike, and sanguyne, and prove to
cowardnes. The arms monstrous long, declare holdnes, fortitude, and
ignobilitie, and with this short life. The arms crooked, in respect of the
stature, or great boned, declare those persons to be unthankful, shameless,
couetouse, ill reporters or backebiters, enuiouse, haute or proud, and not
much differyng fro the^, which have heary arms, which also be proud or
reprocheful, veneriouse, wielie, crafty, unstable, and talketyue or full of
words. When the arms shall be so long, that they reche to the knees, argues
subtylnesse, arrogancy, and covetousness to reygne or govern. Aristotle also
says, that these signs declare boldness* goodness, with largenes in expe^sis,
and such king Alexander was thought to have. The arms so mo^struous long, that
they reach to the thighs, declare that those persons be ungracious, Joying
in other men's harms, and enuyouse: and many authors say that this sign
declares fearfulnes, ignorance, and a lover of discord. He which feadeth so
gredely, that he brings the mouth to the meat, and not with the hand
decently, for the evil fashioning thereof, and for the shortness, and crokednes
of the arms, declare those persons to be malicious, and enuyouse. The cubits
of the arms slendre and lean, if they shall be weak, declare him to be rude,
and unapt to be taught. The arms great in the bones, sinews, and fleashe,
declare a strong and mighty nature. And if the veins appear, declare a hot
complexcyon, when the arms be great, by soft fleashe, declare a feminine
nature.

The Phisiognomiers say, that the arms very hearye, declare that person to be
luxuryouse, Aristotle says, that he which when he talks moves the arm
much, by the mouyng of the hand: declares that person to be enuiouse*
eloquente of speech, and a deceauer. And he that refrayneth to move the hand
the like, is of a perfect understanding, well disposed and wittye of council, or
a wytty counsaylet.

Of the significacions of the breast and ribs. The. xxxiii. Chapter.
THe lion is not alonely known strong but also bold by the breast, as they
especially Judge which write of the natures of beasts: even like by that
conjecture we name that man to be strong and bold which has the breast well
bearyng out, and to be luxuriouse, malepert, or wanton in asking, or ill tonged,
lasciuiouse of talk, haute or proud, Iracundiouse, and somewhat spatyng.

The breast bushie of hear, and in the selyng hot, declares that man to be
choleric with his quality, that is to be bold, obstynate, and much Ireful.

The breast naked and bare of hear, declares that parson to be cold, and
Phlegmatic of nature, and inqualitie fearful, and slow. The breaste
vnequallye hounchyng ht^h out: on the ton part, we find such parsons to be
marcialies, wie^y begilers, and prone to al wickedness, to be naturally vain or
liars, and hipocrites. Even so they which be red on the breaste up to the
throat we find to be Irefull, contencyouse, presumptuouse, haute or arrogante,
inconstante, but yet fearful. And that breast we Judge most comely, which is
meanly filled with flesh, and meanelye heary, for this declares that person
to be discret, prudente, and of a good nature. They which be well ribbed and
strong after life, be compared to the masculyne k^d. And they which be weak
and small ribbed, after nature be likened to the feminine kind: and they which
he compassed about the ribs with fleashe bearyng out like as they were
blown: declare those persons to be talkatyue, and folyshe talkers, compared to
the ox and frogge. Note also that the ribs of the feminine kind be narrow
and small, and the great guts also for the lack of natural heat. And the
man, the contrary, by ^^s great heat.

Of the Phisiognomy of the hands. The.xxxiiii. Capter.
FOr as much as hitherto I have used an order in the phisiognomatyng of the
members, and that by the hands may diuerse^ye be noted, I will therefore speak
somewhat thereof. And first as Aristotle says, the greatness and shortness of
the fingers declares paucitie of matter, and a Phlegmatic compleccyon and
that nature may not direcie, of which the spirits be not like to nature, and
then they be folysh: and the like affirms Rasis, Consiliator, and the
Philosopher Ptholomie. Formica worthily says that the greatness of the hand,
comes sometime by much labor, and therefore they which labor much have
great hands. And sometime it comes by nature and the^ by the grennes of the
bones and sinews or muscles, such a person whether it be man or woman, be
naturally strong, and sometime also it proceadeth by the grossenes of the
flesh, and then such be drunkardes, luxuriouse and naturallye vile. Also he
which has great hands and the fyngers at the tops sharp or small such a
parson is couetouse, and false: understand also, that the fore finger, middle
finger, ryng finger, and ear finger, have three Jointes a piece. If therefore,
in each Joynte, shall be but one line, he shall dye suddenly: but if there
shall be two lines in each Joynte equal distante, declare a happy sign,
and to be an honest faithful man. And if in the middle Joynte of each finger,
shall be but one line, and in the other Joyntes two, such a person shall s^ese
one of his eien, and these hitherto Formica. Ptolom^e says that the hands
great, and think skin ^ed, declares that manne to be disquieted in mind.
Rasys says, the hands light and subtle or thin declare much wysdom, and
a good perfyt understanding, and subtilnes of the humors. The hands slendre
and very long, declare tirannye, and foolyshnes. Ptholomie the Philosopher
says, that the hands of diverse colors, declare that man to be luxuriouse
or cruel.

The fyngers also over thynne, declare foolyshnes. Formica says that he
which has the fyngers at the top broad, such a person is faithful, and a
good companion.

The table in the hand large, and the fyngers slendre, that is long, such a
person is subtle in a natural work, and given to play on Instruments.

The table in the hand small or narrow, and the fyngers great, such a
person is given to write well or perfitlye. And such a person shall dye of an
apostume.

He which has the hands not over great, nor over small, but well proporcioned
to his body, such a person is more congruente in all his mischancis or
accidents.

The hands small, such a person is feminine, in his doings, and is also
vnsac^able, and hateful, and now loves, and now hates, and seldom or never
there is any confydence to be had in him.

He which has great and fat hands, such has ^ dull wit. And the woman
having such hands, desires much veneriouse act.

He which has slendre hands, is nimble and ready in his doings, and much
desires women.

The fyngers hollow, and ill fashioned, and not con^oyning well together, is an
evil person, talking larger lier then he will do, and full of untruth. He
which has the fyngers segregate, and not lying strayt out, declares miserye,
and poverty.

And the reason of this is, for the improporcion, which presupposes not there
a good and perfyt understanding, but an evil, and inordinate.

The fyngers small, declare that person to be a fool, ^ dullarde, and enuyouse.

Morbeth the cardinal in his chyromancye says that the fyngers long, and
thynne, and well proporcyoned together: declare a good wit, and especyally in
handy crafts.

And it declares also an evil governance, whereby they be always miserable,
and neady, and this Cocles many times noted in neady persons, that lived by
alms.

The fyngers very short, and little: declare them to be strong, and
fuffyciently wary or wyttye: but this alonely is not to be affirmed.

The hands gross or fat, and the fyngers over short: declare that man to
be a false demer or periurer, a thief, and full of wyles: and the hands
croking in, and thynne, declare that person to he a glutenouse feader and
talkatyue: Certain say that the fyngers flat and small, and the palm of
the hand crooked, declare that man to be enuyouse, a fool, an innocent o^
wreache, and couetouse: and the reason of this is, because the grossnes
declares abundance of the matter, and somewhat of natural heat, not mighty
above the degree, by which is declared an earthly dry man and rude by reason
of over much drynes, and a fool for the lack of natural heat and moisture
proportionable, and by the consequence to be couetouse, for the crokednes
thereof: A^u^or in ^ys small work of chyromancie says y^ the woman which
has small or (...) ^^e ha^d^^ and the fyngers gross at the tops, declare a
rude wyt^^* and a notyse to be ^u^u^^ouse.

And those women which have a short pa^^e, shall be grieved with the
strayghtnes in the ^e^ue^ie of child.

A certain authoure says, whose name Cocles knew not, that the hands
short and knottye or bounchyng out and thynne, declare that manne to be a
Jeaster, and glu^^enouse feader.

And the cause of this is, that the end of the sinowes which thorough drynes
is drawn together, and bends inward, is thereby knottye.

When the top of the ear finger, shall not reach to the upper Joint of the
ryng finger, declares that person assuredly to be a bastard, which Cocles
very often found true. And if the fyngers bend in the tops: declare envy,
and covetousness, and such be wary, and false of promise, compared to the ape.

But when they bend inward, contrary wise, If the thombe toward the
fyngers, and the fyngers toward the thombe enclyne, declare ma^cousnes, and
covetousness.

He which of a custom or customably, holds the hand ^^rayghte out, and
the fyngers like extensed ^ length, declares that man to be talkatyue,
fearful, and vain.

He which always bears the hand closse shut, declares to be vn^itifull or
vio^ente, and Iracundiouse. The fingers small and thynne i^ a man declare him
to be an idiote, If short and gross, declare boldness, and enui^: and the
fyngers comely made, fayer of form, and of sufficient length, declare good
and honest manners in that person. He which in speaking moves and clappeth the
hands much together, and uses many gestures besides, declares to be
eloquent enuyouse, and a begiler. Certain say (as Hermes) that the tremblyng
or quaueryng of the hands, in a healthful young man, declares to be sone
and lightly angry or moved to ^re. And this proceeds by great heat, and
commocion of the spirits But if the tremblyng be very strong or fast, it is a
token of a vic^ouse comple^cion, and that such a one will be or is angry for a
triff^yng cause* melancholyke, desiryng diverse things, and couetouse or
enuiouse. The hand hollow, with the tubercles fair, and the proportion of the
lines like semly, promise long life. And ^f it be contrary, contrary Judge. The
fyngers in what form they be, with the Joites gross, declare misery and
mi^^ortune as Cocles has very often noted it. Albertus and Conciliator say^,
that when the fingers be so well filled with fleashe, and perfyt round, that
holdyng them up thou cannot see the eleme^t through them, declare that man to be
couetouse, and enuyouse: And if the fingers rightly bend toward the back of
the hand especially if they be thynne, declare that man to be unjust, subtle,
and ingeniouse. And he which of a custom when he walks, holds or bears
the thombe thruste within the other fingers: declares to be couetouse as
Cocles noted the same in a country man of his. The fingers also long declare
the ears of the liver to be long, and the magnytude of the fyngers, declares
the magnitude of the ears of the liver. And the smalnes of the fingers,
declare the smalnes of the ears of the liver.

If any have ruddy hands, whether it be manne, or woman, declares that person
to be sanguine and luxuriouse, as Formica says: ^tholomye says that he
which has the upper joints of the fyngers gross and bendyng or turnyng up,
such if they shall be the^ rich, in countinuaunce of time after shall be poor or
by some other infortune they shall be hyndered: further he says, having the
hands crooked in length, declare him to dye a violente death: These hithert^ of
the Phisiognomating of the hands for this time suffice here.

Of the belly, back, great guts, and haunches, with the legs to the fet.
The. xxxv. Chapter.
OUr matter requires not much to write, what each man may Judge by the
beliye, back, and great guts, although they be principal me^bres of the
body, by which might much be noted and Judged: but notwythstandyng what is
necessaryly to be spoken of them in brevity shall be showed. First the bellye
heary and roughe to the navel: declares that man to be luxuryouse, bold,
hardye or stout, prudent, of a great understanding, studyouse, warye, and
sometime hardlye fortunated.

The bellye lean, and thynne, declare a hot and cholerycke complexcyon, and
often times also a melancholyke complexcyon.

As they for the more part, which have fa^te and ^orpulente beliyes, and yet
very wytty, and this by often experience, we find true. He also which is ^a^
or well brawned about the bellye, and that the bellye bear not much out, is
Judged strong after nature. He commonly which by some accydente, as by
fasting, or sickness, or by some other accydentall cause has a lean bellye,
is Judged unapt to be taught tender, and weak: And so long as he contineweth
(...) such a passion, he declyneth to the feminine nature. Aristotle in his
secrets to Alexander writes, that he which has a great bellye, is
vndiscreate, folyshe, and light minded, loving and delytyng in veneriouse
acts: but the belly mean, and the breast decently strait or narrow, declare
to be a man of a singular understanding, and wittye of counsel or a good
counseler* Aristotle says that the back bone, great and well brawned, and
strong declares that man to be strong and might in stomach, compared to the
masculyne kind. And the back bone narrow, ^a^te brawned and weak, to be
weak, compared to the feminine kind: wherefore Rasys says that the largenes
of the back, declares fortytude, arrogancye, and vehemencye of ^re.

The crokednes of the back, declares the maliciousness of condicious, and
ouerthwartnesse in manners.

The equality of the back, is a good sign, Conciliator says, the back
large, strong, well brawned, and bo*ned, declare a manlye nature: and contrary,
a femini^e nature. And who that is croke backed if it shall be sa^t in fleashe,
bearyng up to a hill, and that any by that be ^arroer, as it were to a waste
about: this man excels in virtue, having a studyouse desire in huntyng.

They say also that the crokednes of the back, declares the ouerthwartnes in
manners. The back large vnextensed, declares fortitude, arro gancie, fiercenes
or furiouse hastines in anger. The thynnes of the back declares yt man to be
of a waywarde nature. Further the back bone large at the nether end to the
buttockes, and safte compassed or brawned with fleashe, declares that person
to be effeminate, compared to the woman. But if the back bone be long and
end sharp: declares that man to be libidinouse, moderate in manners, and
fearful. Certain say, that the back heary, lean, and much bearyng up, fro
an equality of the parts: declares that man to be inuericundiouse,
maliciouse beastly of an evil understanding weak, and not long enduring to
labor, and slothful.

The back great or broad and fat: declares that man to be diverse,
slothful, and of much deceate.

The back thynne extensed, and lean, declares that man to be weak, and of
light cause fearful, vain, a brawler, and of much credulity.

The back from the shoulder points down to the wast or geardel stead
short, and sufficient large, such persons as Cocles has very often noted
it, be swifte and priest in coetyng.

Certain of the Philosophers admonish us, to beware of those persons which
have the back much bunchyng out, for such especially be given to do
mischief and harm, and most in defamyng, backebytyng, and envy.

The haunches express the like, in manner of the former: for if the haunches be
fleash, and fat, and that the legs, down to the fete be also fleashy:
declare boldness, and strength.

He which has bony haunches so that the bones bear out and well sinewed: in
such manner that the haunches be great by especialler cause of the bones and
sinews, the^ of over much fleashines: declare that man to be strong, and bold.
Rasis also says yt when the bones of the hau^ches shall bear out: declare
boldness.

And this Rasis means, when the haunches be well brawned and bendyng to the
siluester part, which is a notyse of fortytude, and such run quick and
swiftly, and be also great iourn^ers: as Cocles has noted it. Mthell the Scot
says, that the haunches well brawned, declare that man to be strong, hardy,
and no less proud: as appears in the stone horse, cock, and falcon. Also he
says, that having the hau^ches bony, but yet in such wise yt the bones be not
great and much fleashy, with the smaines of the synewes: such be weak referred
to the feminine kind.

To this Rasys says, that when the haunches bear out through much
fleashe: declare debi^itye of strength, and loosenes of the members.

The hippe or hucke^l bones tendynge outward (as Consi^ator says) declare
vri^litie and fortitude: except effiminate fleashines happen to hinder the
same. The siendernes or smalnes of them: declares that man to be a lover of
women and to be fearful, with weakness of the body. The shankes well sinowed,
strong brawned or muscled and great, not by reason of the fleashines, but
rather by reason of the greatness of the bones, and sinews: declare that manne
to be strong after iyfe, referred to the masculyne kind. The shankes thynne or
lean, and sufficiently synowed: declare that person to be luxuryouse, light,
and unstable in his mouinges: and this notyse is taken by birds having the
like shankes. Which because they be light after nature, and unstable, have
little of the terrestrial substance or gravity, but much of the Aeriall
^yghtnes. The shankes lean without the sufficiency of sinews, declare that
man to be fearful, as cociliator affirms. The sha^kes over great, by reason
of over much fleashines, and as it were indistincte, that is with equality or
all a like, so that about the ancles they be fleashye and fat, as women be,
be named weak, and unshamefast, as appears above, by the signs incensible.
When the grosnes or fleshines shall be about the ancles, declare that man to be
gross and folysh of nature, as Rasys says. And Aristotle wryttyng to
Alexander says, yt the thynnes or leanes of the sha^kes declares that man to
be Ignoraunte or simple, And the greatness of them, declares that man to be
bold, and strong.

The shankes all a like, as they were swollen down to the ancles of some
disease, declare a fylthy intemperamente.

The shankes soft in fleashe, be signs of a feminine nature.

The shankes lean, and sufficiently synewed, and roughe (after Aristotle)
declare an ardencye to venerouse act: For that their nutrimentall matter, is
altered into sperma in the^, and lykened to birds.

The shankes superfluouse, and indistincte or ill fashioned, declare that man
to be od^ble, and vnshamfaste. Note also that the shankes very hearye, with the
multitude of hear about the preuie members, declare an ardente desire to
veneryouse act, for such be compared in nature like, with brute beasts.

They that be much heary fro the haunches to the feate, declare to be much
given to coeate.

The feet great, by mean they be well sinowed and muscled, and that the
muscles and sinews, appear in such manner, that the greatness be, by reason of
the bones and sinews, and not by reason of the abundance of fleashe, such be
judged strong after nature. Rasis says, the feet much fleashie, and hard,
declares that man to be of an evil understanding. Aristotle in his secrets
writes that the fete fleashye, declare such a person to be folyshe, and a
lover of Injury. And the fete small, and light, declare that man to be bold,
and strong. Rasys also says, that the fete small, and bewtifull, declare that
man to be a fornicator, and sporter and maker of mirth, always merry. The nails
of the fete croking like to hawks talons be judged gready catchers and
unshamefast, in manner living like as the hawk after his pray. Cocles always
marked such persons, which had the like nails on the toes and fyngers, to be
of a cholerycke complexcyon: And found it a laudable notyse, in worthy
warriors, and in such as use marciall aries. And such persons Aristotle
means to be naturally unshamefast or over bold, thieves, despoylers, and
fyithy talkers. And he names the martial, theaues or warriors, because they,
which give their industry holly to war faryng, be robbers, and wily begilers
a^raynyng substance or bouties, whether it be in right or wrong. Of women's
fete, is here what to be noted; as they which be long foted, be apter to the
procreacion of children, and by their rote also (as the Philosophers say) may
be known which be apteste to coeate, with many others more, which for the
displeasure of god in the vtteryng of them, I omit, desiring thee gentle
Reader to bear with me ther^^.

Of the hole stature of man. The. xxxvi. Chapter.
WE may here somewhat Judge of man's stature. And first for an example we read
in the historyes of one Maximinus Emperor, which was a man of a huge
parsonage, and stature, and yet named or rea^ ned for a sole. Of whom arose
this proverb. ( Climacis egiptia, et Caliga Maximini) which proverb brieflye
to say, is applied to such as be of huge stature and parsonage, having eun
conditions or properties, and that for their manners, had in contempt of al men.
But what needs to recite this, seeing we see every where (says Indagines)
that such which be of so huge and strange stature, be not of the wisest, or
very nidiottes, and this most especial, if they be lean long bodyed, and crane
neaked, or neaked long like the crane. Of which sort, Indagines noted in the
court of Frederick the third, and Charles, Emperors, maruelouse lean, and
tall, very froward, and stark folyshe: nor they much differ not fro these,
which go much stoupyng or crokedly, whereof the old proverb (If I may so
say) might here be renewed, which is, I have seldom seen a long or tal man,
wittye, or a little man, meek and pacyent. But to be brief, that man which is
of a mean stature, and comely or reasonable fat of body, and in qualities
honestly nurtered, declares to be ingeniouse, circumspect, and with expedicion
does his businesses. Further, the stature long and sufficient strayte and more
lean then fat, declares that man to be bold, cruel, proud, clamorous,
vain gloryouse, long angry, or furiouse in anger, to much constant or hard to
be moved, presumptuouse, not sone credityng things heard, an often liar and in
many things maliciouse The stature long and sufficietly fat, declares that
man to be strong, lightly unfaithful, false, of a gross wit, a niggarde
warye, unfaithful, and a surmiser. The stature long lean and thynne,
declares that man to be sapyente, vain, a liar, of a gross feadyng or
feader, importunate, to wished things sone credityng, weak, slow in doing
things, and very self willed. The stature short and gross: declares that man
to be vain, fearful, suspicious, more folysh then wittye, of a gross wit,
and congruently saruisable to one, sone crediting, and long continewing angrye.

The stature short and lean, and sufficiently strayte up, declares that man
to be naturally wary, ingeniouse, a sparer, proud, bold, secret, fatigable
or a much prouoker, vain gloryouse, congruently sap^ ente, of a good
understanding, and very often surmysing, The stature declyning or falling
forward (not caused through age) but by nature: declares that man to be wary,
secret, dull, of a gross feadyng, sharp or cruel, a niggarde, laboriouse,
long bearyng anger in mind, and not lightly credityng. The stature bendyng
bakwarde, declares that man to be a fool, of small understanding, a gross fea
der, vayn, of an evil memory, and lightly co^uertibleto good or evil.

A conclusion or brief rehearsal of the whole art of Phisiognomie.
Now let us reduce all these matters before spoken, to a conclusyon: Although
these before rehearsed appear sufficient. Wherefore to be brief, let us
pronounce of all the members throughout the body, and first of the eyes. They
which have moysty, clear, cherful, and quaueryng eyes: declare them to be
honest conditioned and merye. And that these may the readyier appear, we shall
set them forth orderly as it were in a table, what every membre declares,
which we have placed here under.

FIrst the eyes moist, clear and smilyng: declare that man to be merry, well
manered, and circumspecte in his life. The eyes steadfast of sight, some what
read, and very great; declare that man to be a glutton, and leacherouse. The
eyes small, somewhat moving: declare that man to be couetouse. The eyes great:
declare that man to be crafty and a begyler. The eyes steadfast of syghte: to be
deceitful or crafty. The eyes moving to and fro: declare yt man to be
sedicious, suspicious, unfaithful or trusty, and a boster. Brod eied: declare
that man to be dull witted, a sluggarde, fearful, a coward, honest and trusty,
and drunk with wine. Small eied: declare that person to be unshamefast or
shameless. The eyes covertly quaueryng (as it were) to be unjust. The eyes not a
like, and small: declare that man to be deceitful, and a flaterer. The sight of
the eyes turnyng nere the nose: declare that person to be veneriouse. The eyes
broad and runnynge, and the syghte moving to and fro: declare that man to be
Ireful. The eyes dryer then they before: declare that man to be chaungeable,
wyly, and expert. The eyes twinklyng as it were: declare that man to be
shameless. The eyes black and clear: to be a just and vpryghte meaning man,
witty, and libidmouse, and of knowledge. The eyes round about grene: declare
that person to be deceitful, unjust, and a thief. The eyes moisty: declare that
man to be high minded, able to perform that he promyseth, vpryghte of
counsel. The eyes great and quaueryng: declare that per son to be mad,
light or idle witted, and a glutton. The eyes having many windinges or
wrincies, hollow, and dry: declare that man to be a forelec^, and a betrayer.
The eyes standing high out, great, clear, pure, and moist: declare that man to
be witty, studious and a lover. The eyes watery and runnyng, if it come not by
sickness: declare him to be a fool. The eyes dark of sight and dry, to be
very faithful. The eyes quaueryng as it were, large, moist and clear: to be a
man of singular knowledge, haute of stomach, furiouse in anger, hardy of
courage, and a boster. The eyes black and resp^endent: declare that person to
be fearful, and most wicked. The eyes round about swollen as they were, and
crude: declare that person to be a glutton, and hateful. The eyes very small,
and hollow: declare that man to be couetouse, and a crafty begiler. The eyes
cherefull of look, and of a like bygnes: declare that person to be prone and
apt to laughter, gentle, and godly. The eyes moist: declare that man to be a
good counsayler, sad, gentle, and studious for the more part. The eye liddes
partyng: declare that person to be a lover, and loved. That man which winketh
with the eyes: declares to be a deceauer and thief. That man which has
bleared eien: declares to be libidinouse. The over brows large: declare that
person to be efftminate. The cye lyddes playing often, declare that man to be
an aduouterer.

The forehead narrow, to be a fool. The forehead long, to be studyouse and
apt to be taught, or high, or as it were swollen, and round, to be craftye,
mutable, and a doer of iniurye.

The forehead full of wrincles: declares that man to be burdened with cares.

The foreheade round to be enuyouse, and deceytfull. The forehead large, to be
free and lyberall. The ouerbrowes hearye, to be a stammerer. The eye bries
streatchyng to the Temples, to be nastye, and beastly condicioned.

The face plain or even filled with fleashe, to be full of strife. Not full
faced, to be Iniuryouse, rude and nasty, leaner faced, to be wittye. The face
fleashye, apt to learn, sad of countenance, to be a fool, mixed with wisdom.

The cares wide open, to be a nidiote. The ears very great, to be simple
witted. The ears small to be a fool. The ears as they were four cornered,
to be learned.

The nose sharp, to be Irefull. The nose fleashye, and soft, to be evil
manered. The nose bowing to the mouth like an hawks byll, to be honest,
strong, learned, and apt to be taught. The nose great, to be gentle and
friendly. The nose small to be a deceau^r.

The nose flat, to be leacherouse, wyllful and pleasant.

The nosethrelles steafe, to be mighty and strong. The nosethrilles round, to
be fearce. The nosethrils divided a part as they were, to be quick wytted,
iustye of courage and mearye. The nosethrilles narrow and round, to be a fool.

The mouth wide, to be full of striefe and a fyghter, fierce, and bold. The
mouth very great or large, with the upper lyppe hangyng far out, to be a
glutton, wicked, a babier, fool hardye, ouerthwarte, and duli wytted.

The lyppes small, thynne, and subtyle to be Eloquente. The lyppes thynne in a
little mouth, to be effeminate. The lyppes fleashye or thycke, to be a fool

They which have teath like to a dog, bearing out the lyppes, be
contumeliouse, or use to speak rebukefullye, and not to be trusted.

The throat boll asper, to be a trifler, and of little wit.

The throat boll, far fro the shoulders standing, large and extenced*
declares imbecillitie of mind. And mean to be manered and strong.

The neck long, and slender, to be fearful, and evil manered. The neck
fat, and long, to be furiouse, fearful and obstynate.

The neck mean between both, apt to learn, strong and virtuous.

The neck fat, to be rude, rude speakers, and dull to learn.

The neck roughe to be contumelyouse. The neck short, to be fool hardye.
The neck bendyng^ in, to be necligente, and couetouse.

The neck bowynge to the right side, to be reasonable of condycyons, but
bowing to the leaft sydeto be a rioter or Ruffyan, and a fool.

The breaste great to be a man worthy commendacyon.

The breaste large, to be hardye of courage, bold, and in whom reasteth
honestye.

The breaste small or narrow, to be fearful.

The breast corpulent or fat, to be furyouse, and cruel.

The pappes hangyng down fro the breast: declare that man to be violent and
unadvised of that he does. The belly great, to be vndiseret, folysh, proud and
leacherouse. The belly straight, and broad breasted, (to be one) whose mind
may be perceived, and a maker of agremente between man and man, or man and
wife, and a counsayler. The back large, to be gentle of nature: and the back
and breast indifferente broad: to be worthy praise. The back corked or
bendyng: to be a niggarde and couetouse. The arms very long: to be bold,
gentle honest and strong. The arms short to be a sower or worker of discord,
and leacherous. The hands very short: to be gross, and rude manered. The
hands narrow in the middle part, and broad at the upper: to be in his first
age a wastful spender, in his middle age covetous, and in his old age, a
spender or lyberall: And some at that age be ryper of counsel, and covetous in
that old age. The hands and fyngers, fat or fleashy to be a thief. The hands
small: to be mutable, wyly, and expert. The flat or palm of the h^des to the
fold broad, and the upper part narrow: declares that man to be a rioter in
his first age. The legs sle^bre: to be dull of knowledge. The legs gross:
to be bold and strong. The legs larger to be mighty and strong The legs
having great or many ^inowes: to be strong The legs short and fat: to be
furious and cruel. The legs crooked, and hollow or bending in the nether part
of the legs: declare those men, to be evil. The legs soft and high pouffed
up: to be well instructed in good manners. The shankes or legs fro the knee
down with the hele asper or rough, fleashy and short, and with the thighs fat:
declare those men that they shall be ^^naticke. The fete fleashy: to be folish.
The fe^e small and light: to be dull wytted. The fete naked, or dare of hear:
declare a most perfect notise of impotency. And much heary to be luxuryous and
bold.

Finis.

