A proved practice for all young Chirurgians, concerning burnings with
Gunpowder, and wounds made with Gunshot, Sword, Halbard, Pyke, Lance, or such
other.

Wherein, is delivered with all faithfulness, not only the true receipts of
such Medicines as shall make them bold, but also sundry familiar examples,
such, as may lead them as it were by the hand, to the doing of the like.

Heereto is adjoined a Treatise of the French or Spanish Pockes, Written by
John Almenar, a Spanish Physician.

Also, a commodious collection of Aphorisms both English and Latin, taken out
of an old written copy.

Published for the benefyte of his Country, by Wylliam Clowes, Master in
Surgery.



Seen, and allowed, according to the order appointed.

Printed by Thomas Orwyn, for Thomas Cadman. 1588.

To all true professors of Surgery in general wheresoever, Wylliam Clowes,
wishes all happiness, with much increase of knowledge, and after this life,
the most joyful and blessed life everlasting. Amen.
I Have followed the examples of many excellent learned men, which in times
past did usually dedicate their paynefull labors and travels, according to the
worthiness thereof, some to Kings, some to Queens, Princes, Nobles, and other
great personages, partly as testimonies of their own vowed affection and duty
toward such worthyes, and partly, as petitioners for protection to their
labors under their happy patronage: who were therefore as fortresses of
defense to support them against such, as then (and the like whereof we want not
at this day) lay snarling, and scornefully prying into other men's doings, to
blemish and deface the same as much as in their power consisted. In which
respect, it was most truly said of a learned man, that he may be called a very
good Cook, that is able to make one sauce to serve every man's taste. Or that
man may be called a most perfect and rare man, whose works being published to
the view of all men, can please every man's humor, especially in these days,
wherein, are so many daynty cares, and so many queasy stomachs, with no want of
railing toongs, which Horatius Morus, in his Epistle to Jerome Comfort, Doctor
of Physic, declares, saying: Is there any thing so sound, or so passing
well handled, which can escape the venomous tongues of such as would sting
Homer himself, if he were living at this day? Wherefore my loving brethren and
friends, (I mean none but you that are the true professors of Surgery) unto
you do I most willingly offer these my simple labors and travels, as
heretofore I have done, hoping also you will as willingly receive it into your
good Patronage, and to defend it with your friendly supportation, and that is
all I crave: and that you will accept of it, as did King Artaxerxes the cup of
cold water at the hands of poor silly Sinaetes. Then, as for the intemperate
ears of the malicious sort, who make no difference between good and bad, or
truth from falsehood: yet I trust, they shall do me no more discredit nor hurt,
then had Prometheus of Thessalia, who received by the Sword of his mortal
enemy, a great wound in his breast, for a full purpose and determination of his
death thereby, but contrary to expectation, the same did cure Prometheus of a
festered sore, which before did grievously trouble him, so the hand that meant
to hurt, did heal, and the wicked determination of an ill digested mind, yet
contrary to his expectation, had a good and happy end, no more hurt (I hope)
nor no less good, shall my enemies toongs, neither hands procure unto me.

And now my friends and Brethren, to whom I so willingly dedicate these my
labors, understand you, that my present purpose, through Gods assistance, is
to deliver, for the benefit of all young practizers of Surgery, certain
observations and notes of some special cures, by my self accomplished, with
diverse needful and necessary remedies, proved most profitable, not only for
burning with Gunpowder, but also for wounds made with Gunshot, Sword, Daggar,
Harbard, Pike, or Lance, all which, I have gathered out of diverse learned
Authors, and by my self augmented with an addition also of a most excellent
learned Work, written by John Almaner, a Spanish Physician, that does entreat
of the French Disease. Which Treatise, was delivered me by a good friend and a
well willer, unto all the young practizers of Surgery, for whose sakes he
Translated the same out of Latin into English, and required me to publish it
forthwith: the which, (courteous Reader,) I have most faithfully set down,
and adjoined it unto these mine observations, with certain Aphorisms both in
English and Latin, very profitable for all young Students which are desirous
of learning and knowledge.

In which discourses, if I have slipped or ouershot my self in my penning, I
crave pardon, for I know, I shall make a rude perfourmance of a good meaning,
the which I commit in the end to thy consideration, and my self to thy
courtesy.

Vale, in Christo, Wylliam Clowes.

Good men are not forbidden to hope for Honor for their virtue, since both are
the blessings of GOD.
blazon or coat of arms

But some whose minds, a World will not suffice,
As Caesar's reign, and others do despise:
And such I say often speak us fair in face,
Yet work the spite men's credits to disgrace.
Which done, full fine, as foes they will you skorne
With open wrongs, which are not to be borne.
But I conclude, let such say more or less,
Nothing shall stand, but what Gods hand does bless.
The Epistle to the Reader.
SInce I finished my last Book, entitled, De morbo gallico, the which I
presented unto all the true professors of Chirurgerie, in Anno 1585. It was
given me to understand, that a new Impression of my Book was presently to
pass: then I wayed with my self, it would be very hard for me to accomplish
all things that mine intent did lead me unto, for the correcting and enlarging
of the same Book in so short a time, (wherein I know are diverse faults
escaped) but I promised hereafter, if God did permit me life and health, I
would to my power supply all wants. So I willed the Printer to proceed,
according to my former collection, for that I did suppose the matter
sufficient, and the wants tolerable, if it were rightly censured by men of
learning and skill in the Art. But as for the scornful scanners, their
commendations I disdain, for I know they are frosen in the dregs of their
own corrupt judgments, and therefore whilst they should speak well of me, I
might be thought like unto them: but if it shall please any good man, that is
(I say) learned in the Art, who does espy the wants and imperfections of my
Book, that he will vouchsafe to publish an other work of his own collection
or translation entreating of the same matter, then truly I will my self not
only yield him his due commendations, but also be thankful to God that it
has pleased him to make my simple Book the cause of the publishing of any
learned work. Which will be no doubt a benefit unto our Country and common
wealth, notwithstanding the gaynesaying of some, who continually spit forth
poison out of their noisome and unsavory mouths, against diverse godly
learned, and well disposed persons, who have with long and tedious labors
published diverse Books of Physic and Surgery in English. For say these
malicious men in derision and scornful manner, Behold, these be our late
London english Writers. In deed it is said, that Demosthenes himself, being a
great Infallible signs of their vild dispositions.
learned man, could not avoid the snares of those that enuyed his diligence in
the writing of his Books, which is so much the less grief unto me. But I
answer these our backbiters, I mean, such as are gilty in this case, by
desiring, that it will please them Carons Boat, and have wilfully Hypocrates
and Galen, and all Galenists, whose worthy Works being extant to the view of
all men, have purchased to their Authors amongst the good, eternal praises and
credit for ever. Nevertheless, you may easily perceive what spirits they
carry, that thus wound the dead with speeches of defame, and yet themselves in
respect, ignorant in the Art. And some of them are scarce able to write and
read true English, but do brag without Too foul or impudent a fault in
challengers or ^auillers
measure (upon a very sudden) of their excellent cunning, which happily they
had stolen out of the beggarly budgets, of some counterfeite stale Peracelsian
Quack saluer, or Mountibancke, and yet moreover do challenge, to be the true
Disciples of Peracelsus, but God knows, they are not worthy to serve under his
regiment for pyonors: for they missinterprete Paracelsus whom truly they
understand not, and condemn Hipocrates and Galen whom they never read. I
would no man should think I go here abouts to speak against the thing that
is good, neither do I seem to maintain the thing that is evil, neither will
I reward any good man with evil reports for benefits and knowledge received,
for truth is truth from whom so ever it come, be it from Hipocrates, Galen,
Paracellus, or any other learned men. And therefore I say unto such aforesaid,
let not the Paynter go beyond his pensill, nor the Shoemaker beyond his Shoo,
for so his pride may have a fall, and all his honor lie in the dust.

And now good Reader, seeing mine intent is not to hold my tongue at abuses, I
will here a little farther decipher the rest of these exclaiming adversaries,
which have most impudent strumpets faces, that will I think blush at nothing:
and here I will De morbo gallico, he has with reproachful speeches returned
again to his old humor, and spurned against Incarnatiues. But all those young
Students, which are desirous to be satisfied heerin, amongst many other worthy
Authors, read Vigo, cap. 21. fol. 175. which Book, Master Baker has partly
corrected, as himself has there declared, or else read the old english Book
translated by M. Traheron, fol. 111. cap. 21. so he that is but meanly read in
the Art, may by his good endeavor and diligence, easily find and know the
true nature and properties of Incarnatiues of diverse sorts, and therefore
Incarnatiues which have been divised by many grave and learned men, from
succession of ages, are not to be rejected at the becks of every such like lame
schoolemaister, or ridiculous ringleader, which will needs reach out his hand,
and with his Momus pen lead others to seek a Diamont with a Lincke, which
could show it self in the dark: but I marvel that his disciples or followers
are not ashamed of so base a champion, or else one of them ashamed of another.
It is said, that this wisard of late dreamed he was transformed like one of
Acteons whelps, and that he had coursed a Collyers Cart, only to seek for one
that had stolen away the King of the Frogs, which Jupiter sent down in a great
lightning and thunder, which dream, seemed to be far more dangerous unto
him, then the strange Star which Doleto saw in Calabria: nevertheless, his
naked name, and feigned forgerie of this base borne bird, I mean not further
to touch: let no such bosters be your warrant what soever they say, for he is
called an ill Fisher, that cries stinking Fish.

Moreover, a new adopted Chick of this old Cock, and the This fellow is so
wise in his own conceit, that he renounceth to follow the method and ways of
euring, after Hipocrates and Galen, because they were Heathen men. I answer
with the sayings of the godly, wise, and learned, that he which (...) a
Christian, will live as a Christian, and yet may take Physic and Surgery of a
^ew, if he have skill.
has plunged himself in the bottomless sea, or filthy dregs of his aforesaid
Grandsires caluish judgments and opinions: and in the very pride and glory
of his skill, he setting himself as it were in the chair of ignorance, (a fit
Pulpet for such a Prophet:) did there with terrible stearne looks, and squared
speeches affirm, that indeed it was superstuous to use Incarnatiues, which
inuading mind and attempt did become him as well as a ring of gold in a sowes
snoute, whose will wants wit through prodigality to accomplish his childish
intent and purpose. But now forsooth, this was urged and brought in by the
similes of dogs toongs, and Momemyasse, a very deep wit to understand
mysteries, and whose capacity herein, he says himself, far passes our
reach, for his mystical knowledge, lies secretly hid under the shadow of
Apollos gorgeous cloak, and bewtifyed in print with Esculapius golden bearde,
wherein, there is neither grosenesse, nor impurities, as there is in our
Incarnatiues, etc. But the exalted essences foolosophically extracted by him,
out of the egg of an Elephant, the marye of a whetstone, and the brains of a
Woodcocke, soirculate to digest in his baren head, and this is his misterium
magnum, wherewith if he anoint their eyes, then ye shall (say they) behold
certain Spirits that inhabit or dwell in the air, called Nenusareni, and
Aerdadi: a high matter in a low house, which sore troubles the wits of these
wandering Pilgrims, which contrary to the direct line of equity wrong
ballans the meaning of good Authors, and so think thereby, to patch and cloute
up their own silly credits, by pulling down and defacing of others, and thus
would they root up that which they never planted. Therefore I may rightly
compare this image of envy, and such like, unto the malicious man, which
desired of Jupiter he might lose one of his eyes, so that another whom he
hated, might lose both his, etc. but I will now blot paper, or spend time no
longer to answer any such, for it is no conquest to beat an Ass to death.

Also, I mean to unfold the strange events that succeeded Turbith mineralis,
and it is no such thing.

Moreover, it was said to be a Paracelsion Pill, but I am not of that opinion,
for I suppose, no good or godly Paracelsion would have given it to a dog. The
composition of the same vile Pill Master Read has discovered in his Book of
Arceus lately Translated, and by him published, as a caveat for all good people
to beware of that Pill. And in my simple judgment, Such abuse is never wincked
at, but when idiots rules the roast, there the just may be oppressed, and many
a good cause trodden under soote.
no good man ought to countenance, allow, excuse, smother, or conceal so
perilous a medicine, since it has left behind it so foul and filthy broad
scarres, that touched the lives of four persons, first, John Butler, Master
of a Ship, a Barbar surgeons servant of London, a Ropemakers boy in Rowsey,
and one Master Washborne a Merchant, that dyed also in Rowsey. This cruel Pill
was ministered unto these four persons by two simple fellows, who were
Surgeons of two Ships, which said, they were deluded by this crow brightfast
companion, which did write it down its their book of secrets, with his own
hand, for a precious jewel, and there recorded it to be good for all diseases.
a bad policy, and very ill devised, but how needful it is for all good men
to beware of this Pill, let every man judge which has care of his own health,
yet I do not malice the person of the man, but his filthy Pill, There is no
friendship to be had with such honest men.
although to see to, he is more fitter to be made a turnebroche, or a Scullien
of a Kitchen, then to be admitted to be either Physician or Surgeon, but it is
said of a learned man, if such kind of knaves might be well punished for
example sake, by the hands of the Magistrate for such offenses, so should the
young Students in the Art be less deceived. I do not here rehearse a tale of
a tub, which requires no longer remembrance, than the view, or looking on; but
a matter of such moment, which ought to be eternized in thy mind, and although
I know he dangereth his own welfare, that reproves evil men's faults, Not. 1.
and shall lie open to slander and reproach, yet I suppose it better to be
maligned of such, then to conceal so great a mischief, that might otherwise
ensue by the farther spreading of so vile a medicin, and therefore I must crane
pardon, for I do mean hereafter in this whole discourse, not to shun any such
rotten roots as they come or chance to lie in my way.

Here I am I say farther pressed and urged to unmask another apple Abracadabra,
and such like, and persuaded him to take it presently in the beginning of his
sit, for there was (says he) a secret in these words. To be short, the patient
being hungry of his health, followed his counsel, and devoured all and every
piece of the apple. So soon as it was received, nature left the disease to
digest the apple, which was too hard to do, for at length, he fill to vomiting,
then the core kept such a stir in his throat, that where to fore his Fever
was ill, now much worse, a malo ad peius, out of the fryingpan, into the fire:
presently there were Physicians sent for unto the sick patient, or else his
fifteen pound had been gone, with a more precious Jewel, but this lewd
fellow is better known at Newgate then I will here declare. Such counterfeite
Charmers, with Figures and Caracters, Tagaltius does condemn, as absurd and
erroneous, which wicked practices he says becomes no honest artist to use,
or to exercise.

It is also said, that in Archadia, a Woman began to cure with wicked Charms,
without the applying of any medicines, which being known in Athens, she was
condemned by the Senate to be stoned to death: a just reward for such ungodly
practices.

I read likewise of another lewd Woman, which was accused of Witchcraft, the
cause was, for that she did commonly take upon her to cure Men, Women,
Children, and Beasts, by a certain Charm, the which, they say, she would do,
only for a penny in money, and a loaf of bread. This thing was misliked of
many good men in the Country where she did dwell, and for that cause, she was
upon suspicion of Sorcery and Witchcraft, brought to the Assizes, and there
Arrayned for it. The simplicity of the old Woman was somewhat considered of by
the whole bench, then the Judges and the Justices granted her this favor,
that if she would truly declare unto them What manner of Charm it was she
used, she should be delivered: and being in great fear, and doubt of her
life, forthwith in the presence of them all, declared it to be as follows.

First (said she) after I had received the penny in money, and

The Charm.
1. My Lofe in my lap, 2. My Penny in my pursse, 3. Thou art never the
better, 4. Nor I am never the wurse.
Immediately after, the Judges with the rest perceived it to be mere deceit,
and cousenage: then they did straightly charge her, upon pain of great
punishment, to leave off her delusions, and cosening of the people, and so she
was discharged, as it is there said.

I could speak of many other abusers of Physic and Surgerie, but what
redress would be had, I know not, and yet I do not mean to speak of the old
Woman at Newington, beyond Saint Georges feelds, unto whom, the people do
resort, as unto an Oracle: neither will I speak of the Woman on the Bancke
side, who is as cunning, as the Horse at the Cross keys, nor yet of the
cunning Woman in Seacole Lane, who has more skill in her Colebasket, then
judgment in Urine, or knowledge in Physic or Surgery. But I could discover
many others, which practice Physic and Surgery, with the bit in their
mouths, and the raynes in their necks, which do not only thereby deceive the
simple people, but oftentimes the wisest men, and these are as hurtful, as
mothes in clothes, or cancker rust in Iron.

There are many other abusers about this City of London lurcking in corners,
and sometimes they do raunge and wander Henry the eight, which fraternity, and
brotherhood of abusers of the Art, good Master Gale has discovered in his
Book of the office of a Surgeon, who says, that they were all banished the
Camp, and if they had not avoided with speed, they had been all hanged as
thieves and murderers.

And what shall be said to some, which not long since have been commanded to
prepare themselves, and with all speed to and stopping of a tooth, letting of
blood, or for the cure of the french Rocks, and thus they did plainly throw
all their skill in Surgery flat to the ground, which a little before shined
most brightly in the eyes of many. But this I say is well known, let the
service be once furnished with sufficient Surgeons, which oftentimes is very
hard to do, then they begin to shake their chains, The greatest barkers are
not the best biters.
and keep a stir, that they can cure that which all the best Chirurgions in
London or elsewhere do forsake, but what manner of curing they use, I may not
speak that I know. I could rehearse diverse of this stye, but they would say
my Book were seditious: but this may suffice for a caveat. Therefore these to
say the troth, may fitly be compared unto a certain boasting bragger dwelling
beyond the Seas, which did attempt to the great admiration of the standers by,
to deck on with a ciment for the Truth can never so well appear, as when it is
compared with deceit and falsehood.
nonce, a man's ear that was clean cut off from his head, yet his glory was
but short, for within two days, the ^arerotted, and fell off again, and he
became a poynting stock to the whole Town and Country. I would no man should
here misconstrue me, or to think I urge any thing in this my whole discourse,
against any good or honest artist, for my meaning is not against any such, who
have been, and are, in the Art, right diligent and studious for the good of
our country and common wealth, but against such, as Vesalius, Tagaltius, Vigo,
Arceus, Master Gale, Master Hall, Master Bannester, and such as these good
men, do disalow, who have in all their whole discourses and writings, never
sought for vain glory, promotion, or reward, but only by their virtues, and
laudable studies, to make known the indiscreet, and vaineglorious brags,
frivolous vantings, peevish practices, and wicked dealings, of a sort of
abusers of the art and good artists. And I suppose no honest man else, which
is a true artist, but does, and will also detest and hate all such
caterpillars, which suck the sap and eat the bread out of the mouths of many
a good Surgeon, who have been very much decayed by reason of such ill persons,
to the great impouerishment, not only of themselves, but likewise of their
poor Wives and children. Which men are well known, if ability were answerable
to their willingness and skill, to do her Majesty very good service in the
Art, wherein they have been trained, and spent themselves a long time in
travel and study for the attayning of the same.

Now time calls me to an end of this Epistle to the Reader, and of a part of
the general discourses of abuses and abusers of the Art, and all good
artists, and I will conclude with the last and the very worst of all sorts, and
they are those, that with The more ignorant they are, the more bolder they are,
and yet hate to be ^eproued.
open mouth stand upon their tiptoe, saying with many puissant and forcible
reasons, Away with all these books, and bookemen, for they have made our Art
too common. I perceive, it was not without great cause, that Pliny complained,
and said, Like as there is no light without a shadow, no more is virtue without
envy, but by Gods good grace, I will return their speeches upon their own
heads. Chilo the learned Philosopher said, That in Books you shall find
written the verity and truth of things secret and unknown, the which time can
never consume, nor fortune destroy, happy is that man which escapes such
Ciclops dens, without danger of the flux of their foul mouth, but I say unto
them whatsoever they be, that only their naked experience which they so The
foolish persuasion of naked experience, has deceived a great many.
brag of, without learning in the Art, may sitly be compared to a tree without
fruit. The first beginners of their sect of bussardly Empricks, I read was
Philinus Cous. Acro. Agrigentinus, and Alexandreus, with others. And farther it
is said, that their experience is nothing worth, that is not grounded upon
reason, the mother of all Arts and Sciences, and reason and knowledge is
gotten and made ripe by reading and weighing the well observed practices, and
meditated rules of the generations of learned men, and diligent artists in
time, gone before us, heereunto (I say) joining our own practice, we get us
the m^re prompt and excellent understanding, how to put things in profitable
execution* and thus both reason and experience matched togethers, makes a
perfect artist, and he that denies this, has neither wit, art, good
experience, nor honesty* and so I conclude, that the reading of good Authors,
is the school of wise men, for learning, and knowledge, is the most rare gift
of God, which makes men become famous upon earth: for example, as approved
Historyes do report, Plato, and Socrates, were well known to be two famous
Philosophers, though they were the sons of two poor Citizens of Athens, for
their well occupied minds in learning and knowledge advanced them to great
honor, as it may appear by their great renown, large volumes, and infinite
labors, remaining still unto posterities, and therefore it is as possible for
an Owl to encounter with an Eagle, or a Wren with a Faucon, as for such
boisterous blockheads, with their wodden practices, grounded only upon
experience, the schoolemistresse to fools, who with unequal comparisons, do
challenge men of reason and knowledge in the Art, with their beaderowles of
infamy, folaryes, fables, and old wives tales, long bred and nousled up in the
storehouse of abuses, but it is a most true saying, and it is in these days
come to pass, that every peevish Pan will compare with learned Apollo, but
with spite and hatred in their hearts, every Momus will assail Minerua, with
railing privily behind men's backs, and every Zoylus will bark at Cicero, with
open injury in their deeds.

But

Ye may not fear such enemies
To Art, and Authors good,
Who though they fawn in flattery,
Yet thurst they for your blood.
For these have watched full privily,
Such is their vile desire,
Care ye not for their courtesey,
Ne force ye of their ire.
This warning for a caveat,
To me it shall suffice,
Except to those that will not see.
A word may serve the wise.
But our good God, which has ever defended us from the ravening Beware of
hypocrisy, shadowed under the cloak of friendship and amity.
jaws of such dangerous foes, or smiling serpents, which with stealing steps,
do sow the seeds of sedition, with the hands of Briarious, will return all
the evils which they do work upon their own heads. Thus (good Reader,) I will
through Gods assistance, proceed to the accomplishing of this small Treatise,
notwithstanding their great threatenings to kill with Dagger, Sword, or Battle
axe, but I little esteem of such, since these my labors seemed in the opinions
of men, both godly, wise, and learned, not to be unprofitable, or unworthy to
come abroad, for the benefit of all young Students in the Art, whose Readings
and practices, I wish most willingly that God may prosper. Amen.

Willyam Clowes.

COurteous Reader, I suppose it almost impossible at the first impression of
any Book, but some faults will pass, be it never so carefully looked unto,
yet none here I hope so egregious, but that I know every honest mind will
friendly weigh the cause, and consider the troubles that is had in such works.
But as for the malicious quarrel pickers, whose poisoned natures is to turn
nothing to good, these, I say, will not only mislike and repine, but with
their scorning looks rather watch to find faults, than with honest minds to
amend those, which unwillingly have been committed: therefore I have gathered
this small Errate: and if in the course of your readings, it will please you
with your pens first to cover and correct the faults escaped, as it is here
declared, and also very easy to find, both the chapter, leaf, and line, then I
shall think my self most happy, and so wish you such profit by these my
labors, as your own hearts do desire, and as the matter is able to afford, as
knows God, who direct you in all these your studyes and labors. Amen.

Faults escaped.
PAge. 1. Line. 9. for proclayming, read proclayme. Page 3. line. 4. read
foliorum maluarum, lin. 22. albumina cuorum. page 4. lin. 30. ^lei papaueris.
lin. 31. vnguenti. page 5 lin. 15 in the margent read Quercetanus. page 6 lin.
26 foliorum maluarum. lin. 32. 32. vnguenti. page 7. lin. 2. seminis ps^^^^*
lin 10. 11 olei. li. 15. albuminum. page 8. lin. 5. cinnabrij. lin. 7.
Diachalciteos. page 10. lin. 18. radicum Bugloss^. page 11. lin 4. aqua
fumiterrae lin 7. fumoterrae page 12. lin 6. cum gummi. lin. 9. Resin^ pini.
lin. 10. Gummi. lin. 13 colophoniae. page 15. lin. 16. chamomillae, and in the
margent, read Cataplasma anodinum page 16. lin. 6. and oculis populneis. lin.
26. Aquae hordei. lin. 28. sarcocollae. page 17. in the margent read Angeli
Bolognini Restrictiuum. page 18. lin. 19. diamoron. page 22. lin. 13. seminis
sinapis. page 39. lin. 5. cum gummi. lin. 14. ophioglossi. lin. 17. nummulariae
lin. 18. lilij con^all^um page 42. lin. 28. cauterie. page 43 lin 15
peritoneum. page 45. lin. 16. cannabis. page 47. lin. 1. agrimoniae. li. 3.
Androsaemi. li. 4. Aschyri li. 21. pilosellae. li. 23. Quinqueneruiae. page 49.
lin 30. vnguenti. page 50 lin 4. albumen vnius oui. lin. 14 cum gummi. page 51
li. 5. read distillentur ac separato oleo adiungantur, etc. lin. 12. galangae.
li 15. nucis moscatae li. 16. cubebarum. li. 18. ligni. page 54. li. 14. Empl.
Resolutiuum. page 55. lin. 27. aceti page 56. li. 6. read, vitellos ouorum
tres. li. 29. and 30. vnguenti. page 60. li. 28. epispastices. page 62. li. 14.
25. camforae. page 7. in the 1. and 2. line, are left out the doses of mellis
communis, which should be lib. 2. and of vitriol. alb. which should be 4.
ounces. page 88. lin. 20. read* and de Ianua.

depiction of surgery on a wounded man

To his very good friend, Master Clowes Surgeon, all health, etc.
IN writing of Books for the benefit of the studious, as I consider of sundry
commendable courses taken by the Authors in that behalf, so yet is there none
(in my judgment) more apt, either to amplify the Authors name, or else to
increase the Readers knowledge, then that which is done by way of familiar
examples and observations: for such are properly beawtifyed with these three
amiable ornaments, Variety, Perspicuitie, and Certainty whereof in several,
the first delights, the second informs, and the third assures, but
jointly, all concur, to the ready ripening, and speedy preparing of the
Artist to answer the expectation of his calling. When (...) therefore, the
principal of your labor ( Master Clowes) has in this Book been, to
deliver faithfully your experiments in the curation of wounds, with such
plain instances of the medicines used in particular cases, and historical
observations of their several successes, joined with the noting of
occurrences, and prevention of accidents, as may in deed (according to your
speech) lead the young artist by the hand to do the like, I do not only for
mine own part, find my self bound to encourage and commend you, but dare
also assure you, in behalf of the bette^ sort, of all thankfulness:
Hippocrates having led that trace in his Epid^micis, has therein no small
estimation with the learned Physicians Amatus, Valleriola, Coiter, Arc^u^,
Dod^^^^^, and Skenchius, have again renewed that course, and received reverent
account for their labors. The learned Cr^to in his old age, seems to have
repented of nothing in that kind so much, as that he had not reserved and
written the observations of his practice, by which he supposed his name might
more have been commended to posterity, then by any other of his writings. I am
not ignorant also, that to write observations of a man's practice, is a way, by
which the Reader may be as much and perhaps more dangerously abused, then by
any other, namely, if the Author should be unfaithful, or conceited in his
own private opinions, which by this means he would seek to establish and
obtrude unto the credulous reader, but as the later of these can not be
objected against you, if the whole behavior of your life may be taken for a
testimony, so neither may the former be suspected by any that have care to
guide their judgments by the rule of charity. Add heereunto, that beside the
protestation you have made in the word of a Christian, concerning the verity
of these things, and your sincere and upright meaning in the penning thereof, I
am able, and will be ready in sundry points, and namely, in your medicines and
prescriptes, to testify that you have concealed nothing from the Reader. As for
the ^e^t, with those also that I speak of, if their likelihood and
probability may be sent among the learned and artistes of judgment to gather
their voices, I doubt not but your side shall be full. But you say, your
encouragement is greatly hindered, when you consider and call to mind, in what
evil part things are nowadayes taken, that were not evil meant, and that such
as would seem wise men are become so foolish, that they can not hear the
evil parts of base abusers disgraced, but by and by they must deem
themselves in like ^ort thereby defaced. I see the ulcer you appoint me unto, I
d^^^erne it to be Cacoethes, and the malignitie thereof to be greater then any
man can cure: but withal I deny, that it should be any worthy cause of your
discouragement, nay rather I hold, that you are afresh to take courage against
it, for diverse reasons, first, for that the burden shall not lie only upon
your back, but that others are charged in like sort with you, who will not
shrink the shoulder from you in the bearing thereof, and many hands (you
know) make quick and easy work. My second reason is, because the Devil
entendeth thus by their means to uphold his kingdom of ignorance and
wickedness still among us, against which, if we be enemies of his kingdom, we
must needs make war with all our might. Thirdly, because this is an
infallible truth, which you may write upon, that no man will misiudge, or
malign your inuectiues against the wicked and their practices, or take
themselves defaced by their disgrace, but such as have guylty consciences, and
are privy to themselves, either of the same or like enormities, or atleast,
that they do maintain or wincke at the same in others, when as rather by their
places they should punish them: this latter sort (I hope) will be more wise,
then to be found guylty of upholding iniquity, and if there have been
ouersightes committed heretofore (as the best advised will not deny) I trust
they will become more wary for the like hereafter, but the former ^orte are
rightly touched in the old and common proverb of a galde horse back. When a
great many kick at our dressing of two or three men's sor^s, it is a sign that
they are all infected with the like, and do therefore fear, least we would lay
hands on them also, and then what reproach can that be to us, when as our
writings against a few notoriously naught, shall discover unto the world a
greater number that are in secret: as naught, they can not say we have accused
them, when as in deed their own consciences have first condemned them,
wherein, if they had stood sound toward their ownehearts, nothing could have
touched them, so that we see these sayings well con^y^med, A good conscience is
as a brazen wall. And again, An evil conscience is as a thousand witnesses
against a man. Of these things, if I would stand long, I could say much, that
should worthily redound ^o the shame and confusion of all such, but remembering
the length of an Epistle, I will shut up the rest in this brief. One very
aptly compared the conscience of a man, to the minor, or assumption of such
Syllogismes as do conclude particularly upon a general charge or accusation
propounded for example. The Law says, He that kills or maymeth, must be
killed or maimed, the guilty conscience then assumeth thus: But I have killed
or maimed, and so this conclusion comes upon him, therefore I ought to be
killed or maimed again, all writers in Chirurgerie do give this proposition,
All unskillful men do wickedly abuse this Art, and ought to be punished, then
the guilty conscience every where makes this assumption: But I am an
unskillful man, now follows the conclusion on the neck of it, Therefore I do
abuse the Art, and ought to be punished. So when any Writer describes the
properties of wicked practisers, he perhaps does not say, this man is one, or
such a man is such, but the consciences of those men, to whom such propertyes
pertayne, do tell them so much in their bosoms. Who then (I pray you) is their
accuser but themselves? Yea, but (will some say) in your inuectiues against
abusers, you describe the men so by their propertyes, as every one may know
who you mean. I answer, first, I have known some, who think themselves no
small men, that have greatly stained their wisdoms in misiudging such
descriptions, therefore I wish men to be well advised in their Interpretations.
Secondly, if it be so, as they say, that a man by his propertyes may be
poynted out as with ones finger, my counsel is, that every man must labor to
change away his evil qualityes for good, that so, when they shall be spoken
of, they may commend him, and not disprayse him. And verily me think, it is
full of reason, that they, who are so angry for hearing of their qualityes,
should be much more ashamed to use them.

Fear not therefore ( Master Clowes) in the love of man's health, to show
your self even a vehement enemy, to all that hate, or hurt the same: Man's
health (I say) craves it at your hands to decypher such counterfaytes in all
their colors, that they may (at least) be avoided of the people, though they
be not also punished of the Magistrate, which notwithstanding were most of all
to be wished. I see you every where carefully except the sons of art, and
all honest and diligent men in our calling, of purpose because you would not
have your inuectiues applied to any that deserve them not. If then there shall
be any one that will needs take the things that are spoken to himself, and so
being angry at his own shadow, will also play Will Summers part, in striking
him that stands next him: if any (I say) shall thus deal with you, imagine
therein what good success you have had, that in laying for one Fox, you have
caught a couple, one, whom before you knew by special propertyes: and
another, who has now revealed himself by the guiltiness of his conscience,
double gain (you know) brings double rejoicing. In such sort verily, should
I think the matter meetest to be taken, as namely, if I should declare of one
that I know did give a Gentleman common praecipitate (as it seems) but mixed
with a little unguent out of his saluatorie, for a pill to purge him with: and
another that to remove a defiled bone, applied a fair Mallet and a Chissell to
the matter for more speed: and by the declaring of these, I should also rub
the galled backs of others, whom I knew not before to be sick of that
disease, were there not as good cause for me to be glad of the success of my
discovery, as for all other men to take it to their advantage for the shunning
of such impostors? the best men, I doubt not, will give their voices to this:
the worst sort, I am sure, you mean not to make your judges. You have heard my
judgment of your labors, and my opinion of your adversaries, the latter, your
own experience and working shall daily confirm, the other, the Chirurgians
practice, and orderly imitation, shall abundantly ratifye.

And as I do entreat you for the publishing of this present fruit, so do I no
less exhort you, to the keeping of other observations hereafter to the like
use. In both suites I persuade my self, (for the good will you bear unto me)
that I shall prevail.

Your assured friend, and wellwiller, John Banester.

In praise and commendation of the Author and this Work, I. G. Master of
Art, and Student in Physic and Chirurgerie.
AMong many other good things of late published in the Art of Surgery, I cannot
but praise, and greatly commend this brief and short treatise, set forth by
Master William Clowes, proceeding from good judgment gotten by his industry
and much experience by his own practice. I think verily that as no man of
sound judgment can mislike the matter, so no man that is in credit for his
honesty, will discommend the intent of the man, but rather attribute unto him
the title he deserves (a wellwiller to his Country.) In the censures of the
wise, a more necessary Work could not come forth in this Art, considering the
time. Surely the want of that knowledge in many sorry Surgeons which in this
book is manifested unto us, has cost many a poor Souldyer full dear, and
has made that stick by many Mariners, which they shall never be able to clawe
off whiles they live. For when they have been any way maimed or endangered with
loss of life or limme, then commes the bare singlesoled Surgeon, as he rightly
terms them, and what to do by art knows not, yet something he must
attempt, treading in his old cowpath, as though he were healing a broken head,
or plastering of a kibed heel, having one or two boxes of green Salues, with
a plaster of Diachilon, and a green grass Melilot, with their motheaten
Mussilage, and these are good for sooth for all sores, and so commits the
health of the patient to the main chance, a miserable thing, that warlike men
should first fall into the hands of men, and afterward to be as it were
massacred by such ignorant beasts. But that they may leave their brutish
ignorance, and their savage cruelty, let them read over if so be they can,
this directive again and again, and if they be not tootoo sottish, they shall
find their judgment amended, their wits sharpened, their practice
corrected, and their fingers directed, point by point, from the beginning of
the cure, till the finishing thereof.

Thou shall find also heereunto annexed (good Reader) a learned Work for the
cure of the french disease, written by a Spanish Physician. Also, certain
singular Aphorisms, collected out of most excellent Authors, a Work worth the
labor, and worth thanks to, for that a man may walk safely in this narrow
compass, who before might be endangered of losing himself or his sense, in
the wild forest of Aphorisms. And surely, we can not if we did as we should
but greatly thank God, for that as in most other, so in this art, the
necessary knowledge, and sufficient practice is brought of late into shorter
volumes then ever it was, so that though we may say, (...) vita breuis, yet can
we not of late years so rightly say (...) ars longa, for now having the paths
so well trod by our own countrymen, they better know our nature then
Strangers did, we may walk safer with small study, then they could with
tedious travail in time past. Heretofore men might well say, (...)
experimentum periculosum, because peradventure it cost many a man a limme, and
many men might be spoiled* before experience were ratifyed. Now that which
before was incultum nemus, being made parua siluula, a man may take a sure
staff to lean unto, whereas before he might trust to a rotten stick, and so
be deceived. Now because this notable work is wrought at home, up starteth
Aesops mangy curre, and all Acteons Dogs in a great cry; ready to pull down
the authors hereof, but their master must be their master, bark and brawle
they never so loud. Why they be so fell, I know not, unless it be that the
bleareeyed man can not abide the candle, nor he that has been brought up in a
dark den, abide the light of the Sun: but to say the truth, Hinc illae
lachrimae: ego excludor, ille recipitur. by this means they are known to be
ignorant asses, and therefore by wise men worthily shut out of doors, which if
Aesops ass had been, he had not so dangerously taken acquayntance of his
master. Yet there is another fly bytes their galled back, as bad as this,
for that every day more then other, the dawes stolen feathers are plucked from
him, and he known to be but a dawe, what with the old, pulling the black
hairs from their crown, and the young, pulling the gray from their forheads,
they must needs appear to be but bald bussards. and this is the cause they
cry out, fie upon Books, for, Litera scripta manet, as they are knaves in
grain, so they are fools in Print: but to speak much, were but a folly, for
words with them are but wind, it is Morbus inueteratus, an old ulcer of the
stomach, which if you touch, it fluxeth at the mouth, spewing out their poison
against all learning and learned men, who would cure them of their foul evil.
I have oftentimes meruayled how they that are artistes in deed, can suffer
such brasenfaced beasts to live among them, who if they be long tolerated,
will cause Surgery to be of that credit, that a man had rather fall into the
chaps of a mad Dog, then into the hands of a Surgeon. for as their words tend
to the defaming of the most skillful, so their works to the disgracing of the
Art. wheresoever they go, they leave such a stincke behind them, that all
men that has had to deal with them, cry fie upon them. To prove this to be
true without a sillogisme, look upon the aftercures that are among you. It is
some men's work to rectify other men's errors. Here I might speak to the
worshipful company of Surgeons in London, among whom I know many have good
knowledge, and also great reason joined always with their practice, Cicero
contra Catalinam spoke to Senators, Hoc quis far possit, inertes homines
doctissimis viris insidiari, st ultissimos prudentissimis, ebriosos sobrijs,
dormientes vigilantibus, and therefore if either art or artistes be respected
in this case, Non est lenitati locus: seueritatem res ipsa postulat, such
matters are not to be iested withal, the Stocks were a fit place for such
persons to publish their skyll. Hos igitur a vestris aris and aulis, a tectis
vrbis, a moenibus, a vita fortunisque, ciuium arcebitis, and tanquam hosts
patriae, latrones Angliae, recta pergant in exilium. Who could tolerate either
Molem inuidiae, procacitatem linguae, or, Spolium populi, but every man has
spoken so much, and so little prevailed, that I am out of heart to speak any
more. But yet I must needs tear off one ragge more from their torn coat,
before we part. These caterpillars, or peoplepollers, being thus painted out in
their several colors, with their proper badge to know them by, well
perceiving, that among so many torches, their pictures must needs be perceived,
seek to cover themselves under other men's hoodes, get other to compose, and
they to subscribe, and then the work is theirs, and so they become of blind
bussards, that can scarce write and read, great learned men. If Tully were
alive, he would cry out, O honorem contumeliosum, such men in deed do rather
aucupari gloriam, though ignominiosam, then publicae vtilitati inseruire. I
understand that Aesops Ass is alive again, and would cover himself with a
Lions skin, but if he do appear, we shall perceive his long ears well
enough, then were he best to keep him self within his own territory, least
he become by word much famous through greater folly. But suppose he can escape
cleanly a while, yet will Academicus lie whispring hos ego, etc. tulit alter
honorem, I could say something which I leave, expecting alteration of
disposition, that would be like a water of great force, to try whether there
were any figs in their bellyes or no, but because the one may be wiser then
the other, I keep silence, hoping that Philoponos shall have good words for
his good will, and I would pray them all, that old Philadelphus for his
friendly dealing might be free from their fury, but no salve I think can cure
that sore, for this will ever be true, Inuidia virtutis comes, Envy follows
virtue at the hard heels, not to tread in her steps, but to trip up her
heels if she could. But to conclude, I think all have some kind of
conscience or other, and there is magna vis conscientiae, and magna, says
Tully, in vtramque partem, vt nihil timeant qui nihil commiserint, and poenam
semper ante oculos versariputent qui peccarint, A clear conscience will
acquit continually where good meaning is, but a canckred heart will always
accuse where froward dealing is, and so farewell good Reader, and judge as thou
see cause, and apply that which is spoken in good will, to thine own profit.

Vale. From Cambridge, June the 24. Anno. 1588.
T. P. To his loving friend Master Clowes.
IN tempests safe by Pylots skill we sail,
In flattering snares true friendship us vpholds:
From loathsome greese good comfort does us bail,
These three in one, Clowes Book to us unfolds.
He stirs the helm, and friendly comfort lends,
When surges rage, when snares, when grief off ends.
When outward sores as boystrous waves do swell,
When venime hid, as flattring tongues do sting,
When both as greese each heart with torments quell,
When naught but death does seem relief to bring,
Then Clowes thy Pylot can from Sea to shore,
From pain to joy, from sick to sound restore.
Once Aesculapius Theseus son did cure,
Machaon once did Philoctetes save,
Their praise for this vnsteyned does endure,
Such just reward good skill and knowledge have:
Whom fame, unsought for, follows at the last.
Which sought for, by unskillful, flies as fast.
Clowes as Apollos son, by Art is said,
Not one, but sundry Hippolites to save,
And Banester Machaon seems, whose aid,
As many Phyloctetes daily crave.
How then, shall these not live in trumpe of same?
Since thousands cured shall extol their name?
Amongst which sort, my self although the last,
Yet not the least part of their cure did find.
Whose arm past cure, an Atrophy did wast,
And sinews shronke contracted out of kind,
Which past all skill, unskillful Surgeons thought,
To health by skill these skillful Surgeons brought.
But as the sweetest cloth the moathes do eat,
And freshest Rose the cancker seeks to spill.
And as the statelyest towers the wind does beat,
And fretting lightning strikes the loftiest hill,
So envy seeks the deadly foe of fame,
By slanderous toongs to hinder their good name.
The Dogs their vomit loves, the Goats their crags,
The Swine delight to tumble in the mire,
Our common proverb tells that scuruie nags,
Are fittest for to please a scabbed squire.
No marvel then though folly such embrace,
Which seek by lies these skillful men's disgrace.
Yet they shall shine as gold that rusteth not,
When these as dross with shame consumd shall lie,
Repining much that no report may blot,
The rightful praise which of these twain shall fly.
So Momus shall with these compared fleet,
As does the Beetle under Roses sweet.
Fear not therefore these slanderous toongs reports,
Which strike the best, but bad untouched do save.
Of your good names they batter not the forts,
But hating skillful, show what skill they have.
Continue fast, strange cures procure your fame,
Do good, and none but bad will touch your name.
T. P.

Now as follows, is set down those cures, which by Gods help have been
finished and brought to perfect health.
The cure of two Gentlemen grievously burned with Gunpouder. Chap. I.
ALthough it be the manner of Fugitives and Landlepers, which run and gad
from Country to Country, and from town to town, proclaiming their cures at
the Market Cross, as did not long since one raunging runnagate, who called
himself Johannes Petrus, alias Scleeues, which would needs take upon him to
cut of a great Wenne that long time had grown on a man's side: and without any
tarience, with his flattring speeches and sweet words brought a sleep the
poor patient to agree to have his wenne taken away: the which in a short time
he did attempt. And to show the worthiness of his handy work, presently did
cut off the top or upper part of the Wenne, which done, immediately after, to
grace the rest of his work, he tied it round about the root with a strong
ligature, to cause it bear out, and to show the more vgglie unto the
beholders: Then he trained his patient into the Market place, with all his sore
side open and bare, for the market folks to behold. But God knows, within
few days his poor patient, by his beastly usage, dyed: for which lewd abuse,
a Gentleman of Darby, called Master Buckley, an Atorney of the law, upon an
honest zeal and for conscience sake banished this abuser out of the Country
as an outlawe for ever. I will not follow these men, or rather monsters,
neither will I protract time, or use many circumstances, but now I come unto my
purposed matter. It happened in anno Note.
1577. two Gentlemen were drying of Gunpouder in a brass pan, who, as it did
appear, had no consideration unto the over heating of the pan, but without
knowledge of the danger or care of themselves, did continually stir the
powder with their hands, unhappily it chanced, the powder upon a sudden became
on fire, wherewith they were most grievously burned, both hands and face, and
also their bodies, and their clothes were set on fire, which caused them to
make a most lamentable crying: which being heard of diverse in the same house,
and perceiving their chamber to be in a great smoke and smell of Gunpouder,
presently they entered in, and with all have that possible might be, did carry
them into another room, and there they did cut, rent, and tear of all their
clothes from their bodies: otherwise, without these helps, there is no
question but they had been both burned to death. There dwelled near unto them
a Gentlewoman, who did bring them into great ease with a whay, the which she
made of veriuce and milk. Nevertheless, she being fearful to meddle any
farther, A sign of a good conscience.
for that she never had experience in such great burnings with Gunpouder, and
her stomach could not away with the sight nor savor of them, and then
presently I was sent for: And after diligent view had, I did first anoint the
parts that were blistered, specially on their hands and face, three times a
day, for the spa^e of four days, with this remedy following, etc.

Gale. Rec. Salis com.. ss. Succi Cepae.. iiij.
Misce.

But where the skin was burned off, and the parts made raw and paynfull,
there I used this unguent, the which I have infinite times approved in many
cures that have been burned with Gunpouder, which medicine was never changed
till the parts were perfectly whole, without any farther helps but only this.

Clowe. Unguent Ambusi Rec. Axunglae porcinae lib. iiij. Olei lini lib. ij.
Olei Ros. lib. j. ss. ana. m. j. Folia maluarum. Violarum. Nympheae.
Plantaginis. Prunellae Vmbilici veneris. Androsemon. Sempervini.



Infuse these six days, then boil it with a gentle fire of coals, till the
herbs be parched, then strain it, and add thereto Cerae albae. lib. ss.
Nitri Albi.. vj.
And if you please in the bayling to put in of Shoemakers piece grease lib. i.
your unguent will bre the better: I have with this unguent cured many, and it
is of my collection. But note this, that unto their eyes I applied this remedy
following.

Rec Aquae Ros. rub.. iiij. Lactis mulieris.. ij. Ouorum albuminis. numero. ij.
Saccari candi. q. s. Misce.
And I anointed the eye liddes and the parts near thereunto with this
excellent unguent.

Rec. Olei Ros.. viij. Cerusae lotae in aqua Ros. rub.. ij. Cerae albae.. ij.
Albuminis onorum. numero. iiij. Camphorae.. ij. Misce, fiat unguent.


In the end I finished these cures without blemish or signs of any burnings
with Oleum ouorum, and Oleum amigdalarum, etc.


I would be loath that any of the fruit of my labors should be profitable
unto the wicked, or come into their hands, since they are like Esops curre,
neither good to themselves, nor fruitful to others.

Here follow certain remedies, good for burnings with Gunpouder. Chap. 2.
IT is requisite to be noted and observed, that in any wise you attempt not to
cut any of the blisters of them that be so burned with the flame of Gunpouder:
for that will cause your patient to be in too intolerable pain: but they must
be anointed, as aforesaid, with the same remedy for the space of three or
four days, or else with any of these here set down.

M^^ sap.
Rec. Saponis nigrae. lib. j. Mellis com. lib. ss. Salis com.. j.
Misce.

Or this.

Rec. Succi cepa.. ij. Olei lini vet. or Varnish.. j.
Misce.

Any of these may be used as aforesaid, and then if you please you may safely
proceed in this cure with my unguent, or else with any of these here under
written.

Am. Parre his vnguentum pro igne. Rec. Lithargiri auri.. iiij. Olei Ros.. iij.
Olei Depapaueris.. ij. ss. Vnguentum populeon.. iiij. Camphor.. j.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum.

Or this.

Medici florentini. Rec. Olei Rosati.. viij. Olei ex ouis.. ij. Nitri albi
puluerizati.. ij. Cerae.. j. ss. Corticis med. sambuci. m. j.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

Or this.

D. B.
Rec. The pith and bark of Elders, ana.. ij. boil these in three pints of
water, till half be consumed, then strain it, and add to oil of Nuttes.
iiii. boil these till the water be consumed, and add thereto Cerae. q. s.

Et fiat vnguentum.

Or this.

Josephus Quirsitanus.
Rec. Lard molten in the flame. ii. and power it into the juice of Beetes and
Rewe, the Cream of Cow milk. i. Mucilage, of the seeds of Cidoniorum, and
Dragagant, ana.. ss. Misce and fiat vnguentum.

Or this.

Jacobus We^kerus.
Rec. Calcis extinctae. iij. Olei. lib. j. Cerae lib. iij.


Thou shall every day once wash the chaulke, and let the water be taken away
with a sponge: do this ten days, then wash it with Rosewater and let it
dry, and then melt your Wax and Oil, and take it from the fire, and put in
the calx, made in most fine powder unto the Oil and Wax. etc.

The true manner and order of the curing of a Merchant of this city of London,
which was wounded with Gunshot. Chap. 3.
A Few years past, a Merchant of good account in this City of London, called
Master Thomas Gore, being at Flushing in Sealand, there making of great suite
unto the Prince of Orange and the States, for the release of a ship and goods
of his and his friends, which the Flushingers had taken at sea, in which time
of his suite, he did stand at a door where his lodging was, beholding a band
of Dutch Soldiers, as they were marching to the walls: And as it is the manner
of Soldiers, in towns of war, to discharge their pieces as they pass by:
so one of those Dutch Soldiers, that partly knew him, and the cause of his
coming to the town, as the Gentleman himself confessed. This Soldier at that
time had his piece charged with a bullet, and so shot at him, he having both
his hands clasped together, and the bullet passed through the middle of both
his hands, and fractured the bones, and also wounded him through the upper part
of his left arm, and also brake that bone in many pieces, which did rent and
tear the muscles, sinews, veins, and arteries: after which followed great
pains, pulsation, and inflammation, that continued a long time,
notwithstanding he was presently dressed by the Surgions of the town, but he
received of them small comfort or hope of his recovery. Then his friends being
Gentlemen and Merchants of London, were by him given to understand that he was
still from day to day worse and worse. Then they sent for him to London, and
presently upon his arriual I was called unto the cure: And after conference had
with a Doctor of Physic for his diet, purging and bleeding, I made ready
forthwith this Cataplasma, which appeased the pains, and ceased the
inflammation.

ana. m. ij. Folia maluarum and Violarum. Cataplasma.

ana. m. j. Florum Chamomillae Fol. Ros.

Boil all these in new milk till they be very soft, then stamp them in a
mortar, and add thereunto ana.. j. ss. Vnguentum Ros. Vnguentum populeonis.
Vitellos ouorum. numero. ij. Farinae hordei.. ij. ana.. ss. Radicis althae and
Semina Psillij.



Sometimes I did put in these mucilages of each. ii. and of oil of Ros.. i.
ss. with the crummes of white bread steeped in new milk. iii. Thus the parts
were freed from all pains and enflammations: which being done, to shun the
like dangerous accidences, which oftentimes in such wounds is hard to resist:
therefore I applied round about the parts this defensive.

Defensive. Rec. Oleum Ros.. ss. Oleum Myrtini.. iij. ana.. ss. Sanguin.
Draconis Boli armeniaci Farinae Hordei
ana. q. s. Albuminis ouorum Aceti Ros.

Misce.

Mundificative. Rec. Mel. Ros.. ij. Terebinthinae. iij. ana.. j. ss. Succi Apij
and Plantag.

Boil all these together a little, and then add thereunto, ana.. ss. Farinoe
Hord. and Fabarum.
Sarcocollae.. j. ss. Croci.. ss.
Misce.

Powder that which is to be powdered, and mix all these together, stirring it
continually, till it come to perfection. Notwithstanding I had very great help
by this Mundificatiue, and the powder of Mercury precipitate, yet I was after
constrained to use more stronger remedies: And amongst others, I found most
profit in this powder following, which did not only take away the evil
flesh, but also it did remove diverse fragments and pieces of bones which were
hidden within the spungious flesh, etc. Clowes.


Rec. Mercurij praecipitati.. iij. Aluminis combust. in aceto Ros.. j.
Cinalri.. ss.
Misce.

Likewise I commonly used Emplastrum Diachalsitheos, and the gum plaster,
published in my book De Morbo Gallico, in the 27. leaf, which plaster was
invented and practiced by a very excellent Surgion a Frenchman borne, who
followed the wars a long time under the King of Navarre, and also in the Low
Countries: By chance coming over into England, fell acquainted with Master
Baker, vn^d whom he did give this gum plaster, as he called it, and since by
means it is come into many men's hands. Truly the plaster is worthy
commendations, etc. But, as I have aforesaid, after I had taken away all the
spungious flesh, and mundified the wounds, and also removed the loose bones,
then I next used my Vnguentum Incarnatiuu^, whereunto sometimes I did mix
Aluminis combust. in Aceto Ros. which unguent did not only dry up superfluous
moisture, but it did moreover gently cleanse without any great mordication or
biting: which being performed, then I did shortly after desiccate and dry up
the said wounds with Vnguentum Desicatiuum, and Emplastrum Diachalsitheos. And
thus I performed this work and cured him perfectly within this City of London.

The cure of one Master Andrewe Fones, a Merchant of London, who being in a
ship at the Sea, was set upon by the Flushingers, in which fight he was very
daungerously wounded with Gunshot. Chap. 4.
THis Merchants Ship was set upon by certain Flushingers at sea, and being a
long time in fight with them, and very sore oppressed by the number of men and
Ships, yet they did fight it out until at the last by chance he was that
into the upper part of his breast near unto Os forculae, or the channel bone,
and so passed through till it came to the lower part of Os scapulae, or the
shoulder blade, where it did rest till lie came to London, which was a long
time: for immediately after his hurt, the ship was taken and carried to Flushing,
where he was in cure, as he said, along time with two of the Prince of Orenges
Chirurgians, to his great cost and charges, yet it profited him nothing. Then I
was sent for, and after speech had, I made probation and found where the shot
was lodged: then I did without tarience, in the presence of diverse skillful
Chirurgions of London make incision, and there I did take out the shot. And
after that there was great care ^ad of him by his friends, for that I did
signify unto them the wound was not without danger. Then there was joined
with me Master Doctor Lopus, one of her Majesty's Physicians, which afterward
showed himself to be both careful and very skillful, not only for his
counsel in dyeting, purging and bleeding, but also for his direction of Arccus
Apozema, amongst others it wrought most singularly: the proof thereof I never
had until that time, but since I have used it, and I have found it a treasure
for the curing of wounds in the breaft, whose composition I will here set
down, etc. First, after I had taken out the shot, I preserved the wound with
this digestive, the which I used upon tents and pledgets.

Digestive Clowes. Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vita. iiij. Vitellorum
ouorum. nu* ij. Olei Ros.. ss. Mercurij precipitat, biscalcinati.. j. Croci.. j.
Misce.

After the wound was herewith preserved, then I anointed it round about with
oil of Roses warm, and Emplastrum Diachalcitheos dissolved in oil of Roses,
and at every dressing I applied hot steuphs of white wine, and Aqua vitae. q.
s. and I defended the wound from accidents with this defensive.

Defensive. Rec. ana.. j. Pull. ros. rub. and Myrtillorum.
ana.. vj. Boliarmeniaci Ter^ae sigillat^
ana.. j. Succotum Plantaginis and Solani
ana.. ij. ss. Olei Ros. omphac. and Myrtillorum.
Aceti Ros.. j. Cerae.. ij.


In which time and space of the use of these outward remedies, I did give him
to drink of this Apozema oftentimes q. s. Arceus Apozema.


Rec. ana. p. iiij. Hordei mundat. contusi. Passularum mundatarum contusarum.
Radicorum Buglossae contusae.. iij. Gliceryzae contusae.. j. ss. Seminum
cumini.. ij. Iuiubarum, numero. xx. Prunorum, numero. xv. Radicum petrocelini
contu. m. j.


All which being boiled in xiiii. pound of Rain water, to the consumption of
the third part, after that let it be strongly strayned, whereunto shall be
added* Penediarum.. iij. ana.. iij. Sirupi Rosarum and de duabus radicibus sine
aceto.
Saccari albi lib. ss. Cinamomi puluerizati.. j. Fiat Apozema.


And likewise for cleansing and mundifying of the said wound, I used this next
following, and also many times besides with Basilico, mixed with Mercury
precipitate.

Petri Andreae Mundificatiuum. Rec. Terebinthinoe Venotoe lotoe in
aquafumitoriae.. iiij. Vitellorum ouorum, numero. ij. ana.. ij. Mellis Ros.
Sir. de fumitoria. Farinae orobi.. iij.
ana.. ss. Thuris. Masticis Aloes hepaticae.
Radicis Peucedani. * j. Misce.


Also I iniected inwardly with a ^iting this excellent losion, which did
wonderful well mundifie and cleanse the breast. Iniectio. Mundificatiua. Vigon.


Rec. ana. * ij. Hordei mu^dati Lentium.
Caudae equinae. m. j. Ros. Rub. m. ss.


Boil them in equal parts of common and Plantiue water, cum modico succo mali
punici, unto the consumption of the third part, putting thereto, when it is
strayned, Sacchari rub. ij. Sir* ex infusione ros.. iij. Croci.. ss. Misce.


After the parts were perfectly mundified, then I perfected the cure with these
remedies here under prescribed.

This iniection does mundifie, incarne, and consolidate.
Rec. Aquae hordei lib. ss. Sir. ros.. j. Penidiarum.. ij. Liqueritiae.. ij.
Myr^^^*. ss.
Misce.

(...) with the before rehearsed infections I used this unguent, which is very
necessary for such wounds made with gunne shot: and I have approved it in many
other cures.

Vnguentum de Peto. Clowes. Rec. Succi de Peto. lib. vj. Adipis ouini. lib. ij.
ana. lib. ss. Oleorum Ros. lumbricorum and Olei Hipericonis cum gummis nostrae
inuentionis.
Terebinthinae Venetiae,. xij. in aqua vitae lotae. Resini pini. lib. ss.
Gummis Elemnij.. vj. Olibani.. iiij. Masticis.. ij. Collophonij. lib. j. Mellis
Ros. lib. ss. Cerae albae. lib. j. Vini albi. lib. j. ss.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

With these remedies and order here rehearsed I did perfectly make him whole,
and cicatrized up the wound with vnguentum desicatiuum rub. and so he
remains unto this day, within this city of London.

The cure of a certain Soldier that was wounded with gunne shot in the low
Countries, he was shot in at the bottom of his belly on the left side, and
the bullet passed through and rested in the right buttocke near unto Anum,
where it lay secretly hid and could not be found for the space of three years,
in which time it became a Fistula of a hard curation. Chap. 5.
IN the year of our Lord 1573. I was sent for unto my singular good friend
Master Richard Young, one of her Majesty's Justices of Peace of Middlesex, who
did earnestly request me, that I would for his sake, if it were possible, that
the foresaid Soldier, whose name was called Master Giles, might be recovered
again and brought to his former health, for that he was known to be a very
valiant man. Which cure in truth seemed to me to be very hard and difficult,
for that he had been for the space of three years with diverse very good
Chirurgions, both beyond the Seas, as also in England, and yet his grief did
still reuerse and break out again. The reason I perceived, was, for that the
place where the bullet lay could neither by probation nor conjecture, be
certainly known where abouts it did rest, and that was the chiefest cause, I
suppose, they failed in this cure. So at this worshipful Gentleman's request, I
did take him in cure, and after probation made with probes of lead and wax
Candles, and long and small flexible tents that were apt to yield to every
crooked turning, yet by no means I could come to the knowledge or
understanding where the bullet had conveyed and hid it self, neither could the
patient himself give me any certain direction thereof: then first of all I
enlarged the mouth or orifice of the Fistula, with a tent made of a Spoonge,
and for that the callous hollownes did penetrate deep, and as I have said,
being uncertain of the bottom which was in that part where the bullet lay,
therefore I ordained a long and small stiff tent made of fine lint without any
gross threeds in it, and so with the white of an Egg well beaten I framed my
tents in length and bigness according to the greatness and smalnesse of the
grief: which being thus prepared according to art, then I did annoint every
tent flightly over with vnguentum Rosarum, only to have the powders cleave fast
and take better hold on the tents, whereby it might be so conveyed in to destroy
and remove the callous hardness which was environed about the circuits or
compass of the hollownes of the Fistula, and the first powder that I used for
this purpose was this.

Rec. Vitriol crud.. ij. Mercurij precipitat.. iij. Cinabrij.. ss. Boli
armeniaci orient. q. s.
Misce.

After that I had reasonably well enlarged the Fistula with the powder, I used
it twice a week, and I removed the escares with vnguentum Rosarum, and laid
upon the same most commonly Emplastrum diachalcitheos dissolved with oil of
Roses and the white of an Egg mixed together, and so applied it. And although I
had herewith partly taken away the callous, yet I found not that profit and
commodity, as heretofore I had done in the curing of diverse other. Then hoping
of better success with this strong powder following, the which I applied after
the same manner and order, as the other aforesaid.

The strong powder. Rec. Vitrioli albi combust.. j. Alluminis vsti.. j. ss.
Mercurij sublimati.. j. Boli armeniaciorient. q. s.
Misce.

With this powder I did wholly destroy the callous, so far as it was possible
to convey in my tents. Then supposing I had made way sufficient to have found
where the bullet rested, but yet do what I could by searching, either when he
stood up right, or stooped downwards as he stood when he was shot, all which
profited nothing, till at the last I did consider that such Fistulaes that has
mo ^^^k^s or turnings then one, could hardly be cured by teuts: wherefore I
followed the counsel of Tagaltius, who says, in the cure of Fistulaes where
medicine by tents cannot be brought or conuayed into the bottom, as the cause
does require, then to use iniections and liquours meet for the purpose, to be
cast in with a string, is, says he, greatly available, as I very well did
prove by this cure: for I prepared this water following, the which I did cast
it in with a ^^^ing that had a long pipe and a large barrel: The said water is
called Aqua Fallopij.

Aqua Fallopij Rec. ana. lib. j. Aquae plantaginis and Ros.
ana.. ij. Alluminis Roch. Argenti sublimati.



Put all these together in a double glass, and boil it in Balneo mariae to
the consumption of the fourth part. After I had cast in of this water,
presently I stopped the mouth or orifice of the Fistula, and caused him
forthwith to lie down upon his right buttocke, according as the passage
directed me, only to this end that the water should not return back again
till it had wrought his effect, for within xxiiii. hours after he did greatly
complain of extreme pains in his right buttocke ^ere unto Anum, and there I
did perceive it to be greatly tumi^^ed and swollen, then I applied on the out
side of his buttorke where he complained this Cataplasma, which is a singular
remedy in such causes. The composition is as follows.

Anodina. Cataplasma. Clowes. Rec. ana. m. j. ss. Foliorum maluarum violarum.
Hiosciami albi.
ana. m. j. Floru^ chamomelae. and Ros.

Boil these in new milk, and then add thereto Medullae panis. q. s. Farinae
hordei.. ij. Sem. lini.. iij. ana.. j. ss. Oleoru^ ros. and Violarum.
Vitellorum ouorum, numero, iii. Croci.. i.
Misce.

Thus I let him remain till the next day following in the morning, for then I
had a good hope the water had found the passage and place where the bullet had
seated it self. Then I called other in presence when I made incision upon the
right buttock nere unto Anum, and there by ye inciston I took out the shot.
And for that time to mitigate the pain I iniected new milk and Sugar, with a
little oil of Roses, and upon pledgets I applied vnguentum Rosarum to remove
the ascher which was made by the foresaid water, and I stayed the bleeding
which came by the incision with Galens powder: and so he rested reasonable
quiet all that day and the next night: then at the second dressing I ordained
this unguent, the which I used till the pains and inflammation was ceased,
and the said unguent is made of Axungia and oculoru^ populei, wherewith I mixed
a small quantity of Mercury precipitate, then after I did mundiste it with
this mundificatiue.

Vnguentum mundificatiuu^ Rec. Gum. amoniaci.. ii. Galbani.. i. ss. ana.. i.
Aloes Sarcoc.
Terebinthinae.. iiii. Resinae pini.. ss. Olei ros.. iii. Olei mastic.. iiii.
Mellis ros.. i. ana.. ss. Succorum plantaginis. Apij. Card* Bened.
Viridis aeris.. iij.


Dissolve your Gummes in white Wine and make an unguent according to art:
After that the parts were well mundified, then I did iniect in twice a day this
iniection, which does both incarne and conglutinate.

The iniection of Tagaltius. Rec. Aqua hordei. lib. i. Mel. ros.. iii.
Saracol.. ii. ana.. i. Olibani. and Myrrhae.
Vini Maluatici.. vi. Misce, secundum artem.


Thus in a short time I finished this cure with this iniectio^, and my
vnguentum de Peto, and the plaster of Diachalcitheos.

The cure of one Master Henry Rodes, one of the wayters of the Custom house,
he being upon the water skirmishing with his piece, and by reason that the same
had flawes in it, did break in many pieces, and made a great wound upon his
chinne, and carried away a good part of the manduble and teeth withal: moreover
it did rent his hand in three parts very greatly: all which I cured again
without mayme or deformity. Chap. 6.
AFter I had stitched the wounds of his hands and face, then I preserved them
with oil of Hipericon warmed, and upon the same to restrain the bleeding I
applied this Restrictiue.

Angeli Bolognini Restrictiui.
Rec. Boli armeniaci.. j. ss. ana.. j. Sanguinis Draconis. Terrae sigillatae.
Thuris gummosi.. ij. Pilorum leporis terrefact.. ss. Ouorum albuminis. q. s.
Misce.

And the wounds of the hand were defended from injurious accidences that
commonly follow such wounds, that will admit no cure till they be removed by
good industry and diligence, which was performed with this defensive. etc.

Defensive. Rec. ana.. j. Rosarum rub. Myrtil.
ana.. vi. Boli armeniaci. Terrae sigillatae.
ana.. j. Succi platag. and Solatri.
Aceti ros.. ij. ana.. ij. ss. Olei ros. and Myrtil.
Cerae.. ij. Misce.


Then with decent bolstring and roulling I preserved his hand for the first
dressing, laying it orderly upon a palmestrie of wood, bewrapped round with
fine towe, and bound it easily so that his hand might safely lie on it, without
stirring or removing any way. Then after the wound of his lip was also
stitched, I used unto the wound of the outward part the oil of Hypericon
warmed, which I applied to with pledgets of fine lint dipped in the same oil,
and upon that the foresaid Restrictiue. And I often dressed the wound in the
inside of his mouth with Sirup. ros. and Mel. ros. and also with this
Gargarisme here following.

Gargarisme. Rec. Aquae hordei. lib. j. Succi granatorum.. ij. Mellis ros.. ij.
Diamorion.. j. ana.. iiij. Aquae ros. and Plantaginis.
Alluminis Roch.. ss.


And thus also with bolstring the wound of his chinne and convenient roulling
of it, he rested till the second day, then at the second dressing I ordained
steuphs of white wine with Aqua vitae, q. s. and my vnguentum de Peto, which I
used continually with the oil of Hypericon warmed, and the plaster called
Diachalcitheos, and annoynting the parts about with oil of Roses: and so this
wound of his chinne was in a short time perfectly cured. In like manner I
prepared at the first for the curing of his hand also steuphs of white wine
with Aqua vitae, q. s. and I ordained likewise this digestive, wherewith I
continued until* the wounds did yield perfect matter, in which time no
accidence ensewed that did hinder the ordinary course of curing.

Pigesti^^m
Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vitae.. ij. Vitellorum ouorum, nu. ij. Croci..
ss. Olei Ros.. ss. Farinae hord. q. s.
Misce.

A convenient digestive in such wounds is necessary, because of the alteration
of the air, and for brusing and renting of the parts so disseuered: how be it,
digestiues may not be used over long, for then it will certainly too much
putrify the parts. Moreover, I used in the time of Application of this
digestive, Oleum lumbricorum, and Oleum hipericonis, of each equal portions,
and twice a day I dipped the pledgets of the digestive in these oils, and
anointed the part about with warm oil of Roses, and a plaster of
Diachalcitheos dissolved with oil of Roses, and the white of an Egg being al
relented together, and so I continued with bolstring and roulling, as
aforesaid, till the wound was well digested. Then I did mundifie those wounds
of his hand with this Mundificatiue which Master Rasis the French Kings
Surgion did give unto me: and it is a singular remedy in such wounds, as I
have many times approved.

Francisci. Rasij. Mundificatiuum.
Rec. ana.. iij. Pull. Aloes. Myrrhae. and Gentianae.
ana.. ij. Pull. vtriusque Aristolochiae. and Centaurij minoris.
Pulueris ireos florent.. ss. ana. q. s. Accipiantur omnia cum ^ir. Ros.
siccar. and Absinthij.
Addendo Aquam vitae.. j.
Et fiat linimentum.

After the wound was well mundified, then I prosecuted unto the end of the
cure with mine Incarnatiue, and sometimes I mixed with it, as aforesaid,
aluminis combust, in aceto Rosarum, and after brought it unto a perfect
cicatrize with this vnguentum de minio following.

Vnguentum de Minio. Rec. Minij leuissime triti.. ij. ana.. ii. Olei rosati.
Olei myrtini.

Coquantur lento igne cum cera alba.. ss. Misce, and fiat vnguentu^ secundu^
artem.

Now here I will draw unto the end of this cure, the which I performed within
this City of London. About the same time, one Henry Battey a Cheesemonger,
dwelling at Broken The cure of one Henry Battey a Cheesemonger of London
Wharfe, which by ouercharging of his Dagge yt did break in many pieces, and
the breech or screw of the Dagge did fly up into the corner of his eye and
fractured the bone, and so passed up into his head, and the wound presently was
closed together, that those Chirurgions which were before called unto the cure,
supposed the wound to be very small, and went about to heal it up* but still
he did grow weaker and weaker, and in the end he was speechles, that diverse
times the bell toulled for him. Then I was sent for, and forthwith I enlarged
the wound by incision, and I took out the screwe of the Dagge out of his head,
and the pieces of fractured bones, and so in a short time after I cured him
within this City of London, and yet he lives until this day.

The cure of a certain Soldier that was shot through the leg, and fractured
the great bone called Ostibiae, or Foscilla mayor. This wound fell to Gangraene
within two days, by reason of a wonderful inflammation that followed, he
having also a very full and plethorick body. Chap. 7.
THis Soldier was of a hot collericke and furious nature, and his body was
replenished with evil humors. The parts about the Gangroene was marueilously
inflamed, which greatly increased the fury and spredding of the said grief:
so that forthwith I scarified the affected part with deep sections and
scarifications. And I opened with a launcet all the small veins that did
appear about the Gangraene, but where Horsleaches is to be had, it is very
profitable to apply them, but in the stead of Horsleaches to opening the small
veins with a launcet is available, but not so good as the Leaches, because
they suck and draw out the adusted blood* which is congeled and compact in
the veins and parts inflamed: then I fomented the corrupt part two times a ^ay
with this Lixiuium, which did excellently cleanse and consume the filthiness
and corruption.

Lixiuium Am. Parrei.
Rec. Aceti optimi. lib. j. Mellis ros.. iiij. Sir. acetosi.. iij. Salis com.. v.
Boil all these together and then add thereto Aqua vitae. lib. ss.

When the corrupt part was herewith well fomented and bathed, then I applied
upon it this vnguentum Aegiptiacum.

Vnguentum AEgiptiacum. Rec. ana.. iij. Floris aeris. Alluminis roch. Mellis
com.
Aceti acerrimi.. v. Salis com.. j. Vitrioli Rom.. ss. Sublimat Puluerisati.
ij.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

Thus with pledgets of lint I did apply unto the corrupt part, and upon the
same also this Cataplasma, of which I have had sufficient trial.

Fallopij cataplasma. Rec. Rapum vnum domesticum. Vnam satis crassam radicem
Raphani.
Let them be scraped and sufficiently cleansed, then take Pulueris seminis
synapij.. j. Gariophilorum.. iij. ana. q. s. Olei seminis lini. Olei nucum
iugland. vetustissimi.



Let these be labored in a mortar to the form of a plaster or Cataplasme,
and then use it, etc. Moreover, there was applied about the mortified parts
three or four times double this Defensive, which is of a marvelous good
operation, for it comfort the member, and will not suffer it to receive
corruption.

Desensiue Vigonis. Rec. ana.. iiij. Olei ros. ex oliuis immaturis. Olei
myrtini.
ana.. ij. Succi plantaginis. and Solani.



Let all these be boiled till the juice be consumed, then strain them, and
add thereto Cerae albae.. j. ss. ana.. i. ss. Farinae fabarum Farinae lentium.
Farinae hordei. Sandalorum omnium.
Boli armeniaci.. j. ana.. i. Pulu. myrtilorum. Granorum and foliorum eius.

Misce.

By these means before rehearsed, the Gangraene was stayed, in which time and
space the Liver vein was opened, and his body was purged with Diacatholicon,
and at sundry times we did give him to eat of fine Mithiridat a little
quantity at a time, which, as Tagaltius says, is merueilous good to defend
the filthy and venomous fumes from hurting and offending the Heart, which
venomous vapors commonly ascend up from the corrupt member: And during all
which time he was adjoined to a thin and cooling diet. Then after that the
Gangraene was by these means fully and wholly stayed, then the aschers were
after removed and taken away by these remedies now next ensuing.

Vnguentum Tetrapharmacon Galeni. Rec. ana. q. s.
Picis nigrae Resinae. Cerae. Adipis vaccinae.
Fiat vnguentum.

Then I did take of this said unguent. iiii. of the ointment that is made of
Axungia and Poplear buds. iii. whereunto I did add the yolks of two Eggs, all
which together was well labored in a mortar, then I did therewith remove the
aschers, which being done, the part affected was after perfectly mundified with
this most excellent unguent.

Mundificatiuum optimum Vigon.
Rec. Terebinthinae clarae.. iiij. Mellis rosati colati.. ij. ana.. i. Succi
plantaginis. Succi Apij.

Let them boil unto the consumption of the juice, then take them from the
fire, adding these here under written. viz. Statim, vitellos duorum ouorum.
ana.. j. Farinae hordei. Farinae fabarum.

Misce.

And after the place was thus well mundified and cleansed, then i did incarne
and heal it up with vnguentum ceraseos paruum Mesuae, and with my vnguentum
incarnatiuum mixed with Allumin. combust. in Aceto ros. etc.

Vnguentum Ceraseos paruum, Mesuae.
Rec. ana.. j. Aristolochiae. Ireos. Sanguinis Draconis. Hamoniaci. Sarcocollae.
Lithargirileuigati.. v. Olei. lib. j.
Misce.

And likewise I used this plaster following always upon the foresaid unguent,
until the end of this cure.

Emplastrum nigrum. Rec. Olei ros. lib. iiij. Cerae albae. lib. ss. Minij. lib.
ij. Camphor.. ss.


Boil together your Minium and Wax til they be black, then put in your Wax,
and last your Camphyr. And thus within the space of ten weeks he was safely
cured, and his bone was again united and knit, his splints and roullers were
taken also away, and the plasters that did remain about his leg, for the
curing of the fractured bone was likewise removed: and thus I finished this
cure as effectually as though he had never received hurt. But if the Gangraene
should yet have increased, as oftentimes I have seen, notwithstanding these
and such like good remedies, then the last help will be miserable, that is, to
cut off the corrupt member in the whole and sound parts, etc.

The manner and order of the taking or cutting off a mortified and corrupt leg
or arm, which comes oftentimes by reason of wounds made with Gunshot, etc.
Chap. 8.
Since as I have said, that oftentimes it happens, by reason of evil
accidents which follow wounds made with Gunshot, the whole member does come to
Gangraene Sideratio or Sphacelus, so that we are many times constrained
forthwith to make a speedy dispatch to cut off the member, which shall be done
as Master Gale very skilfully has appointed in the whole and sound parts.
And if it so fall out, or happen, that a leg is to be cut off beneath the
knee, then let it be distant from the joint iiii. inches, and iii. inches above
the knee: and so likewise in the arm as occasion is offered. These things
being observed and noted, then through the assistance of almighty God, you
shall luckelie accomplish this work by your good industry and diligence. But
you must be very circumspect and careful of all things which concern the
methodicall perfection of this work, that is, you shall have a great regard to
the state of his body, as also for euacuation and dyeting: And after his body
is prepared and purged, then the same morning you do attempt to cut off the
member, be it leg or arm, let him have two hours before some good
comfortable Caudle, or other broth, according unto the discretion of the
learned Physician, or Surgeon, only to corroborate and strengthen his
stomach. And in any wise omit not, but that he have ministered unto him some
good exhortation by the Minister or Preacher: And you shall advertise the
friends of the patient, that the work you go about is great, and not without
danger of death: for that many accidents or syntomies do run and flock
together unto such great wounds: which desperate euilles in such causes will
many times admit no cure. All which being considered, then ordeyne the night
before some good defensive, and let it be applied two or three times about the
member.

Defensive Clowe^.
Rec. Emplastrum Diachalcitheos. lib. j. ss. ana.. j. Succi semperuiui. Succi
plantaginis. Succi Solani.
Olei ros.. ij. ss. Olei myrtini.. j. Ouorum albumin. nu. ij. Aceti ros.. j.
Misce.

And oftentimes I have used this with good success.

An other defensive. Gale. Rec. Boli armeniaci.. viij. Farinae hordei.. iiij.
ana.. ij. Sanguinis Draconis. Terrae sigillatae.
Olibani.. j. ss. Aceti.. iiij. Albumin. ouorum. q. s.
Misce.

All which being well considered, you shall have in a readiness a good strong
form and a stedie, and set the patient at the very end of it: then shall
there bestride the form behind him a man that is able to hold him fast by
both his arms: which done, if the leg be to be taken of beneath the knee,
let there be also an other strong man appointed to bestride the leg that is
to be taken of, and he must hold fast the member above the place where the
incision is to be made, very stedily without shaking, and he that does so hold
should have a large hand and a good gripe, whose hand may the better stay the
bleeding: but in some bodies it will not be amiss to admit bleeding,
specially in such bodies as are of hot complexions In hot complexions we are
many times constrained the second or third day to open a vein, only to prevent
a fever, and in bodies of evil constitution. It is also very necessary to
empty or loose the belly by suppositories or Clisters, if cause so require,
etc.
and do abound in blood. And I have known through the skilfulnesse of the
houlder not much above. iiii. of blood lost at a time: but in weak bodies it
may not be suffered to loose much blood: for blood is said to be the treasure
of life, for which cause a good houlder is not to be spared. In like manner
there must be an other skillful man that has good experience and knowledge to
hold the leg below, for the member must not be held too high, for staying
and choking of the saw, neither must he hold down his hand too low for
fear of fracturing the bones in the time it is a sawing off, and he that does
cut off the member, must be sure to have a sharp saw, a very good catlin and
an incision knife, and then boldly with a stedie and quick hand cut the flesh
round about to the bones without staying, being sure that the Periostium or
Panicle that covers the bones be also incised and cut with the Nerve that
runs between the two bones of the leg, which shall Also he must have a
good quick eye, a strong arm, and a stout heart.
be done with your incision knife: all this being orderly performed, then set
your saw as near the sound flesh, as easily you may, not touching it, and
with a light hand speedily saw it off, then having prepared also in a readiness
this restrictiue powder to stay the flux of blood.

The restrictiue powder. Clowes. Rec. Boli armeniaci.. iij. ana.. j. Sanguinis
Draconis. Aloes.
Olibani.. j. ss. ana.. ss. Terrae sigillatae. Masticis.
Croci martis.. ij. Lapidis hematites.. ss. ana.. j. Calcis ex testis ouorum.
Mummiae.
Gypsi.. vj. Farinae volatilis.. iiij.
Misce.

Take of this powder as will serve your turn, and mix with the said powder
Pilorum leporis terrefact. and ouorum albumin. ana, quantum sufficet, and let
the Hare hairs, I say, be cut as fine as possible may be, so much as will
bring it all to a reasonable thickness, and when the powder is thus prepared,
before you cut off the member, let there be in like manner made for the purpose
three or four small boulsters or buttons, fashioned in the top or upper part
like a Doves egg or as a Sugar lofe button, flat in the bottom to the
compass of a French Crown, and round upwards as aforesaid, and these you
shall make of fine Towe, according to art wrought up in water and vinegar,
whereupon you shall apply some part of the restrictiue: And when the boulder
of the member above does partly release the fast holding of his hand by little
and little, by which means you may the better perceive and see the mouths of
the veins that are incised and cut, and upon the ends of those large veins
that are incised and cut, you shall place the round ends of these three or
four small buttons, and upon them presently without tariance, place a round
thick bed of Tow made up in water and vinegar, so yt it be fit as near as you
can gesseit, to the compass of the stumpe or member that is taken of, and
thereon spread of the restrictiue, and upon that you shall lay an other brother
bed of Towe made up as aforesaid, so large yt it may compass the member
over, and that it may be safely tied to keep fast on the rest: and upon the
two beds of Tow spread the Restrictiue reasonable thick before you place them
to, and you shall tie on the large bed of Towe being cut first with a pair
of Sissers in iiii. parts thereof, one cut right over against another an inch
long and somewhat more, that the said bed may be bound to with the more ease.
And you shall tie the large bed to, as I said, with a ligature, which they call
a chokeband, doubled two or three times, being flat and fully an inch broad,
and a yard long: in the middle of the said ligature you shall spread some of
the restrictiue, whereby it may take the better hold to the large bed of Towe:
after it has remained on a small time, being thus fast tied, then you shall
place upon these a double large bed of soft linen cloth: and then with a
strong rouller of four inches broad, and three or four yards long, let it
be artificially roulled, and where as the blood begins to show through all,
in that place you shall specially lay a good compressor or thick bolster made
of Towe wrought up in water and vinegar the thickness almost of a man's hand,
and thin toward the edges, and in compass of a Philips dollar more or
less, as you suppose the greatness of the flux to be, and couch them close
to, in as many places as the blood does show it self: and thus with three or
four roullers and as many soft linen beds, some single and some double,
with sufficient number of bolsters, some great and some small, you shall
artificially stay the flux of blood: which order and way did yet never fail
me, nor any other that have used the same, according unto the order here
prescribed. Some also do use to draw over the great bed of Towe a wet Ox
bladder, and pulls it close up over the same, the which they tie fast to with
the aforesaid ligature or chokeband, and upon the same a double or single
linen bed: and thus with a few broad bolsters and roullers they also very
orderly stay the flux of blood: All which being orderly done, then you shall
easily as possible may be, carry the patient to his bed, having a pillowe made
ready to rest the member on: Thus let him lie with as much quietness as may
be, keeping a convenient diet, then the third or fourth day you shall have in a
readiness steuphs of white wine, with a decent rouller, etc. Likewise prepare
for the second preservation of the wound this digestive, or the like.

Digestive. Rec. Terebinthinae in Auqa vitae lotae.. iiij. Vitellorum ouorum.
nu. ij. Olei Ros.. ss. Sir. Ros.. j. Masticis.. ij. Farinae hordei. q. s.
Croci.. j.
Misce.

And apply upon the same digestive this plaster following, or the plaster
called Flos vnguentorum.

Emplastrum de Peto, or Hyosciami lutei. Clowes.
Rec. Resinae. lib. ij. Cerae albae. lib. j. Adipis hircinae.. iiij. Gummi
Elemni. lib. ss. Aquae vitae. lib. ss. Succi de Peto. lib. iiij.


And if you cannot get Succi de Peto, take in the stead thereof Hyosciami
lutei the quantity aforesaid, boil all these till the juice be consumed, then
strain it, and after make it up in rouffes. This plaster I have proved to be
good for wounds made with gunshot: And after the wound is well digested and
brought to perfect matter, then you may mundifie the same with this gentle
mundificatiue, or the like.

Mundificatiuum. Rec. Mellis Rosati.. iiij. Farinae hordei.. ss. Terebinthinae.
iij. Resinae.. ij. ana.. j. Thuris. Masticis.
ana.. ss. Myrrhae. Sarcocollae.
Cerae.. ij. If you add to of Cerae one ounce, it is not amiss.
ana.. iij. Olei mastic. and Hyperic.

Misce.

Or this.

Vnguentum mundificatiuum. Rec. Mellis.. x. ana.. j. Farinae Siliginis
Lupinorum. Hordei.
ana.. ss. Myrrhae. Aloes.
ana.. iij. Succi apij. Absinthij.
Terebinthinae clarae.. ij.
Misce, and fiat vnguentu^ secundu^ artem.

For Incarnatiues you may use vnguentum aureum, vnguentum ceraseos Mesuae, or
that which is of my collection specified in my book De Morbo Gallico, or this
Incarnatiue following, which I have used in such causes, and it profits this
cure greatly, specially in children, and in soft and tender bodies.

Rec. ana.. vj. Terebinthinae clarae. Olei rosati.
Resinae pini.. iiij. Cerae citrinae.. iij. Gummi Elemni.. ss.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum.

And sometimes I mixed herewith Alluminis combust. in aceto rosarum, and being
made into very fine powder q. s. it would then also gently cleanse without
pain, etc. And I did usually deficcat and dry up the same with this
Desiccatiue, and sometimes with vnguentum de minio, etc.

Vnguentum desiccatiuum. Rec. ana.. j. Antimonij. Cerussae.
ana.. ij. Plumbi vsti Lithargiri. Terebinthinae.
Olei rosati.. iiij. Cerae albae.. iij.
Misce.

Powder that which is to be powdered, very finely, then dissolve at a gentle
fire of coals your Wax Oil and Cerebinthine, and in the cooling put in the
powders, etc. But if you have not this my powder always in a readiness, you may
the^ use Vigoes order, that is, to cauterise the place with a bright
cauterising iron fit for the purpose, made red hot: or else with good Master
Gales powder, which I will hereafter set down The iron is most excellent, but
that it is offensive to the eye, and brings the patient to great sorrow and
dread of the burning and smart.
in this book, which powder of his was a worthy invention, and better pleased
the patients then the burning yrons, which were, I say, very offensive unto the
eye, and yet the powder wrought with extreme pain, and made a very great
ascher, and by that means the bone afterward has been cut off new again,
as I have seen many times within the Hospital of S. Bartholmewes, and so did
make a very long work or ever they were cured: but this powder here published
never causes pain, but often brings with it reasonable white matter. The
foresaid powder is of my collection and gathering, the which I did put first in
practice in the Hospital of Saint Bartholmewes, as it is well known unto
some of the Surgions that then served there, and yet live within this City of
London, who were present with me when I first put it in practice, after the
order before declared, at which time there was taken off in one morning seven
legs and arms, and so by Gods assistaunce, we stayed al their fluxes of
blood, without any pain unto them, but only in the compression and close
roulling and tenderness of the wound excepted. After it was made known, there
were diverse that were destrous to have it: amongst the rest Master Crow, a
man of good experience and knowledge in the art, he was very earnest with me
for it: and for diverse special occasions, I was the more willing to give it
him, but I would not deliver it unto him as then, till he had seen with his
own eyes first the experience and proof of it. Not many days after the
woorshipfull Masters of the said Hospital requested me with the rest of the
Surgions to go to Hygate to take off a maids leg which they had seen in
the visitation of those poor houses: The said leg was so grievously
corrupted, that we were driven upon necessity to cut it off above the knee,
which we did perform by this order here before prescribed, and he did see, we
stayed the flux, and lost not much above. iiii. of blood, and so cured her
after within a very short time. Then I gave him the order and making of the
said powder. Only this I am to give you to understand, that I have since my
first collection, added other Simples, which profit it greatly: And I have
also given it unto many good Surgions, who were men both sober, wise and
learned, as well in London as in the Country, that have been thankful for it:
But I must needs say again, some other there are, whose tongues can unfold
secrets, and their capable heads understand great mysteries, unto who^ I have
likewise friendly given it. These men were not only unlearned, but also
shameless, and such have rewarded me again, even like unto the churlish Curre
unto whom relief was offered, whose malice is such, that he never respects
the goodness of the gift, nor the courtesy of the giver, but snarleth and
snatcheth at him that offers relief to help to satisfy his hunger: a
slender recompense for so great a courtesy. To speak hereof I am taught by
experience, for having bestowed on them, not only this profitable powder, the
which now most willingly I present unto all the young professors of
Chirurgerie, etc. and I know they have used the same, unto the profit of
their patients and credit of themselves: yet nevertheless, some could find
in their hearts behind my back to render me no other thanks, than did the
churlish Curre, who rewarded evil for good. In stead of thanks I have been
backbitten: and thus I reap for my labor but chafe for corn: ill will and
private grudge, for courtesies and friendship offered. I do not here compare
any good man unto any such had persons, neither will I compare any such bad
persons unto any good man. But (now gentle and courteous Reader) I do crave
pardon, for that I do here with the Macedonian call a spade a spade, a
backbiter a backbiter. And so I end, wishing all good Artistes to take heed
and beware, unto whom they impart their secrets, least they also enter into
the gappe of ungratefulness, or the unsavory dunghill of their despightfull
tongues.

Now follow very good approved remedies for wounds made with gunshot, which
may be used with Flamula, if the bullet have passed through, or else with tents
according to the depth and greatness of the wound. Chap. 9.
Am. Parrie
Rec. Mercurij precipitati biscalcinati.. j. Butyri recentis.. iiij. Vnguenti
basilicon.. iij. ana.. j. Olei liliaci, and Lini.
Camphyr. ij. dissolved in Aqua vitae. q. s.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum.

Or this.

Rec. Vnguentum Basilicon.. ij. Butyri recentis.. j. Mercurij praecipitati..
ij. ss.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum.

Or this.

Digestive Clowes Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae.. iiij. Vitellor.
ouorum. nu. ij. Vnguenti Populeon simplic.. ij. Olei rosarum.. ss. Mercurij
precipitati.. ij. Croci.. j.
Misce.

This Digestive being used with Oleum catulorum of A note or observation.
Master Ambrose Parries description, has a certain league and soctetie or
faculty to appease pains, and to alter and change the contused substance of
flesh, made by the bullet, into perfect matter: but if the part affected be
possessed with any distemper or inordinate accidents, which often follow such
wounds, sometimes by reason the body is replenished with thin and seirrous
humors, called of the learned Cachochimia, and other distemperatures,
specially in such bodies as abound in choler, phlegm, and melancholy, then it
is convenient to make euacuation by purging the humor most molesting and
abounding, which is to be done with great discretion. There are other noisome
causes which follow these wounds, and do, as it were, excruciat and torment
the patient with great inflammations, fluxes of blond, fevers and conuoltions,
which suddenly invade the body: which if they be not with speed cured, it
wastes the strength, and the recovery of the patient is to be lamented, and
death speedily ensues. So these things being foreknowne, diligently weigh and
considered, may by Gods assistaunce, be prevented, where Reason and Experience
are copartners and partakers together.

This Oil is also good for wounds made with gunshot.

Landrada. Rec. Oleilini. lib. ij. Terebinthinae. lib. ij. Viridis aeris pull..
ij.
Misce.

Or this which is called Oleum catulorum.

This oil does appease pains and also remoueth the bruised or contused flesh.
Am. Parrie.
Rec. Olei viol. lib. iiij. Catulos duos. Verminum terrestrium. lib. j.
Boil these over a gentle fire of coals till the flesh be separated from the
bones, then strain it, and add thereto Terebinthinae Venetae.. iiij. Aquae
vitae. j.


Some of late have added unto this Oil the leaves of Nicosiana, or Peto, with
other herbs, and they say it profits greatly: but I have used it without any
addition, as Master Ambrofe Parrie has himself published, and for the
worthiness thereof I can speak by experience: for being sent for by letters
from Right Honorable, and also by her Majesty's commandment to go into the
Low Countries, to attend upon the Right Honorable Earl of Leicester, Lord
Lieuteuant and Captain General of her Majesty's forces in those Countries,
and shortly after my coming thither, I was commanded by his Excellency to
have a great regard unto the hurt and wounded Soldiers, and there was
likewise in that service, Master Goodrouse one of her Majesty's Surgions, It
is more tolerable in him that praises his own virtues, than he that bosteth
of other men's deeds.
who was also employed about the curing of the wounded Soldiers, and without
praise of my self or flattery to others here nominated, but only I speak it
to the praise of almighty God, there did not dye, to my remembrance, one man
that was then hurt with gunshot, so that he was not first wounded to death, but
he was shortly after perfectly cured: for our method and ways of curing, did
greatly differ from the bitter practices of a sort of straglers, which did
thrust them Stealing of same and credit, is the only mark such shoot at.
selves into Captains bands for principal Chirurgions, and there without
either knowledge or skill seduced many with their rude observations, and
indiscreet practices, which at randon they had gotten, and partly by tradition
from their foolish masters, of whom also they had learned bedroulles of
errors, with a few experiments passed from hand to hand: and such, as says
Guido, follow one another as it were a sort of Geese or Cranes. I say, like
masters, like men: more fitly may they be compared unto certain cart Jades or
Packhorsses, yt lamely do carry their loades unto the Inn door, but farther
they cannot, nor will not go. And thus the blind leads the blind, moyling
and toyling as though they should roll the stone of Sisiphus. But it may be
some of them hereafter will repent their rashness and boldness: as did the
Ape, who as it is said, was so proud of his furd Jacket, that he would
forsooth needs imitate the Bear, only to spoil the poor Bees of their hiue
and Honey. But to conclude with such catterpillers which enter into other men's
harvest, I am persuaded there be mo killed by such wicked practisers, then
there are many times slain by the sword of the enemy. And this I have
generally noted of them, that seldom have they cured any of their Patients,
but they did first pass as it were through a gulf of misery, which is too
infallible signs of their wilful ignorance: for no doubt but many of them, as
I say, do practice their malignant corrosiue, biting or gnawing medicines, to
the utter subuertion and overthrow of their patients. For, what fevers, what
fluxes of blood, what crampes and conuultions do follow, let such as have
seen their beastly dealings be judge, specially the poor wounded Soldiers,
who abide still the brunt of their sowterly Chirurgerie. But now (to the praise
of almighty God be it spoken) who did so bless our labors, that none of our
hurt Patients did at any time complain of pain or grief, by reason of our
remedies, but they did take their natural and quiet rest. Being but shot
through either their thigh, leg or arm, or other fleshie parts of the body,
so that no joints were wounded, or bones greatly fractured withal, but being
wounded in the fleshie parts, then our order was thus, to draw a Flamula
through the member, being made of fine Lawne or some fine linen cloth, and
upon the same we applied of my Digestive, or the like in operation, and sleeped
the same in warm Oleum catulorum, and did also convey into the wound of the
aforesaid Oil being warmed, and in the Orifices of these wounds placed a short
tent armed with the Digestive, etc. and I laid upon the same Emplastrum de
Peto, or Hyosciami lutei, and also round about the member the defensive made of
Emplastrum Diachalcitheos, with the Succies, as I have set it down in the
eight Chapter of this book, and then with convenient roullings and bolsterings
we accomplished this first preservation. And when the wound was in time
perfectly digested, and the contused flesh made up the bullet removed, then
forthwith the wound was mundified and made clean with this Mundificatiue, or
the like.

Mundificatiue. Franciscus Rasius. Rec. Butyri rec. lib. ij. ana. lib. ss.
Cerae citrinae Resinae Resinae pini. Picis Graecae.
Viridis aeris. ss.
Misce.

The wound being well cleansed, then we did leave of the use of the Flamula,
and used short and easy tents, and did after incarnate and heal it up with
this unguent following.

Rec. ana.. vj. Gummi Elemni. Opopanacis.
Bdelij.. ss. Resinae pini.. j. Terebinthinae.. iiij. ana.. ij. Thuris.
Masticis.
ana.. x. Cerae citrinae. Olei rosarum.

Misce.

And oftentimes I did iniect into the wounds Oleum Hypericon cum gummis. And if
the wound did chance to pass into the body, then I did give them this wound
drink, or else some of these drinks following.

Clowes
Rec. Vini albi. lib. viij. Aquae com. lib. x. Saccari albi lib. ij. ana. m. j.
Consolidae vtriusque. Filicis aquaticae. Calendulae. Ophioglosson. Celidoniae
Polipodij quircinae. Numilariae. Lillij conuali. Sanimundi. Diapensiae.
Veronicae. Verbenae. Pimpinellae.



Boil all these in Balneo Mariae five hours, and so let it rest till it be
cold, and drink hereof two or three times a day, specially morning and
evening,. iiii. at a time, etc. I have with this wound drink, heretofore found
great pleasure in the curing of diverse persons that have been wounded into the
body. And for example, I will here speak only of two or Obseruatio.
three which were wounded in the belly, and so conclude, for being over
tedious.

There did come unto me to be cured a Gunner of a ship, which was
daungerously wounded in the lower region of his belly, so that a great part of
the Zirbus or Omentum, did come out of the wound, and also some of the
Intestines or guts proffered themselves to come forth likewise: but the
Patient did keep al very close and well till he came unto me: Then I caused
him to lie down on a bed upon his back, and after search made, I found the
guts safe and not touched of the weapon: then with a strong doubled third I
did tie fast the Zirbus, as close unto the wound as possibly well I might, and
then a finger breadth, or there abouts, I did cut off that part of the Zirb
that hanged out of the wound, and so I cauterized it with a hot iron almost to
the knot: All this being done, I put again into the body that part of the
Zirb which I had fast tied, and I left the piece of the third hanging out of
the wound: which within four or five dai^^ after, nature cast forth. The
third, as I say, being fast tied, then presently I did take a needle, with a
double strong silk third well waxed, wherewith I did thrust through both Mirach
and Siphach on the right side of the wound: but on ye left side of the wound I
did put the needle but through Mirach only, and so tied these three fast
together with a very strong knot, and presently I cut off the third. Then, on
the same side where I did stitch but Mirach only, which I call the left side, I
did there begin again to thrust the needle through both Mirach and Siphach,
and also on the right side where I did first begin to force the needle through
Mirach and Siphach, there I did thrust that but through Mirach only, and so as
before I made another strong knot, and then I cut off again the third, and
after the same manner I made the third stitch, etc. Al which is according to
Weckers, and other learned men's opinions, who say also, that the stitches of
the one side must be higher than on ye other side. The Author of all good
knowledge (I mean Galen the Prince of Physic and Chirurgerie) allows this
manner of stitching wounds in the belly: and also it is allowed of all our
ancient predecessors successively unto this day. After (as I say) I had thus
finished all ye stitches that were there requisite and needful to be made,
then I did preserve the said wound with my oil of Hypericon, conueying it in
with a fine piece of Lawne dipped in the foresaid Oil, and so put into the
dependant part of the wound. Then to restrain the bleeding, I placed upon the
wound Galens restrictiue powder, which I mixed with the whites of Eggs and
Hare hairs, and about the wound I used this defensive, which did defend the
wound from anoyance of evil accidents.

Defensive. Clowes. Rec. Emplastrum Diachalcitheos. lib. j. ss. ana.. j.
Succoru^ semperuiui Plantaginis. Solani.
Olei ros.. ij. Olei Myrtini.. j. ss. Ouorum albumin. nu. ij. Aceti ros.. j.
Misce.

Thus, with good bolstring and roulling, he rested till the second day. Ye
shall understand, that immediately after he did complain of the grudging of an
Agew, and being therewith somewhat distempered, presently there was opened a
vein, and forthwith a gentle mollifying Clister also: then shortly after his
bleeding and purging he mended again, and by this means his Fever was
prevented. Thus in foreshewing of the euilles that happened in this cure, you
may the easilier shun the like dangers in others. The second day we opened
the wound, and we found it very fair, without pain, or any other evil signs
or symtomes: then first I fomented or bathed well the wound with my wound
drink: which being so done, I put into the wound warmed my oil of Hypericon,
with a piece of fine Lawne, as before said, also with pledgets of fine lint I
did spread them with vnguentum de Peto: and I dipped these also in the warm
oil of Hypericon, likewise upon ye same pledgets I placed the gum plaster with
warm double steuphs steeped in the wound drink, and so I roulled it up
according to art: then presently we gave him of the said wound drink. iiii.
and between one and two of the clock in the afternoon we gave him. iiii.
more, and at night between seven and eight of the clock. iiii. also, and so
he did continue till he was cured. Likewise for a time his ordinary drink at
meals was Ptisanes and Barley water, and he was moreover adjoined to a thin
and cooling diet. And so by this manner and order of dressing twice in the day,
that was in the morning and evening, and by his good order of diet, he was
within the space of xxi. days made perfect whole, etc.

Also in Anno 1580. there was one William Mouch a There was joined with me in
this cure Master Clowe* a very expert and skilful Chirurgio^.
seruingman remaining about this City of London, who received a wound in his
belly, and the Zirb issued out of the wound so broad in compass, that it did
very easily cover a great square trencher, which was cured likewise with the
order and remedies before rehearsed.

Moreover, in Anno 1586. a little girl of the age of ten or twelve years,
dwelled with one Master Bracie a Merchant of London, which girl was also
wounded in the belly with a knife that she carried in her hand, and in running
hastily she sell down upon the same, so that the Zirb did come forth of the
wound the compass of a man's hand: she being then in the Country seven miles
from London, unto whom I was brought: and presently at my coming I did cut
off the part of the Zirb that hanged out of the wound, and then I tied it fast,
as before I have said: but you shall understand, I did not use any cauterize
unto this girl, neither yet unto the serving* Note.
man: The reason partly was, for that neither the Patients nor their friends
would willingly hear of the hot yrons, although it were said to be a safe and
sure way: Neither did I find any discommoditie for not using of them: which
girl was after brought to London, whom I likewise did cure in a very short
time: for the which the name of: ODD be praised.

Now last of all (friendly Reader) I have thought it good for the better
understanding of all young practszers of Chirurgerie, to signify unto them
what Zirbus is, and also whereof it is composed: In like manner what Mirach is,
and also what Siphach is, each part severally, and of their place or situation
within the body of man: and by the knowledge hereof ye shall easily foretell
the possibility and success of the cure: but being ignorant herein, we bewray
our selves to the world to be none of the sons of art.

The Zirb is said by Vigo, and other* learned authors, to be a Panicle,
compound of two Tunicles, and of diverse Arceries and Ueynes, having also in it
a great quantity of fat, so ordained of nature to defend the inward parts
from outward cold, and also to comfort them, and to keep them warm, etc.

Next unto the parts outwardly is Siphach, or Peritonea, and it is a sinowie
Panicle, very strong and tough: but without blood, and of complexion cold and
dry, and for these causes it cannot receive consolidation: it is contained
within the belly, and it does circumuolue and keep in the entrails very well
together, etc.

Also Mirach is that part which is containing on the outward part of the
body, and is composed of the outward skin, called in Latin Cutis. Secondly,
of Adipis, or the fat. Thirdly, of Carnious, or fleshie Panicles. And fourthly,
of Muscles.

Here have I very briefly rehearsed the parts contained and containing, from
the Zirbus, which is next the intestines, unto the outward parts called Mirach
and Siphach, the which I have thus done for the better instruction of all young
practizers of Chirurgerie, whom I wish void of sclaunder and infamy: And I
know such cures do commonly happen in the wars both by sea and land: for ye
cause I have here published this short note or observation for the benefit also
of the wounded Soldiers, who oftentimes do perish by means of the rash
carelesnes and blind practizes of many ignorant Chirurgions, which will take
upon them, to the discredit of themselves and the art, the thing which
passet* their knowledge and skill, but only can face it out very bouldly, and
always their bragging knowledge, bears the sway with a sort of windshaken
reasons, which would set a man's teeth an edge, and trouble any wise men's ears
in the hearing.

Or this.

Rec. ana.. j.
Baccarum Lauri. Aristolochiae rotundae Madame Danueil^.
Prunellae.


Beat all these to fine powder, and take of Prunellae that grows in the
shade, then take the flesh of fresh water Creuices dried into powder, and of
sweet Orrace, ana.. ss. tie all these together in a dry linen cloth, and
sees them with a handful of Vinca. peruinca. in three quarts of white wine
til a quart be consumed. Epithemat the wound, the^ close the lips of the
wound, and cover it with a leaf of red Colewort dipped in the said Wine, and
lay upon them large linen clothes dipped also in the same wine: likewise if
the wound be deep, siring in the decoction every morning and evening, and
proceed in the rest as before. Furthermore, let him drink. i. or ii. of this
drink every morning, fasting upon it three or four hours from all meat. If
the Potion seem too bitter to thee, to the quantity of powders and herbs
add to double the quantity of wine: This drink have I proved, and it is
wonderfully commended by Noblemen, Gentlemen and soldiers yt have served in
the wars in France. This Lady for her charitable deed in curing of many
wounded soldiers, may be compared unto Artemisia Queen of Halicarnassus, and
wife unto Mausolus King of Caria: she was the first that found out that herb
which we call in English Mugwort: the Latin name it after her own name
Artemisia, etc.

Or this.

Rec. ana. m. ij. Fol. and Rad. Rubiae tincto. Rad. Aristoloch. long. and
Rotundae. Fol. and Rad. Plantag. Fol. and Rad. consolidae maioris and minoris.
Fol. and Rad. gariophil. Fol. and Rad. Centauriae maioris.
ana. m. j. Rad. Altheae. Summitatum Rubi. Summitatum lapathi acuti. Tanaceti
Millefolij. Pimpinellae. Arthemisiae. Summitatum canapis. Caulis rubei.
Fragrariae.
Thuris albi.. ij. Sarcocollae.. j. Vini albi Bocalia. xv.


Put all these together in an earthen vessel well nealed or glased, that half
the vessel may remain empty, and let it be close covered, that no air do
euaporate, and boil it for three hours with an indifferent fire, and let it
be strayned, unto the which let there be added Mellis lib. vj. then let them
be boiled again unto the cousumption of the fourth part: The quantity hereof
is to be given in the morning. iiii. and as much more at night: the wound is
to be bathed with the same, laying thereon a Colewort leaf. This excellent
wound drink is said also to be singular good for the curing of Phistulaes.
Other hidden virtues it has which I pass over: which drink was given me by
Master Doctor Foster, a worthy Reader of the Surgerie Lector in the
Physicians College, a man for his learning in the art, knowledge and
judgment, deserves of us which profess Chirurgerie, and are desirous to have
knowledge, that if it were in our power, we would erect, in token of his
excellency therein, some ancient Monument, or stately Pyramides. It has been
peradventure objected publicly, yt the negligence of some Chirurgio^s
frequenting not of his Lectures, does bewray the^ to be rather wilfully bent to
shrowde themselves under the dark wings of ignorance, than desirous of learning
and knowledge. In deed it may be, there are some which are neither good to
themselves, nor profitable to other: And therefore what avails it to play
excellent Music to those that cannot, or will not hear. But this does bewray
their natural inclination, who refuse to frequent so good and godly an
e^ercise, which is both profitable to themselves, and also to our Country and
Common wealth. For, Chirurgerie is a most necessary art, without which man's
life cannot long continue, considering so many mishappes that chance to men
daily.

A Balm good for wounds. THis Balm is approved precious in green wounds, and
B(...).
heals them very speedily and effectually, it heals scabbes and wheales in
the face and hands, and causes them to be very fair. It is very excellent in
wounds of the sinews and joints, it stays the mucilage and gleeting water:
but if you will still it according to art, you shall first have an excellent
water: secondly, a most pure Oil: thirdly, the Balm, which is most excellent
in wounds and ulcers of the fundament. The Oil is precious against all aches
and gowtes: the water also preserves from venime and pestilence, etc. This
Balm was first given unto me by one Master Bactor, which at that time served
the Lord of Aburgaueny, unto whom also I did retain. But to say truly, who
was the author or inuenter of it, certainly I do not know: but as I have
heard some say, it is supposed to have been invented by Master John Halle
Surgeon in Maidstone, whose composition is as follows.

ana. m. j.
Rec. Egrimoniae. Alchimillae. Androsemon. Aschiron. Betonicae. Bifolij.
Bugullae. Prunellae. Callendulae. Caprifolij. Consolidae ma. Cruciatae.
Hypericonis. Iaceae herbae. Lauendulae. Meliloti. Millefolij. Numulariae.
Origani. Perfoliatae. Pilocellae. Plantaginis. Quinque-nerui. Quinque-folij.
Roris marini. Veronicae. Violae Nigrae. Violae luteae. Violae matronalis.
Let these be gathered each one in his time and kind, and let them be
stamped, and then put into sweet oil Olive. So that you may get herbs from
time to time, you may in the end have a gallon of Oil to the quantity of
herbs, then let it stand together the space of one month in a pot well nealed
and close covered, bury it in horse dung, and in the mean season get these
Gummes following.

ana.. j.
Rec. Gum amoniaci. Galbani. Bdellij. Masticis. Mirrhae. Olibani. Opoponacis.
Sarcocollae. Sagapeni. Storacis calamitae. Thuris.
ana.. j. ss.
Gariophilorum. Maceris. Nucis muscatae. Cinamomi.
Powder them that are to be powdered, and dissolve the Gummes in good white
wine, then set the herbs to the fire in a fair brazen vessel to boil with
ye Oil, putting thereto lib. iiii. of good wine Muscadell, of Vermium
terestrium well washed in white wine and mundified from the earth lib. iii. Let
them boil thus together, stirring it diligently with a slice at a soft fire
till the wine and juice be wasted, and that the Oil have a fair green color
of the herbs: then let it be strongly strayned, and put thereto your Gummes
and other things together, with lib. iiii. of odoriferus wine, that is,
Muscadell or Malmsey, then add thereto Terebinthinae Venetiae. lib. j. Let
these boil again at a gentle fire till the wine be consumed, then take it of
and strain it again, and so reserve it to your use. This Balm, I suppose, is
not inferior to any Balm that I know, be it Indian Balm or other: the
virtues, I say, will praise it self. Wherefore it is needles to use any
farther speeches herein: only this one note or observation amongst many other
I will declare. It happened Obseruatio.
in Anno 1575. a Barber Surgion, whose name is called William Clarke, dwelling
in Southwarke, he having in his house a lewd servant of the age of xvii. or
xviii. years, he wanting the grace of God, did in his masters absence (by the
intisement of the devil) cut his own throat with a knife, so that part of his
driuke did, for the space of six or seven days, flow out of the wound. I was
presently called to the cure of him, and after I had stitched the wound, I did
then apply thereon warmed this foresaid Balm, and stayed his bleeding with
Galens powder: and so for that present time I ended, with convenient roulling
and boulstring. But in such a case there be also required the help of the
hand, to keep close and fast the medicines, and all helps will be little
enough, as I have well approved: then after I made in a readiness to use with
the Balm this Vnguentum consolidatiuum, and also my Vnguentum de Peto.

Vnguentum consolidati^^.
Rec. ana.. j. Gummi arab. Dragag. dissolut. in aceto. Sarcoc.. ij.
ana.. j. Sandaracae. Hipocistid.
ana.. j. ss. Mastic. Thuris.
Tutiae praeparatae.. j. ss. Olei mastic.. iij. Cerae. q. s..
Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundu^ artem

And upon the same the gum plaster, and about the parts ^eere unto the wound I
used this Defensive.

De^ensiu^.
Rec. Vnguentum de bolo.. vj. Omnium sandal.. j. ss. ana.. ij. Pulu. mirtillorum
and Ros.
ana.. i. ss. Olei Ros. and Mirtini.
Aceti Ros.. ij. Albuminis ouorum nu. j.
Misce.

Thus with this Balm and these remedies he was perfectly made whole by me, and
so he returned home to his friends again, etc.

Or this.

Balm. Am. Pa^^ie.
Rec. Terebinthinae venetae. lib. ij. Gummi Elemni.. iiij. ana.. j. Boli
armeniaci. Sanguinis Dragonis
Olei Hypericonis cum gummis.. iij. Aquae vitae.. ij. ana.. j. Irios. Aloes.
Masticis. Myrrhae.

Misce, secundum artem.

Or this.

Balm. A^de^^a^^^.
Rec. ana.. ij. Myrrhae. Aloes. Spicae. Sanguinis Draconis. Thuris. Mummiae.
Opopo. Amoniaci. Carpo-Bal^am. Sarcocoll. Croci orient. Mastic. Gummi arabi.
Stirac. call.
Laudani.. j. ss. Resinae abietinae. lib. j. Terebinthinae com. lib. viij. Vini
generosi. lib. ss.
Distillantur ac liquore, ponatur Muscigra. xv. and fiat.

Or this.

Balm.
Rec. Terebinthinae. lib. j. Olibani.. ij. ana.. j. Aloes cicatri^.
Gariophilorum. Galing. Cinamomi. Croci. Nucis Muscatis. Cucubarum.
Gummi arabici.. ij. Lignum aloes.. j.
Mix these together, and then put all into a Stillatorie, and still it
according to art, etc.

Or this.

Balm. Rec. Olei com. lib. iiij. Terebinthinae. lib. ij. Aquae vitae. lib.
iiij. Viniodoriferi. lib. ij. Viridis aeris in pull.. ij.


Boil all these according to art, and last put in your Viridis aeris. This
was a common Balm, and few better known amongst some old practizers in time
past.

Or this.

Rec. Olei Terebinthinae lib. j. Vitellorum ouorum. xiiij. ana.. iij. Resinae
pini. (...)
Myrrhae.
Gummi hederae.. ij.


Let the yolks of Eggs be first fodden hard, then mix all well together in a
Stillatorie, and with a soft fire let it be drawn, and there will come first
a water, and last the Oil, the which ye shall reserve, for it heals wounds
very speedily. This Oil was greatly in use by my Master, master George Keble,
but whether he were the inuenter of it, or not, I do not certainly know, etc.

A plaster very good for green wounds, practiced of late in the Low Countries
by a worshipful Gentleman, called master Ierom Farmer, a great favorer and
lover of Chirurgerie.

Paracelsus Plaster. Rec. Rad. consolidae maioris. lib. j. Fol. Ophioglossi.
lib. j. ss. Vermium terrestr. lib. ss. Aristolochiae rotundae recenc.. iiij.


All these being green, beat them well, and then add to Vini albi, so much
in quantity as will cover all these herbs, sees them in a double vessel
well nealed ten hours: these being then strayned and taken out, put in new
herbs and roots, and boil it as aforesaid, and then put to it Butiris
recent. q. s. All these being mixed together, let it be boiled in a double
vessel, which being effectually boiled, then strain it, and after set it in
the Sun, and reserve it to your use: then take of the foresaid Oil and
virgin Wax of each a pound and a half.

Lithargiri auri. lib. j. Plumbi vstiloti, lib. ss. Terebinthinae.. iiij. ana..
ss. Amoniaci. Bdellij.
ana.. vj. Galbani. Opoponacis

Infuse these in Uineger, and so make a plaster according to art. This plaster
was given me for a secret, by this worshipful Gentleman Master Ierom Farmer,
when I was at Arnam: at that time when Nemegam was besieged, he desired me to
put it in practice, at which time diverse of our men were hurt, not only with
shot, but with other weapons. It happened that a Horseman was wounded in his
thigh by the enemy, being a Pikeman: the wound was about seven inches long,
entering in at the inside of his right thigh, and so passed upwards, and by good
hap it rested on Os pubis, otherwise he had been slain, nevertheless he was
grown very faint and weak with extreme bleeding. So happily having things
about me, I stayed his bleeding, which was good for him, and no hurt unto me,
as it fell out. At the next dressing I applied Note.
a Defensive about the wound, and then I warmed well some of my oil of
Hypericon cum gummis published in my book De Morbo Gallico, the which I
iniected into the bottom of the wound with a siring: then I made a very short
rent armed with my vnguentum de Peto, and upon the same the foresaid plaster.
Thus I dressed him five days, and the sixth day I left out the tent clean, and
within xiiii. days he was whole and ready to serve in the field again.

Or this.

Emplastrum sticticum Paracelst.
Rec. Olei Oliuarum.. vj Cerae. j. quibus liquefactis
add Lithargirij.. ij. ana.. ss. Amoniaci. Bdellij.
ana.. ij. Galbani. Opoponacis.
ana. ij. Aristolochiae rotund. Calaminaris Myrrhae Thuris
ana.. j. Olei lautini tantundem. Terebinthinae putae.



Dissolve the Gummes in Uineger xxiiii. hours, and then boil it till the
Uineger be euaporate, then let it be strongly strayned, and put in these
Gummes by little and little, always stirring it till the Gummes be incorporate
with the rest of the powders being finely powdered and searced: and last of all
put in your Terebinthine, and make hereof a plaster according to art. This is
the order which I use in the making of it, etc.

Emplastrum Resoluendum. Rec. Amoniaci lib. j. I. B.
Galbani lib. ss. Cerae albae. q. s.
Misce.

Emplastrum consolidatiuum and desiccatiuum, to be used in green wounds in
stead of stitching, often proved. Rec. ana.. iiij. Gummi Drag. Sang. Drag.
ana.. ij. Olibani. Mastic. I. B.
Myrrhae.
Boli armeni.. j. ss. Farinae volat. ss.
Make all these in very fine powder cum ouorum albuminibus, q. s. Misce.

A good plaster to be used for dry stitches of wounds in the face, etc. Rec.
ana.. iiij. Resinae. Resinae pini. Picis nig. I. B.

ana.. j. Mastic. Myrrhae Thuris Olibani. Aloes hepat. Terebinthinae
Gummi Dragagant.. vj.
Misce, and fiat Emplastrum.

Master Rasius plaster good for to keep open any issue, the which he gave me
for one of his serrets, and I have seen him use it with great profice, and I
have found pleasure in it my self.

Franciscus Rasius, Surgeon to the French King.
Rec. Cerae albae lib. ss. Viridis aeris.. iij. Mercur. Sublimat.. j.
Misce.

A Cataplasme for Inflammations. Rec. ana. quart. j. Succorum semperuiu^.
Calmetheus.
Plantaginis. Solani. Aquae lenticulae.
Aceto.. j. ana.. ^. ss. Oleoru^ Ros. vel. Nympheae.
Far, hordei.. ij.
Fiat.

A Cataplasme for bruised wounds. Rec. Rad. altheae lib. ss. ana. m. j. Fol.
Mal. and Viol.


Terantur, coquantur, and exprimantur, deinde add Butyri, and Olei com. ana..
iij. Tria ouorum vitellorum, croci modicum, Far. triticeae and Hord. q. s. Fiat
Cataplasma.

A Cataplasme very comfortable, and also it appeaseth pains. Rec. ana.. iij.
Far. fabarum. Valeniola.
Hord. Lentium, and Lupinorum.
ana.. ij. Far. semin. lini, and Fenugrae.
Farinae orobi.. j. Croci.. ii.


Bulliant Farinae cum Aceto and mellis paruo. Fiat Cataplasma.

Or this Cataplasme does appease pains and cease Jnflamations. Rec. ana. m.
ii. Fol. maluarum. Violarum.
ana. m. i. Flo. Chamomillae Fol. ros.

Boil all these in Milk till they be soft and tender, then beat them in a
mortar, and add thereto ana.. i. ss. Vnguentum rosarum Vnguentum populion.
Vitellorum ouorum. nu. ij. Farinae Hordei.. ij. ana.. ss. Mucilag. seminis
psyllij, and Rad. altheae.

Misce, and fiat Cataplasma.

Master Gal^ powder.
Master Gales powder for restrayning of great fluxes of blood. Rec. ana.. ij.
Alluminis succarini. Thuris. Arsenici.
Calcis viui.. vj.


Make all these in fine powder, and put unto them a pint of strong Vinegar, and
boil them on the fire, stirring it continually till the Vinegar be consumed,
then set it in the Sun, or in an Oven, till it be perfectly dried, that you
may make it in very fine powder, and when you will use it, take of this powder.
iii. of Boli Armoniaci iij. of Puluis Alcumisticus. j. Misce. And when you will
use it, take of the whites of Eggs. q. s.

Pull. Galen^.
Galens Restrictiue powder. Rec. Olibani. ii. Aloes hepaticae.. i. ana. q. s.
Pilorum leporis terrefact. and ouorum albumin.



Or this.

Pull Caimatheus. Rec. Boli armeniaci.. vi. Terrae sigillatae.. ii. Farinae
volatilis.. iii. ana.. iiii. Gypsi. Calcis viu.



And when you will use these powders, mire therewich of Albuminis ouorum q. s.
Misce.

A powder to rebate spungious flesh, very profitable. Rec. Mercurij
praecipitat.. ij. Cinabrii. ss. Mastic.. ii.
Misce, fiat puluis subtiliss.

A very good drink for the cure of Fistulaes, commended by Tagaltius. Rec.
three parts of Osmunde, two parts of Gentian, and one Tagaltius. A drink for a
Fistula.
part of Centaury, boil these together in white wine and strain it, and
thereof give the patient every morning a draught: if you put hereto a little
Guaicam, and let it stand therein a space and then boil it, it is the better,
etc.

A very good Mundificatiue.

Mundificatiuum. Rec. Mel ros.. ii. Terebinthinae.. iii. ana.. i. ss. Suc. Apii
and Plantag.

Let these boil together a little, and then add thereunto, ana.. ss. Farinae
hord. and Fabarum.
Sarcocoilae.. i. ss. Croci.. ss.
Misce.

A good iniection for old and callous Fistulaes. Tagaltius.

Rec. Vnguentum Aegiptiacum.. ss. Mer. sublimat.. ss. Lixiuii.. iiii. Aquae
ros.. ii. Arsenici.. i. Aquae plantaginis.. iii.


Let all these be boiled together to the consumption of the third part, and
reserve it to your use.

A cataplasma very good for Gangraen. Parreus.

Rec. ana. lib. ss. Far. fab. Hord. Orob. Lupin.
ana.. iiij. Salis com. Mel. ros.
ana.. ij. ss. Succi absinthij Marrub.
ana.. ii. Aloes Myrrhae and Aquae vitae
Oximel sympl. q. s.
Misce, and fiat cataplasma.

No man needs to doubt of the goodness of this Cataplasma, etc.

An unguent good for burnings with gunpowder. Rec. the yellow moss that
grows upon the bark of the Ash tree and branches two handfulles, of Sheep
sewet lib. ss. melt the Sheep sewet and the moss together very gently, and
then strain it, etc. and use it warm with a feather.

A maturatiue plaster. Master Keble.
Rec. Olei liliorum.vi. Cerae lib. i. Resinae lib. ss. Resinae Pini.iiii. Picis
albae ii. Galbani. i. ss. Gum amoniaci..ii. Croci..i.
Misce, and fiat Emplastrum.

A very good Lixiuium to stay Gangraene coming of cold, by lying in the
snow, and the like occasions, whereby the vital spirits are prohibited to
come unto the mortified part: which Lixiuiu^ was greatly commended by my
master, master George Keble, and I have many times approved it profitable.
Master Keble.


Rec. Lixiuij. lib. viij. Lupinorum contusoru^.. iij. Orobi.. j. ss. Salis.
com. m. j. ss. ana. m. j. Absinthij. Centauri. Marrubij.
Flor. camomil. m. j. ss. Aquae vitae. lib. j.


Boil all these together, till one part be consumed, and so let it rest all
together, and reserve it to your use, etc.

Emplastrum epispatices ad omnes iuncturarum dolores ex frigiditate.

Rec. Cerae veteris, colophoniae, resinae pini. ana. lib. j. Odo^phus O(...).
calcis viu. Alluminis plumati, Arsenici. ana.. j.

Relent the Wax and Rosin with a small quantity of Oil, then straw in your
powders, being finely powdered, and mix with them Aceti fortis, q. s. boil
all together at a gentle fire to the form of a plaster.

Vnguentum Incarnatiuum. Vigo.
Rec. Terebinthinae..ii. ana.. ss. Sirupi Ros. Mel. Ros.
Succi plantaginis.. vi. Croci. q. s.
Misce: and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

Vnguentum Incarnatiuum. Rec. Cerae liquefact..v. I. B.
Olei com. lib. ss. Resinae.. iiii. Mellis.. i. ss. Tereb.. iiii. ana.. ii.
Mastic. Olibani. Sarcoc. Myrrhae. Aloes. Croci.

Misce: and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

Josephus Quirsitanus.
Rec. The mucilage of the seed of Fenigreeke. ii. the juice of Hounds tongue,
Persicaria, and the great Comferie, ana.. i. ss. Oil of Franckincense and
Myrrh. ana.. iii. Oil of Hipericon simple. ii. Terebinthine washed in white
Wine. ii. let them stand in the Sun, (...) at a soft fire, until they wax
thick, etc.

Vnguentum Incarnatiuum. Master Keble.
Rec. ana.. iiii. Resini. Cerae.
Terebinthinae.. ii. Olei com.. viii. Mellis.. iii. Vitellorum ouorum nu. iiii.
Misc.

A good unguent for inflammations. Rec. ana.. i. ss.
Vnguenti populeonis. Vnguenti Ros.
Being well washed in Rose water, and Plantaine water, q. s. adding thereto Olei
Ros.. iiii. Cerussae.. ii. Cerae albae. q. s. Terae sigillatae.. i. ss.
Camphyrae.. ii. Opii.. i.
Misce and fiat vnguentum.

An unguent very good for burning with Gunpowder, or skalding with water, and
it heals without vlceration and pain, and dries very well, and it brings
again the beawty of the skin, and this must be aplied to the affected parts
morning and evening, etc.

Rec. Seui secundae decoctionis Sutorii. lib. i. ss. Succi Ophyogllossi. lib.
ss.


Coquantur simul in Balneo, ad consumptionem succi: postea add Camphyrae.. ss.

Misceantur in mortario plumbeo.

The use. After that you have warmed of this, with feathers anoint the place
burnt, or scalded, keeping unto the place affected warm coals, until the
pain be ceased, which will be after three or four times warming. Take great
heed that you break not any of the blisters which are wont to arise, for that
induces pain.

Vnguentum neruorum, commonly called Nerve oil. This unguent I have seen many
times used with great profit unto the patients: and for that I never read it in
any English Book, I have thought it not amiss to publish now the same.
Peradventure some skorners will say it is a medicine for a Horse,
nevertheless, master Ambrose Pary is not ashamed to set it down in his book
for a medicine profitable for man's body.

Vnguentum Neruale. Rec. ana.. iii. Eupatorii. Camomillae. Betonicae. Saluiae.
Menthae. Hederae terestris. Abrotani. Arthemisiae. Absinthii. Nasturtii.
Maluarum. Origani. Pulegii. Auriculae muris. Solani. Camaepitheos. Vrticae.
Serpentariae. Fol. lauri. Ebuli. Costi. Enulae camp. Rubiae maioris. Herbae
paralisis. Ruthae. Raphani. Sambucae. Aristolochiaelo^gae. Apii. Rad. altheae.
Ciclaminis. Calendulae. Caulis rub. Calaminthae. Centaurii minoris Vitis albae.
Hipericon.
Butiri maialis. lib. xii. Cerae virgineae. lib. i. Seui arietis.. xii.
Axungiae gallinae.. vi. Axungiae anseris.. iii. Olibani.. xii. Olei laurini.
lib. viii.
Fiat Vnguentum Neruale.

I have known certain practizers at Seas to use this unguent, with Farinae
tritic. and Vini albi. ana. q. s. and so boiled them together, and made hereof
a cataplasme for painful swellings about wounds, etc.

A water for sore eyes. Rec. ana.. i.
aquae verbenae. Betonice. Ruthae. Rosarum rub. Eufrag. Celidoniae. Plantag.
Calendulae. Feniculi.
Misce.

Aqua Viridis aeris, for Ulcers in Virga. Rec. Aquae Pluuialis, lib. viii.
Saccari candi. lib. i. Viridis aeris.. iiii.
Boil these together, and in the cooling put in the Viriciis aeris. Fiat.

Or this.

Rec. Aquae Plantag.. iiii. Aquae Ros.. ii. Aquae Hord.. iii. Sir. Ros.. ii.
Collirium album, sine opio.. i. ss.
Misce.

Vnguentum Apij, which in times past was had in great use by the ancient
Chirurgions of this City of London, and it does mundify very well, as my self
have had sufficient trial.

Vnguentum Apij. Rec. ana. m. i. Foliorum Plant. Artemisiae. Absinthii.
Quinque-neruiae. Sanaemundae. Periclymeni. Consolidae minoris. and Melliloti.
ana. m. ss. Foliorum Hyosciami albij. Violarum. Crassulae maioris. --
ana. pugillum. i. Bardanae. Trifolij.



Then take of Apij the weight of all the rest: juice them all. Then take of
Mellis com. as much as of all the juice: mix all together, and then take of
Farinae triticeae. lib. ii. Terebintinae.. v. Mix all these together, and set
it on the fire, and boil it to the form of an unguent, etc.

A mundificatiue. Rec. Mellis. lib. ii. Succi Saniculae.. viii. Viridis aeris..
ss.


Boil these to the form or body of your Vnguentum egyptiacum. Fiat.

Vnguentum Populeon. Vnguentum populeon (...) and Weeken.
Rec. Oculorum populi arboris recentium collectorum. lib. j. ss. Axungia
porcinae praeparatae. lib. iiij.


The Pople buddes must be bruised and mixed with your Axungiae, until your
other herbs may be prepared, then add to it ana.. iij. Fol. papaueris
agrestis. Fol. Mandragorae. Fol. Hyosciami. Solani. Vermicularis, aut
Crassulae. Lactucae. Semperuiui. Bardanae. Portulacae. Florum violarum.
Vmbilici veneris.
Summiratum pruni tenerarum.. iij.


These herbs must he mixed and tempered with Axungia, as aforesaid, then add
thereto Vini optimi quantum satis est.

Boil these to the consumption of the Wine, then strain them, and make an
unguent according to art. It is very good against extreme and raging heates in
Fevers: it provoke sleep, the temples being therewith anointed, etc.

Vnguentum mundificatiuum magistrale. Weckerus.
Rec. Mellis rosati colati.. i. ss. Terebinthinae clarae.. iij. ana.. ss. Succi
apij Succi prassij.
Succi absinthij.. ii.
Simul coquantur deinde addantur. Farinae hordei, fabarum. ana.. vj. ana.. iij.
Farinae lupinorum. Orobi.
ana.. i. ss. Sarcocollae Myrrhae

Reduc. in puluerem, and fac vnguentum.

A very good mollifying unguent.

Vnguentum mollificatiuum. Rec. ana.. ij. Axungiae humanae Anseris Gallinae.
Medullae ceruinae
Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vitae.. j. Cerae q. s.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

A sparadrap plaster. Master Keble.


Rec. Olei. com. lib. ij. ana.. xj. Plumbi albi, and Plumbi rubri
Cerae. vj.


Boil all these together till it wax black, and in the cooling put in ana..
j.
Adipis anatis and Caponis. Misce.


Vnguentum Sanatiuum. Master Keble.


Rec. Lapidis caliminaris praeparati. iiij. Cerusae lotae in aqua ros.. j.
Lithargiri auri loti.. ij. Olei ros. lib. ss. Seui ouini. ij. Terebinthinae
lotae in aqua ros.. ij. ss. Cerae citr. q. s. Camphorae.. j.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

A molifying Searecloth: This was given me for a secret, but I never proved it.

Rec. Cerae. viij. Olei pedis vaccini. iij. Resinae. v.


Relent these, and strain it, and so dippe clothes in it, and reserve it to
your use.

A powder which I have approved to be good to A good powder to take away
^pungious flesh.
remove and take away superfluous or spungious flesh.

Rec. ana.. ^j. Alluminis Zaccarini Vitrioli albi.
Aceti rubri. lib. ss.


Let this be calcined together in a great crewsible till u come to perfection,
and that the vinegar be consumed, then let it be finely brought to powder, and
so reserve it to your use.

Or this.

Puluis sine pari. P^^^sh^e pare. Johannes A* deu.


Rec. ana.. ij. Viridis aeris Auri pigmenti
Vitrioli combusti. iiij. Alluminis zaccarini combusti. viij.
Et fiat puluis.

Emplastrum flos vnguentorum. Emplastrum flos vngue^^o^^^.


Rec. ana. * viij. Resinae Resinae pini
ana.. iiij. Cerae albae Olibani
ana.. j. Masticis and Myrrhae
Adipis ceruini. iiij. Camphor.. ij. Vini albi lib. iiij. Terebinthinae. iij.
Misce, and fiat emplastrum secundum artem,

This plaster I have approved to be excellent for wounds made with gunshot,
and I would advertise all young practizers of Chirurgerie never to be without
it: for it has many excellent virtues, which I will not here nominate at this
time, because of being too tedious, etc.

A good mundifying medicine called Lipsius, used by the Chirurgions in the
Hospitali of S. Bartholmew, most specially for Ulcers in the mouth. ^^psium.


Rec. Mellis com. Vitrioli albi. Succi caprifolij lib. iiij.


First boil your juice and your Mel together till it come to the thickness of
Honey, and last put in your Vitrioll, and boil it a little, and so reserve it
to your use.

Vnguentum in frigidans Galeni. Vnguentum in frigidans Galeni.


Rec. Olei ros.. iij. Cerae albae.. ss.


Melt these together, and being well washed with Rose-vineger and Rose Water,
reserve it to your use.

Vnguentum Resinae, which was also had in great price by the old
practitioners. Vnguentum resinae, which does mund* fi^* incarne* and sta^^th
the mucilage or gleeting humor, specially about the (...)*


Rec. Resinae. v. Mellis lib. j. Terebinthinae.viii. ana.. i. Myrrhae and
Sarcocollae.



The mucilage of Fenigreke, and the mucilage of Lins^ede* being made with white
wine of each. i. Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

A Cataplasme for a windy tumor or swelling.

Rec. ana. m. j. Flo. Camo^illae Melliloti Anethi Ros. rub. pull*
ana. m. ss. Foliorum mal. and Absynthij.
Furfuris. m. i.
Boil all these together in Lixiuio and vino rub. then add thereto. ana. q.
s. Medullae panis, and Farinae fab.
ana.. ij. Olei ros. and Myrtini

Misce.

A lyniment for wyndy tumors.

Re. ana.. i^. Oleoru^. Camomil. Anethi. Lauri.
ana. q. s. Cerae albae. Aquae vitae.



A present remedy to take away Warts.

Rec. ana. q. s.
Aceti fort. Thymi. Hisopi.
Stamp them in the vinegar, and strongly strayned, make thereof a lixiuium,
with the ashes of willowes, and often wash ^he Warts, etc.

A common Powder to take away Warts that grow about Praputium.

Rec. ana.. ss. Auri pigmenti. Sulphuris viui. Calcis viui.
Sabini.. j.
Misce and fiat pull. secundum artem.

A very good spiced plaster, which my master, M. Keble often used, and he
did therewith much good for pains and aches. (...)


Rec. Cerae.. xii. Resinae.. viii. Picis.. i. ss. Olibani.. iiii. Resinae pini.
lib. i. Adipis ceruini.. ii. Croci.. ii. ana.. ss. Mac^ris. Garsophilorum.
Vini rub. lib. ii.
Misce, and fiat Emplastrum.

A good medicin for a pin and a web in the eyes.

Re. ana. q. s.
Succoru^ Saluiae rub. Feniculi rub. and Trifolii. Mellis com. and Ouorum album.
Let all these be well beaten together, and reserve it to your use.

Or this.

Rec. ana. q. s.
Mellis com. Succi Semperuiui. Aquae Ros.
Then take ten or twelve streines of new laid eggs, of a white Hen as near
as you can, then let them be well beaten in a sweet mortar, till they be
united in manner of an ointment, then let all these be beaten together, and a
little relented, and reserve it to your use: and sometimes you may add to it
Aquae celidoniae and eufragiae. q. s. This receipt was given me for a secret,
of one I suppose to be a good occulist, and some trial I have had of late of
these foresaid remedies, etc.

The white Mucilage plaster.

Rec. Cerussae lib. v. Lithargiri auri lib. ij. Olei com. lib. viij. Rad.
altheae being cleansed and picked from the pith. m. iiij. ana. m. j. Sem. lini
and Foenigraeci contus.
Aquae q. s.
And make hereof a Mucilage: then take of it lib. iij. Misce, and fiat
Emplastrum secundum artem.

An unguent good for the Hemeroyds. Master Keble.


Rec. Vnguenti ros.. ij. Vnguenti populeon com.. j. ss. Vitellum oui..j. Opij.
ss.
Misce.

A very good resolutiue Cerot.

Rec. ana.. ij. ss. Olei Liliacei. Amigdal. dull. Medul. cruris cerui.
ana.. j. Mucilag. sem. lini Foenigraeci and Altheae. --
Cerae q. s.


A mellilot plaster greatly used of the common Chirurgions.

Rec. Resinae lib. viii. Cerae lib. ij. Seui ouini lib. ss. Succi meliloti lib.
viij. Vini rub. lib. ij.
Misce, and fiat emplastrum.

Master Francis Rasius Mundificatiue, the which he used here when he had the
Earl of Sussex in cure, and he did swear unto me, it was his Fathers practice
before his time. Mundificatiuum. Franciscus Rasius.


Rec. Butyri rec. lib. ij. ana. lib. ss. Cerae citrinae Resinae Resinae pini
Picis Graec.
Viridis aeris.. ss.
Misce.

A plaster against inueterat ulcers. Franciscus Rasius.


Rec. Emplastride Cerussa optime cocti. lib. ss. Mercurij extincti in aoua
vitae. iij.
Fiat Emplastrum bonae constitutionis. secun. art.

A Liniment to cease pain, and cause sleep, being applied unto the temples.

Rec. Opij extracti cum aceto ros.. j. Sem Hyosciami albi. vj. Nucis musc.. v.
pull subtiliss. Vnguenti ros.. ij. ss. Olei nucis musc. gut.
Fiat Linimentum.

A most precious Oil against all inflammations, and to I. B.
cause sleep also, and it will cease the pains of the Gout in any part of
the body.

Rec. Olei. com. lib. viij. Vini albi. lib. ij. Summitatum Hyosciami and Sem.
eius virid. lib. iij. ss. ana.. iiij. Vermium terrestr. Gariophill.
Croci.. j. Opii.. ss.


Let these be bruised and mixed together, and let it stand s^ in the Sun
twelve days, then boil them to the consumption of the Wine and the juice:
then strain it, and keep it to your use. But if you will make of this Oil a
liniment for wounds in the joints, and to cease pain, and for bruses, or any
sharp and biting pain of virulent ulcers, then

Rec. Olei Praedic.. iiii. Olei Hyperic.. i. Olei Lumbricorum.. ss. Gum.
Elemni.. vi. Terebinthinae lotae in lacte mulieris.. vii.
Misce.

Mix all these together, and make it in form of a liniment: and if you will
have it more thicker to the form of an unguent, add thereto ana.. iii.
Resinae pini. Resinae.
Vnguenti Ros.. vi. Cerae albae.. ss.
Misce.

A Plaster good to resolve knobs, and hard swellings.

Rec. ana. lib. i. Terebinthinae puriss. P^^n^^.
Aphronitri.
ana.. iiii. Galbani. Propolis.
Guttarum ammoniaci.. viii. Lixiuij. q. s.
Fiat Emplastrum secundum artem.

A Plaster for the hard swellings in women's Breasts.

Rec. Mellis despumati.. ix. Olei rosarum.. vi. Cerae citrinae.. iiii.
Misce, secundum artem.

An Oil for Convulsions, proceeding through wounds in the nerves, or
otherwise. I. B.


Rec. Olei com. lib. iiii. Olei terebin. lib. i. ss. Saluiae. m. ii. Florum
Rorismarini. m. i. ss. Vermium terrestrium preparat.. iiii* Euphorbij.. iii.
Gum. Hederae.. iiii. Radic. Brioniae.. i. Iridis.. ss. Olibani.. iii. ss. ana..
ij. Masticis. Cinamomi.
Cariophilorum. Croci.. i. Vini maluatici. lib. ii.


Bruise the Sage with Rosemary flowers, and powder the rest that are to be
powdered: mix all together, and put them into an earthen vessel well glazed,
being close stopped, and set them to macerate for ten days in Horse dung, or
in Balneo, according to art, then boil them to the consumption of the Wine,
etc.

Vnguentum pro Spasmo. Vnguentum pro Spasmo.


Rec. ana.. i. Axungiae cerui. Taxi. Vrsi.
Olei Laurini.. i. ss. ana.. ss. Olei vulpini. Castorei. Therebinthinae.
Iuniperi. Lumbricorum.
ana.. ii. Vngue^t. Agrippoe, and Dialtheae.



The Terebinthine wash in the water of Lylyes, then take Euphorbij.. i. Cum
modico cerae fiat vnguentum.

These Oils following are also very good for a convulsion coming by repletion
and fullness.

Oleum Vulpinum. Oleum Laurinum. Oleum Rutaceum. Oleum Chamomillinum. Oleum
Iuniperinum. Oleum Terebinthinae. Oleum Benedictum. Oleum Philosophorum.
These unguents and Oils do partly warm, ate^uate, and dissolve cold and
glutinous humors, that often follow sharp sickness: which perilous accident
comes, by reason the sinews is offended and hurt, which does torment the
patient, as I have seen in wounds made with Gunshot, and also in the cutting
and pricking of them, by reason of repletion, and vchement pain, that draws
matter to the part affected, the which matter, Vigo notes unto us, is
sometimes conuayed to the brain, by the sinews, and when the brain feels
the matter, it drives it back again: by which expulsion, the sinews are
filled with the aforesaid matter, and so are inobedient unto their accustomed
mouings. For the appeasing of these pains, you shall find great pleasure in
the foresaid unguents and Oils, wherewich you shall rub and chafe well the
spondles of the back, shoulders and neck, and it is good to cover the neck
with wool, dipped in the sayd*Oyles. As touching diet, glisters, etc. I leave
it unto the learned in Physic and Chirurgerie, and so I will end this short
observation, only I will deliver you the signs and notes of a convultion,
which is, says Tagaltius, a dull and difficult motion of the members,
stretching of the neck, a drawing of the lips, as though the patient would
laugh, a straightnes of the jaws, teeth, and throat, a perverting, and wrying
of the eyes, and also of the whole face.

A digestive to remove aschars. I. B.


Rec. Terebinthinae.. iiii. Vitell. ouorum number. ii. Mel. Ros.. ss. ana.. i. ss.
Olei Liliacei. and Amigdalarum dulc. Pingued. caprin. Butiri rec..i.

Fiat, etc.

Vnguentum nutritiuum. M^^^^ Good^^^^^.


Rec. Olei Ros. lib. i. Aceti. lib. ss. Lithargiri.. iii. or. iiii.
Misce, fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

Arceus Balm or Liniment digestive for A^^^^^.
wounds in the head.

Rec. ana.. j. ss. Gummi Elemni Terebinthinae abietinae
Sepi castrati, antiqui and Liquefacti. ij. Pinguedinis porcinae antiquae
Liquefactae. j.
Misce, and fiat Linimentum.

Emplastrum de Gum. Elemni, for wounds Ar^^us.
of the head.

Rec. Gummi Elemni.. iij. ana.. i^. Resinae pini purissimae. Gummi Hammoniaci
Gummi Hederae. Cerae --
Terebinthinae. iij. ss. Olei ros.. i. ss.


Let al these boil together, except the Gum Ammoniack, with one cup and a
half of odoriferous wine, unto the consuming thereof, add in the end the
Ammoniack dissolved in Uineger, and your Gum Hederae finely powdered: and being
sufficiently boiled: let if be wrought up in Wine and aqua vitae, and so make
it up in roules, etc.

A plaster of Betony for wounds of the head. (...)


Rec. Terebinthinae clarae lib. j. ss. Cerae albae. v. Resinae pini. vj. ss.


Make hereof an Emplaster according to art, which being done, let it be
labored in white vinegar, in the which it must be infused six days, adding
thereto two parts of the juice of Betony, and one part of the juice of
Uerueine, so let it lie till it be thoroughly steeped, then let it be melted,
and infuse it in the like quantity of vinegar, and other iuyces for other six
days: then let it be molten again and labored with women's milk, and so make
it up and reserve it to your use, etc.

Another singular plaster for wounds in the head. A plaster for wounds in the
head. Vigo


Rec. ana.. ij. Olei Rosati, Omphacini and Completi.
ana.. j. Olei Mastichini Olei Myrtini
Pinguedinis Hircini.. j. ss. Succi Betonicae. j.


Let them all boil together to the consuming of the juice* then let them be
strayned, after adding thereto Masticis. x. Gummi Elemni. vj. Terebinthinae.
ii. ss. Cerae albae q. s.


Then let them boil again at the fire a little, and so make a plaster
according to art. This oil Omphacinum before spoken of, is meant the oil made
of vnriped Olives. And the oil that is called Complet, is that oil which is
made of the full riped Olives.

Arceus Liniment for wounds in the head, that does digest, mundifie, and
incarne.

Rec. ana.. i. ss. Terebinthinae clarae Emplastri gummi Elemni.
Pinguedinis castrati.. ij. Pinguedinis porcinae antiquae. j.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum secundum artem.

Vnguentum Mundificatiuum. Quercetani.


Rec. Vnguenti aurei. i. ana.. ss. Terebinthinae Mellis Rosati.
^arinae fabarum. ij. Boracis. j. Pulueris praecipitat.. iii.
Misce, and fiat vnguentum.

Vnguentum incarnatiuum Regis Angliae. Rex Angliae.


Rec. ana.. iiii. Cerae albae Resinae
Terebinthinae lotae. i. ana. ss. Thuris Masticis
Olei. iii. Misce, and fiat vnguentum.


A drying water good to skin up an ulcer that I. B.
is hard to be cicatrized.

Rec. Aquae ros. lib. ij. ana.. ss. Lapidis Hematites Alluminis Cinabrij
Mercurij sublimat.. j. ana.. ss. Sanguinis Draconis Boli armoniaci
ana.. ij. Masticis Thuris Sarcocollae

Misce in Balneo Mariae.

A Cataplasme to suppurate. Andernacu^.


Rec. ana.. i. Farinae triticeae. Farinae fabarum
ana.. vi. Farinae sem. lini Farinae foenigraeci
Ficuum contusarum. i. ss. Axungiae veteris. ii. Croci.. i. Vitellorum ouorum
nu. ii.
Fiat Cataplasma. Andernacus.

Vnguentum Viride Andromachi. (...)


Rec. Resinae pini lib. ii. Cerae lib. i. ss. Olei com.. viii. Aeruginis
aeris.. iii.


Relent your Oil, Rosiu, and Ware at a gentle fire of roales, and at last add
to your Aerug. in sine powder.

Now it follows that I speak of the order and reason of diet, which the
patient wounded ought to observe, according as Tagaliius and Guido, with other
excellent men, have published and set down for all us to follow which practice
Surgery, for the comfort and health of the sieke and wounded patients.
IN the first seven days, his diet must be thin and slender, inclined to cold
and mo^stliesse, specially, if the patient be young and full bodied.

You shall forbid Wine to all wounded persons, chiefly if he have a Fever, and
incline to an Inflammation.

Let them austayne from all flesh that is hard and tough, and from great
Fishes, that engender evil juice, from new and unleavened bread, evil made
and baked.

Also it is good to refrain all cheese, and chiefly that which is old and
salt: from Fruits, almost of all sorts, from Garlic, Onyons, all sharp and
salt things, and let him not taste any kind of hot Spices.

They may use Partridges, Pullets, and Birds that haunt the woods: let them
have ptisanes of barley, and Almond Milk, and use potage made with flesh of
Ueale, simple, or prepared with Eggs.

Let him have Lettice, Purslane, Borage, Buglosse, Spinach, and such like
herbs in his brothes.

His drink shall be water boiled, wherein is soked household bread, such as
has some part of branne in it, commonly called brown bread, or in stead of
the said water, let him drink a ptisane of Barley: or if he be weak, or old,
then let him drink tarte and stiptike Wine, delayed with plenty of water and
sugar.

His Supper must be but short, yet nourishing.

It is good to use light and gentle rubbing or cha^ing the parts somewhat far
off from the wounded part.

Let him be quiet, for quietness is their chief medicine, and stirring and
walking contrary, especially, if they be wounded in the lower parts of the
body.

It is necessary altogether to abstain from the use of carnal copulation.

And also to shun ire, contention, anger, wrath, and all vehement motions of
the mind.

After the seven days, when the patient seems to be sure and safe from
infla^mation, and all other evil accidences, then let him use a more
plentiful diet, and by little and little let him return to his former
custom, and then use some Wine, but meek and gentle, and let him eat such
flesh as do engender good blood, and be a mayntayuer of nature, and heat, and
moisture, and the strength of the body, such as are the flesh of Hens,
Capons, and Mutton, especially the Mutton of Weathers. And this diet is
necessary and commodious to wounded men, because it maintains the natural
habit of the body, and does not move or stir up fevers, inflammations, nor
fluxes. And to this diet, says Tagaltius, does all the best Physicians and
Surgeons agree, as Galen, Hali, Rasis, Auicen, Brunus, Lanfrancus, and
Guilielmus de Saliceto. Yet Theodoricus, and Henricus (says Tagaltius) are of
a contrary opinion, for they would have Wine, and a hot dyet-to be given, and
used immediately upon the wound received: for (say they) the weakness of the
faculties of the wounded person, is by and by to be strengthened and confirmed,
and that by the drincking of Wine, whose sentence and judgment, is repugnant
to reason, as Galen 1. lib. Aphoris. 4. says. It chances but seldom in
sicknesses, that we should study to restore the strength of the body, more
then it may receive, for in so doing, we shall increase and maintain the
sickness: so that it appears by Galens words, that we must not always haste
to increase the strength, but it is sufficient sometimes to conserve, and
mayntaine the same, so that, from the first time that the wound is received, to
the seventh day, in the which time, inflammations use to come. Let the use of
drinking Wine be altogether forbidden, unless through flux of blood, the
strength be altogether infebled. Celsus says, ye may refresh the patient a
little with Wine, but otherwise, it is an enemy to wounds. After the seventh
day, if nothing do let, you may use Wine delayed with water: for if the wound
remain without accidents till then, it is commonly afterward in safety,
therefore nothing I say herein can be more necessary for a young practiser in
Surgery, then to endeavor himself to know before what evil will follow, and
to learn how to prevent and resist the same. And thus much as concerning
dyeting of your patient, which is very necessary as I say for all those
Surgeons which travail great and long voyages by sea, as also in the wars by
land, etc. which can not have always Physicions at their elbowes to counsel
them, but it were very good, I know, if they had: but where no such helps are
to be found, I judged it not amiss here to admonish and set down this
foresaid order of dieting of your patients, first of all collected for our
comfort and help, by those excellent learned men here before spoken of, etc.

A short and brief note for the manner of the purging of your patients being at
the Sea, or in such like places where the counsel of the learned Physician or
Surgeon is not to be had.
YE shall understand, if the patient wounded, be bound in his belly, and not
laxatiue; for remedy thereof you may use a Clister, or Suppositorie, or else
give the patient Cassia, or Ma^na, or some such gentle purging medicine. But if
he be of evil complexion or habit, his body being replenished with evil
iuyee, or if the wound be grievous and great, yea though his body were pure
and clean, yet those gentle purgings will not then suffice, but we must use
stronger medicines: so that there are two principal observations in purging of
the patients in such wounds: the greatness of the grief, and the abundance
of the evil juice. But if the wound consist in the upper part of the body,
then to purge downward, is the counsel of the learned: and if the wound be in
the lower parts of the body, to stay the flux of humors from flowing thither,
it is meet and convenient to withdraw the same by purging or by vomit; which
is to be done with great discretion. Thus much I have thought not amiss to
note for general observations herein, and such as I have followed in mine own
cures, partly by my own endeavor, and partly directed and ratified by the
judgments and informations in times past of diverse learned Physicians and
Chirurgions.

depiction of man with many war injuries

Necessary medicines and Instruments, good for young practizers of Chirurgerie
to be furnished with which follow the wars either by Sea or land.
IT is truly said, there is no coin so current, but has in it some
counterfeyts, which makes it suspicious: so is there no art so sincere, no
profession so good, but has also some counterfeyts which breeds it disgrace.
And none so much, I suppose, as there is some in these days, which take upon
the^ the titles or names of far traueiling or wandering Chirurgions, and such
like, which with Many good Ships are as it were become e^ges for such unclean
birds the more is the pity.
corruption of conscience, being void of the good graces of God, and true
knowledge in this noble art, either in reason, judgment, or experience, being
likewise utterly unfurnished of all good method or yet good medicines, unless
it be some such stuff which a man would scarce lay to a gald horse back, with
other furniture correspondent to the same, neither being able to perform any
good cure they take in hand, no more then they are able with one puff of wind
to turn about a Millstone. All which is a plain demonstration of their great
oversight in Chirurgerie, as by their cures at their coming home, is a
special token of their vilde ignorance. And therefore very hardly are such
able to declare or foretell the end of their cures, but rashly do promise that
which they cannot perform, and so bring themselves in the end to ignominy
and shame, and this worthy art unto great discredit. I have therefore, as I
have many times said, for the benefit of young practizers of the Art, here
collected out of Josephus Quirsitanus and good Vigo, with diverse others,
special medicines and necessary Instruments, whereunto I have added somewhat
of mine own collection, very needful and neces^^rie for all young practizers
of Chirurgerie to be furnished with, which follow and serve in the wars by
land, or at seas in ships, unto whom I wish most happy success in all their
cures, as I wish unto my own: as knows God, who sees the secrets of all
men's hearts, which guide you all with his outstretched arm, and bless you
also with his holy hand. Amen.

Suppuratiues, or Maturatiues (...) Quercetanus.

Vnguentum Basilicon vtrumque. Vnguentum Macedonicum. Tetrapharmacum. Vnguentum
resumptiuum. The Emplaister of Mucilages, which may be dissolved with Oil
Olive, if need require.
Mundifying or cleansing Medicines.
Vnguentum diapompholygos Nicolai. Vnguentum viride andromachi. Emplastrum
Diuinum dissolved in Oil of Roses. Vnguentum Apostolicum Auicennae. Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum Auicennae.
Incarnatiues, or Regeneratiues.
Vnguentum Aureum. Vnguentum ceras. Mesuae vtrumque. N. (...).
Emplastrum de gratia Dei, and de farina.
Desiccatiues or drying Medicines.
Vnguentum de minio. Vnguentum desiccatiuum rub. Emplastrum de cerussa.
Unguents for burnings with Gunpowder.
Vnguentum fuscum Nicolai. Vnguentum de calce viu. Vnguentum Magistrale, of the
Physicians of, Florence, described by Weckerus. Medicines, to repel and keep
back. Vnguentum de bolo communi. Vnguentum rosarum Mesues, etc.
Also Vnguentum pro vstionibus, after Paracelsus, which Paracelsus.
was greatly commended to me by a Physician and Surgeon of good account, but as
yet I have not proved it.

Rec. Butyri. lib. j. ana. lib. ss. Olei nucum. Seui ceruini.
Medullae tauri.. iiij.


Let this be melted at the fire, then put it into the water of Nymphae, three
quarters of a pint, and so make here of an Unguent according to Art, let the
part affected be anointed herewith, till the pain be ceased, and the wound
cured.

Of Syrups these be convenient. Vigo.

Acetosus simplex. A Syrup of the juice of Endive, or De duabus radicibus,
without vinegar. Mell rosarum in small quantity.
Of waters these shall suffice. ana. q. s.
Water of Endive. Hops. Borage. Wormwood. Fumitory.
Of Electuaries, these they shall have with them.
Diaphoenicon. Elec. de succo rosarum, after Mesue and Diacatholicon. Also
Cassia.
Pills they must have.
Pillulae Hierae cum agarico. Pillulae de fumoterrae, the greater and the
less.
Against the disease Opthalmia, they must have
Aqua Rosacea. And a sief without Opium. Oleum Rosaceum. Myrtillorum.
Chamomillinum. Oleum Omphacinum.
And it is convenient that they have with them

Farinae.
Fabarum. Orobi. Lini. Foenugreci. and Aqua vitae. Hordei. Lupinorum. Clow^^.
Tritici.
Emplasters.
Emp. despeciebus. Emp. Diachalciteos. Emp. Cum Gummis. Emp. Sticticum
Paracelsi. Emp. Hyoscyami Lutei, of my invention. Emp. Cumini, good for cold
and windy swellings. Emp. Flos vnguentorum. Emp. de minio.
Unguents, etc.
Vnguentum Dialthaeae. Vnguentum Album Rasis. Vnguentum de peto of my
invention. Arceus Liniment for wounds in the head, and his plaster for the
same. Also Vnguentum pro Spasmo. Balsamum Artificiale. Oleum Hyperic. cum
Gummis. Oleum Catulorum. Oleum Lumbricorum. Oleum Ouorum. Oleum Scorpionis.
Oleum Amygdalarum dull. Butyrum Recens.
A Lotion for sore mouths, good for such as have the Scorbuto, as at Sea and
other places I have seen: for the perfect cure of it, I refer you to Wyerus,
which book Master Hunton has of late translated into English.

Mythridatum, or fine Venice Triacle, Spermaceti, french Barley, Licoris, and
Anniseedes, very necessary to make Barley water, and Potus Antiochiae for
wounds in the body, etc.

For Cataplasmes.
Flores Ros. in pull. Flores Chamomil. in pull. Flores Melilot. in pull. Rad.
Altheae in pulu,
To rebate spungious flesh, etc.
Mercury Praecipitat. Mercury sublimat. Allumen roch. Vitriolum. Acetum.
Also
Eggs. Towe. Splints for fractured bones. Tape to bind. Cupping or boxing
glasses. A Chafingdish of Copper, Brass, or Iron. A Mortar, and a Pestell.
Blood Porrengers.
Powders to restrain great fluxes of blood.
Galens Powder. Gales Powder. Or my Powder may suffice.
Small and long wax Candles made of Tin, Lead, Silver, or Wood, etc. A
sharp Saw. A Catlin. An Incision knife.
Needles two or three, some of eight, ten, or thirteen inches in length,
having a decent eye in it, guttered like a Spanish needle, fit to draw a
flamula, or piece of fine Lawne or linen cloth through a member that is
wounded, etc. Small buttons, or cauterising yrons, meet to stay the flux of an
artery or vein, if great necessity do so require. A Trepan. A head Saw. An
Eleuatorie.
A Dilatorium to open a wound, that a Darthead, Arrowhead, or bullet, may the
better be taken out, with a Rostrum Coruinum, or Ravens bill, or with a Rostrum
Anatinum, or Ducks bill, or with a Rostrum Gruinum, fashioned like a Storcks
bill, or Cranes bill.

There be in use of these two sorts, one bowing, and the other straight.

A Speculum oris, for the mouth.

A Syringe.

As for stitching quills, and other instruments that a Surgeou ought always to
carry about him, I leave unspoken of. There are also many other Instruments I
know, which are in use, but these may suffice for young practizers of the
Art, and unto men of great knowledge and experience it is needless for me to
nominate the rest.

A necessary note or observation for the cure of one Master Buckland,
dwelling (as he said) at the sign of the George at Reading, a town in
Barkshire, he received a puncture or prick into the sinewe or nerve of his
right arm, by a most impudent and ignorant bloudletter, which did prick the
sinewe in stead of the liuen vein.
THis Master Buckland having a full and plethorick body, and thereupon
inclined to sickness, made his journey up to London, only to take physic,
which he did by the counsel of Master Doctor Symons, who was in times past
one of his old acquaintance. After his body was well prepared and purged, his
Physician prescribed him farther remedy by a bill, and amongst other things,
that the patient should be let blood to the value of eight ounces (...) the
liver vein, appoynting him thereunto also a (...) dwelling in this City,
called Master Morland: but (as he said) fortune owing him dispite, by chance
that Surgeon was not at home, being called otherwise about some special
cures, and therefore it was said his coming home to be uncertain. With that a
friend of Master Buckland that did come to visit him, and after speeches had,
understanding that he wanted one to let him blood, said: If it please you I
will send for one that I do partly know, not only to be a good Surgeon, but
for letting of blood, and drawing of a tooth, he is supposed to be as skillful
as any man in this town. Now such a one (said he) that can so well let blood,
I would willingly hear, and if it will please you, I will send my man for him
in your name. In fine, a bad thing was easy to find, for he was presently
brought. Then Master Buckland (as you have heard) being the sick patient,
delivered unto this bloudletter the Physicians bill, which was written in
English: but be answered and said, Truly I can neither write nor read:
nevertheless, doubt you of nothing, but I can and will do it as well as any
man whatsoever. I dare make that comparison (quoth he) so the patient did read
the bill unto him, which did signify that there should be eight ounces of
blood, taken from the liver vein on the right arm. O the liver vein sir
(said he) I know it as well as all the Physicians and Surgeons in this town:
and so without any longer detracting of time, he went about his business, and
did so be rub and chase his arm, as though he had been laboring about his
horse heels, and then bound it up after his own fashion. All which being
accomplished, in the twinkling of an eye, or turning of a hand, this
toothdrawer, or bloudletter (as he called him) did Ignorance engendereth error.
without all regard or skill, unadvisedly ouershoot himself, and did thrust
the sick patient into the sinewe in stead of the liver vein. Then presently
by the reason of the great sensibilitie and feeling of the pricked sinewe, he
fainted, or sounded down right, and much ado they had to keep life in him: so
they gave him presently to drink Aqua vitae, etc. And were further constrained
to burn a card, being soulded up round, and offered the smoke thereof up into
his nosethrilles. This done, he was laid upon his bed, then all those that were
about the sick patient, did begin to find great fault with his baseness and
want of skill, and condemned his handie work. Well (said he) I pray you be
patient, the matter truly is as much The more the worse.
as nothing, for I have had diverse that have faynted thus, and yet were
presently well again: but the fault that I have committed, I will confess,
was, for that the Orifice was made too little, and in very deed the only cause
was in himself, for that he did not hold still his arm, as he should have
done. Then one of the standers by answered, a blind shift is better then none
at all, you might as well have said, he had eaten his horse because his faddle
lies under his bed. Well (said he) you speak merrily, I know that saying has
been used long, as an old jest, but I pray you al be contented and I will make
him well again upon my credit within twice four and twenty hours. To be
short, his words were but wind, for within that time and space he had most of
those accidents which foretells death, for the wound did receive or
entertain many humors, with extreme pain, inflammation, a Fever shiuering,
rauing, and oftentimes conuulsions. Then they counseled together and
determined to stay no longer upon this foolish toothdrawer his vain promises:
for which cause they sent for Master Doctor Symons, and after his coming it
was strange unto him to see such a sudden alteration, demanded of them what
the cause might be: Then briefly they delivered unto him all the evil that had
happened, and the causer thereof. In the mean time, I was also sent for: but
here omitting other speeches had, I requested of them, that without any
detracting of time I might see the hurt: so without carrying I did lay all naked
and bare, where I found the patient to have those evil symtomes before
rehearsed, and nature also weakened. Then Master Doctor Symons called for the
fellow that had dressed him. Here I am (quoth he) You have not been circumspect
in all things which concern the methodicall perfection of this your handie
work. I will answer what I have done (quoth he) Then said he unto him, what
reason had you not only to commit a merueilous oversight in pricking of the
sinewe, but also almost as foul a fault in stopping or closing up of the
Orifice of the wound, or prick of the sinewe, which now by your unskillfulness
is hidden under the skinue, which at the very first you ought with all your
industerie and diligence to have kept open. Well (said he) I have applied
thereunto those medicines which cannot be bettered, and are by me well approved
to be good, either for pricks or cuts of tendons, sinews, or veins, but yet
did I never see accidents thus secretly steal into a wound. I pray you (said
I) what be your medicines or remedics yt you have used which are so good and
have so evil success. I tell you (said he) they are no beggarly medicines,
but the best I could buy for my money: The one is Gracia dei, and the other is
an Indian Balm, which I know is good, for well I wot it cost me two shillings
and six pence the ounce at the first hand. Your remedies (said I) may be
profitable as they are used, although not for such pricks of sinews. What is
your reason I pray you (said he) I never heard any man say so but you. Marie
(quoth I) because at the beginning of all such pricks, you ought not to use
neither conglutinatiues, nor incarnatiues, until the wound be past all
danger, and then such medicines which have property to incarne, and to cover
the sinewe with flesh, may safely be used: neither are such wounds restored
again by Balmes, according to the first intention, but only in fleshy parts.
But this shifting fellow answered and said: You make here a greater stir
before the patient and his friends, then there is cause. And what though he be
a little faint, he shall be well again by Gods grace, if he will be ruled by
me but a little while, and I will stand to it for all your talk, it is but a
small prick only in the skin. But admit the sinewe were clean cut asunder,
which is, I suppose, a more worse and dangerous thing then the prick of a
sinewe: and yet (said he) without comparison or praise to my self I speak it,
and without all this business, I have cured them when I have had no such
overseers or counselors, but my self alone. Why (said I) do you not think
that a prick in the sinewe is more dangerous then that sinewe which is clean
cut asunder. No (said he) you shall never make me believe that a prick by a
small poynted thing, as is a launcet, or a needle, can be so dangerous, as
that which is cut asunder by a razour, knife, or other sharp weapons. Now
truly (said I) I may well credit you in good sooth that you can neither write
nor read, neither yet have any good experience: for if you had, you would
never thus besot your self with such rude judgments and fond opinions: but
you are partly to be excused, for you have more fellows, whose knowledge and
skill is correspondent with yours, as directly as the sheep does follow the
Ram. Then he did begin to oyen the gates of infamy (as is the manner of such
mischievous miscreants) but most specially against a reverend and skillful
Surgeon of this City of London, shamefully charging him that he had spoiled
a Gentlewoman in the country, who He has me^^ selowes that will point at
other men's faults, and forget their own.
having (as this slaunderer said) but a little prick with a needle only in the
skin, and was in the joint of her fore singer of her right hand, and by that
small prick in the skin, she lost the use of that finger, which cure (quoth
he) has utterly discredited him both with the Gentlewoman and her friends. I
answered him and said: That might have been any other man's case, and I told him
that my self had known the like success to happen in the cure of men of good
knowledge, experience, and judgment: and yet, in mine opinion, no fault nor
error at all committed by them touching the method or manner of cure. Well
(said he) speak what you please, I do know the prick with a needle in the
skin is nothing so dangerous, as you make it, in any body whatsoever. But
it is said to be the manner of all you, to hide and excuse one an others fault,
and to speak against such as I am, because I am a stranger unto you, and none
of your company, and therefore I am despised, and my medicines dispraised. Why
(said I) cuery honest man and faithful true Artist that is diligent in study,
and by his studying attayneth to knowledge and skill, and being examined,
approved, and allowed, and a man that fears God, and endeavors to the
uttermost of his power and skill to discharge his duty which is committed to
his charge, according unto those graces and gifts which God of his great
goodness has endued him with: such men are our brethren and of our company,
wheresoever he dwell or abide: but contrariwise, deceivers, intruders, and
shifters, as you are, which without either reason or skill, do abuse the art
and spoil the people, we exclude such persons clean from us, and do account
you all but as a sort of Caterpillars in the country and Common wealth. Then I
proceeded to his former speeches as touching the prick of a needle in the
skin, and I said unto him: since you will not believe me that such pricks are
dangerous, I will show you what Tagaultius says being a learned man, and of
great account in Physic and Chirurgerie, he also citing Galen in the sixth
book of his method, whose words in effect are these. Imagine (says he) one
come unto us, who has but only a prick in the skin with a needle, that man
for the good disposition of his body may easily be cured, and to follow his
accustomed business, having the part naked and bare, and without any medicine at
all, and yet receive no hurt: but if he have a full and plethorike body, or a
body of an ill constitution, called Cachochymia, in such a body the prick of
a needle in the skin is hard to be cured. Then this counterfeyt answered
again, I care neither for Galen nor the other man you speak of (meaning
Tagaltius) Reasons according to his rudenes.
for (said he) I have done as good cures as the best of them both, and yet I
hear they were a couple of good workmen. Then said Master Doccor: I am
ashamed of thy impudency and boldness, and for that cause did sharply reprehend
him: So he was commanded to avoid the place and presence of the patient. Then
with unseemly speeches, which are not meet to be spoken of in this place, he
departed, etc. And now I will come unto the cure of the said puncture or prick
of the sinew: but first you shall understand, that the matter was so stopped
in, that it could not by any means conveniently breathe out, and therefore I
did open the skin by incision directly upon the prick of the sinewe, which I
made of a sufficient length, that the matter which was stopped in did the more
freely and easily issue out: and that matter which did continually flow forth
was some what clear, thin, and glutinous, like as though it had been a
stime, or muscilage: then I applied upon Note that, old things be enemies unto
the sinews.
the said puncture to mitigate the pain these Dyles following, made first
actually hot, which I used continually until the forenamed accidents were
removed and taken away.

Rec. ana.. ss. Oleorum Chamomeli and Lombricorum. (...)

Olei Euphorbij.. ^. ss. Olei exvitellis ouorum.. ij. Aquae vitae. q. s.
Misce.

Since the time of this cure, I found the like profit for appeasing of pains
in the cure of a woman, which also was prick into the sinewe, unto whom I used
these Dyles following, in the same order as the other before rehearsed.

Rec. ana.. iij. Olei Terebinthinae Olei Rosarum. Olei Lumbricorum. Olei
vitellorum ouorum. Misce.


After I had (actually hot) applied the aforesaid Dyles, then I ministered
therewithal, for more security and speedy help to appease the pains, this
worthy remedy, which is of Vigo his description.

Rec. Medullae panis, and Lactis vaccini confecti cum Oleis Vigo.
Rosarum, and Chamomeli cum vitellis ouorum, and cum Croco. ana. q. s.

Boil all these together unto the thicknes of a plaster, the which I applied
warm upon the said puncture. Also upon this medicament of Vigo, and likewise
round about the whole member, where any pain or inflammation was, this
excellent Cataplasme of Valeriola.

Rec. ana.. iij. Farinae fabarum Hordei. Valeriola.
Lentium. Lupinorum.
ana.. ij. Farinae Seminis lini. Foenugreci.
Farinae Orobi.. j. Croci. ij.
Bulliant farinae cum aceto and mellis paruo. Fiat Cataplasma.

Also I have used this following in the like cure done of late, as I have
declared, with great profit and ease unto the patient, etc.

Rec. ana. q. s. Radic. althaeae Farinae Hordei Farinae fabarum Farinae lentium
Weck^^.

Coquantur cum sapa, vel lixiuio. Whereunto you shall add ana. q. s. Olei
Rosarum Olei Chamamelini and Olei Anethini Also Terebinthinae and Croci parum.
Misce, and fiat Emplastrum.

I have thought it not amiss here to give to understand, that Guido does
admonish us, not to use at all those pultises, or hot waters which are wont to
cure inflammations, for that such remedies in this cure, do rather putrify and
waste away the sinews, etc. And since the chiefest thing in curing wounds of
the sinews, is to appease the pain, therefore I have thought it good here to
set forth such chosen medicines, as my self have approved, for the better
directing of those young students, which have not been practiced in the like
manner of curing. Moreover, whereas Guido with others does wisely declare, that
conuulsions are evil, and for the most part incurable, as it is most certain
and true, yet it so pleased God by these remedies hereafter nominated, he was
in a reasonable time and space quite delivered of that evil accident, by
annoynting morning and evening all the hinder parts of his neck, and both his
shoulder blades, and down all the spine of his back, even unto his hippes
with this Unguent.

Rec. Olei Castorei. j. Olei Iuniperi.. ss. ana.. vj. Olei Lilliorum and Olei
Vulpini.

Misce.

This being accomplished, as is before declared, then I proceeded from time to
time until the finishing of this cure, the which was done in the end with
that most excellent Balm, that is supposed to be of Master Halles
description, late of Maydstone, which is now extant in this book, with the
which also I used this Unguent following.

Rec. Vnguentum aureum Heben. Mesu^.
Cerae.. v. Resinae quar. j. Terebinthinae lib. j. Mellis. quar. ss. ana.. ij.
Masticis Thuris. Sarcocollae. Myrrhae. Aloes. Croci.

Fiat Vnguentum.

This approved Unguent, and the aforesaid Balm together, brought very speedely
flesh upon the hurt sine we: and having left the use of the Cataplasme, before
spoken of, then I did wrap the whole member round about cum Emplastro
Diachalciteos, disolued in Oleo Rosaru^, and Lumbricoru^: which did greatly
strengthen the weak member. And thus by Gods help by this manner of method he
was restored again to his former health of the part wounded. And here I finish
this short note or observation, the which I do most heartily desire all young
students to take in good part, and to accept of this until it shall please
some learneder man of greater gifts and judgment to publish a more profitable
work: the which heartily I wish, as knows God, who direct both you and me in
all lawful proceedings and practices in the art.

The cure of a certain stranger which was wounded or thrust through his thigh
with a Rapier, by one of his own countrymen, being combatting and fighting
together. The cure thereof was somewhat hard and difficult, by reason he was
further touched with the french disease before he received his wound, etc.
Immediately after he had received his wound or thrust through his thigh, I was
sent for unto this cure, the patient lying at a strangers house in the
Crouched Friars: ye shall understand he had a very strong, fat, and corpulent
body, and so a very big thigh, he was a man about thirty years of age: all
which being considered, concerning the state and strength of his body, and the
greatness of the place wounded: then for the cure thereof I did ordain a
flamula made of fine Lawne, the which dipped in Oleo Hypericonis cum gummis,
and with a needle made of Whales bone, fit for such purposes, I did draw the
said flamula into the wound, and I did leave both the ends thereof hanging
forth at the Orifices of this wound, putting also a small tent in the
dependant or lowest part of the wound, and the largest Orifice which was at the
inside of his thigh, and there it did rest for the space of two days, applying
also thereto for the staying of the blood Galen his powder, and above the wound
I laid a very good defensive: after I did bolster and roll it up according as
art did lead me. The second day at night he did require me to dress him
again, for because the night before he said he was troubled with a fever, as
he supposed it to be, and was so persuaded by other: and for that cause he
entertained a Physician, a country man of his, for to cure his Agewe, and also
to see his wound. Now when the wound was opened, it was without tumor or any
other evil symptoms, only I found a bloody saines: for that cause I used next
with the flamula a very good digestive, the which I dipped in Oleo rosarum, and
melle rosarum, ana. q. s. and left to use the Oil of Hypericon: The next day
in the morning he complained of extreme pain which he had suffered all that
night: then I opened the wound, and I did find it as before, wherewith he was
somewhat disquieted in body and mind. Then I dressed him again, and he was
very quiet and well all that day, and at night the wound tended toward
digestion, which was (me thought) very well to be liked of: but the next day in
the morning it was more worse then before, a stinking bloody sanies: and the
next day at night the matter was indifferent, yet in the morning by no means I
could procure concoct or digest matter: notwithstanding, the best digestiues
and other good medicines used. So the Physician and the rest of his He was a
young Phisito^, scarce skillful in the art of Chirurgerie, though otherwise
well learned.
country men thought somewhat amiss in me, for that the patient his wound did
prosper no better: And in like manner I thought somewhat in the Physician, for
that he could not find out the reason and cause of his supposed fever. To
come unto the purpose, at the next opening in the presence of his host of the
house, where he did lie, which was his interpretour, I desired him to demand
of the patient, when and where his pains did most afflict him. He answered, in
the night time, and chiefly in his head, and also his shoulders, legs and
arms, al which were very sore grieved and tormented. Then I was the bolder to
proceed in examination, and asked of him if he had any breaking out in some
particular parts of his body. He answered no, but only a few Scabbes in his
head, the which he did not perceive, but since he was hurt and kept his bed:
and further he said, he was very sore grieved with the Emoroydes or Piles,
which for the baseness of the place he said he was unwilling to acquaint any man
with. Then I plainly told him he was touched with the French disease. So They
(...) neither ^^oroydes nor P(...)es. vi^let his correction, but the F. P.
I being loath to give offense, said little more at that time, because I
perceived he had my words in disdain, until he had better considered with
himself. And against my next coming he caused the Physician to meet with me:
So after he had also seane and heard the whole matter, he likewise confirmed my
sayings, that certainly it was the French disease. Why (said the patient to the
Doctor) does our country yield such fruit, and I being no Frenchman: He
answered, God plagueth most part of the world with that disease only for our
sins and wickedness. So order was taken by us presently: and we entered him
in cure for that sickness. But here it is to be noted, that in all this time I
did never alter or change mine intention of curing, neither did I leave of the
use of the flamula, until the wound was perfectly digested, which we could by
no means procure, until he was entered six days in the diet: and then
altogether I left of my digestiues, and the use of the Such wounds are sildom:
void of accidents, until the (...) be perfectly di^ested
flamula, and used but short tents with good iniections, and also Oleum
Hypericonis, with other convenient remedies meet for this cure. In the end,
when the patient did perceive he was almost cured, he would (as it were) merely
seem to excuse himself: and being (as it seemed) partly ashamed of his
disease, protested unto us, with many incredible speeches and untruths, that
he did not understand how he should come by the disease, no more then he did
know, how, or whether the Ocean seas did ebb or flow, or not, unless it
were by traueiling over the Alps, or with drinking of Snow water. These his
ridiculous reasons I accepted as wind. It suffices (I say) that he was cured.
So he was glad of his health, and I nothing sorry of his liberalicie. Yet he
was to be borne withal: for I have not heard of many that would willingly
vouchsafe to confess the original and taking of such infirmities. But what if
he had? It is not our functions or callings (that be Chirurgions) to reveal
the secrets of our patients, as we are taught by the ordinances of our elders
and ancient fathers that went before us.

The cure of a man which received a notable wound in his head, with great
fracture of the skull, and did moreover fracture the bone of the thigh, called
Osfemoris, by a fall out of a gallerie in the Bear garden, at that time when
the Bear garden did fall down, and did kill and hurt many.
I Have thought it good, before I enter into the brief note or observation of
this cure, partly to signify unto all young students in this art, that such
great wounds in the head, with fracture of the skull, are holden generally of
the best professors and practizers, to be most perilous and dangerous. The
bone being compressed upon the panicle Dura matter: for which cause, at the very
beginning of this cure, I did shave or cut the hair away round about the
wound: then with my finger I made further probation into the wound, and there I
did manifestly feel a notable fracture or breach in the skull on the left side
of his head upon the bone, called Os Petrosum, which (as is before said) was
depressed upon the panicle Dura matter. And for that the fracture of the skull
was greater in length then the wound in the flesh, for that cause, without
detracting of time, I made incision, and so followed the fracture, until all
the rift or cracked bone was wholly discovered. When I did see and behold the
full length of the fracture or breach in the skull, and had raised up the
flesh, then for that I could not at that present time proceed any further in
this business, because of the great flux of blood, and the rather for that he
had lost a great quantity of blood before he was brought home to his lodging.
All which being considered, I filled the wound with pleggets and runlets made
of lint, and very sine towe, wet in the whites of Eggs, being mixed with Galen
his powder. Then after, with good bolstering and roulling, he remained thus
until the next day, and then having also a present regard unto the preservation
of the fracture of his thigh, as hereafter I (...) lie to set dow^e the true
manner and (...) or (...)* (...) this great fracture and wound in his head. ^et
amongst other things, I thought (...) good al^^ to ^ore heart unto you, that the
patients master, and other of his friends, did signify (...) me that h^ (...)
of ^^^d account, and for that cause they were ^e more (...) I would de^^e^e
truly unto them w^^^ d^ung^* I thought he was in, that they might also signifi
i^ ^^to other of his (...) in the country. Then I considered with my self, I
was then to speak before men of worship* wisdom and learning, unto whom I
was to deliver m^^e (...). And calling to (...) remembrance some part of the
wise sayings of Guido, Tagaultius, and others, whose good counsel herein is
thankfully to be embraced and followed.

When then ar^ (say they) called before a Magistrate or head Officer, or any
other grave and wise man, and that thou are required ^o deliver thine opinion,
sen ence and judgment vppou the person wounded, and to prognosticat^, as much
as art requires, it behooves thee diligently and effectually to mark the
wound or wounds, if there be many, and shall shall truly call the same wound
or wounds by their express and proper names, together with the place wounded.
Then after it behoneth thee to consider with thy self the cause or thy
conjecture, and the reason of thy sentence and judgment by thee delivered,
wisely and prudently, least thou tail in thy judgment, and so show s^y self
to be either (...)rent, or else deceived, etc. So briefly here I could them,
that he was not without great daimger. partly by reason the (...) was sore
shaken with the fall, and also for that the ^one was broken, and depressed upon
Dura matter, which were (...) caus^^ that did h^^der his speech, and ^ it could
not be (...) at the (...) or dressing, by reason of the great (...)oud:
^owbe^t, I did hope of some amendment after ^ h^^ pierced the skull with the
Trepan. Other sp(...) I h^^ as touching his vom^^ing, the greatness of his
wound, with the fracture of his skull and (...) s^eake ^^^e of hereafter in
(...) I caused them to hang all his chamber (...) about with Couerle^s and
other hangings, and made it (...) dark, and without any light or air, but
only by a candle: because in this c^se air is very hurtful. Then at the
second (...), after (...) e^ed the wound and taken away all (...) wound was
filled, for the res^rayning (...) it did require with all expedition to make
v^n^ or way (...) to come forth, therefore I caused th^n strong men steadfastly
to stay his head with their hands* and (...) ^opped his ears with wool, then
I did set on the Trepan. and so pierced the skull through both the tables in
two places: and then with an Instrument, called ^ Leuatorie, I raised up the
depressed bone, with great care and diligence, for fear of procuring further
accidents: which being dove, presently his speech amended. And upon Dura matter
I found a good quantity of congeled blood, which presently I removed for fear
of pain and inflammation. After the blood with speed was taken away, there
was also very apparent to be seen a certain blacknes upon Dura matter: for the
which cause I did put between Dura matter and the skull, in the ^^ead of a
syndall that Vigo commends, a fine (...)wne, dipped in Melle Ros. and upon
the fracture of the (...) I applied actually hot Olei Ros. and Aquae vitae,
(...) with ^^^t so filled up the wound: and at other (...) I used upon pleggets
of lint this Unguent, which is called Vnguentum caprifolij, that I found then
(...) in Master Gales second book of his Antidotarie: but since that time I
have found it in Wecker, and diu(...)others.

Rec. Vnguentun^ Capri^olij. Wecker.
ana.. iiij. Terebinthinae Resinae pini Cerae nouae
Olei Rosati. viij. ana.. j. Masticis Thuris
Gummi elemnij.. ij. ana.. iij. Caprifolij Betonicae
Vini optimi lib. x.


The Woodbine and Betonie being stamped, let them stand infused in the wine
four and twenty hours, then add to them all the other parcels, except the
Gummes, Frankensence and Masticke, boil these on a clear fire until half
part of the wine be consumed, and that it begin to wax green, then strain
it, and let it cool: then boil it again until the wine be consumed: then
strain it again, and add to the rest of the parcels in fine powder, then put
it in a cold place and reserve it to your use. After (as I said) I had
preserved the wound with these remedies here rehearsed: then I applied also
over all the aforesaid medicines, this plaster of Betony, and at last I
anointed his head round about the wounds with Oleo Rosarum, and over all this
a good bed or cap of towe: and then with blosterings and roulling I finished
this dressing, etc.

Rec. Emplastru^ Betonicae.
Gummi elemnij. iiij. Resinae. viij. Cerae. vj. Gummi armoniaci. iiij.
Terebinthinae. vj. Succi Betonicae. x.
Misce and fiat Emplastrum.

I was constrained contrary unto the description of this plaster, to enlarge
and double the quantities of the receipt, because I used much of it. And
further, it is to be noted, that from the beginning I also applied upon the
wound warm stuphes with white wine and Aqua vitae. And thus I continued with
this manner of dressing, until all the blacknes was clean taken away from
Dura matter, by the said honey of Roses. But if that blacknes should not have
gone away, notwithstanding the use of honey of Roses, as I have seen, it is
then to be feared, and small hope of health is to be looked for. It is supposed
not to be good for to over busy our selves in these wounds of the head in the
full of the Moon, without great cause constrayne us.
And again, the wounded man was in the more danger, for that he received his
hurt very near the full of the Moon, whereby this evil followed that Dura
matter did rise, and thrust it self out of those places of the skull, that I
did perforat or pearce with the Trepan, the which I did safely bring down
again in this manner, with a fomentation or decoction made thus, etc.

Rec. ana. q. s.
Florum Ros. Chamameli Melilotae Aquae vitae


And these were all boiled together in fair water, and last was added the Aqua
vitae, and herewith did I for a good space foment well or bathe the place: and
then I applied upon Dura matter, this remedy following, and with a fine piece
of Lawne orderly conuayed under Cranium, or the skull, perfectly to defend the
panicle from being hurt with the sharp edges of the bone.

Rec. ana.. j. Olei Rosarum Mellis Rosarum.
Aquaevitae. ss.
Misce.

And sometimes in like manner I used Oleu^ vitellorum onorum, which did
pleasure us greatly sometimes being used by it self alone. And at other times
I mixed it with the remedy above written, I mean that oil of Eggs, which has
a fair yellowe color, and a pleasant and sweet savor: And ^^po^ the
foresaid piece of ^^^e Law^e ^ (...) a (...) piece of a sponge steeped in the
(...) (...) with this order Dura matter was (...) wought (...) (...)* which to
do in some bodies is wonderful (...) and (...): therefore it does require
great diligence* care, and (...) ^ud as touching the skaling and removing of
the fractured ^^^es, it was safel^ done in a reasonable time, partly with the
use of Olei Rosarum* and Aquae vitae. ^^d sometimes with Aqua vitae, and
Vitriol alb. ana. q. s. But when I applied the Aqua vitae, and vitriol, I did
first de^^^^ t^^ (...) parts of the wound with dry lint, etc. for if it should
at any tune touch the flesh, it wi^^ cause great pain, neither may such wounds
be disquieted with any sharp or by^ing (...), least the wounds (as I have
seen) shall receive or entertain a certain strange malignitie, which does
greatly hinder the perfection and course of the cure. And often times I used
Puluis Cephalicus, which is a very apt and a convenient remedy for skaling of
bones of the head. And with these foresaid medice^^^nes, A continued until
there was good flesh brought upon L^ura matter, and the fractured bones being so
loosed and borne up, and in the place of these bones Nature supplied and
ordained a good and perfect callus, or porus. And thus he was shortly after
well and perfectly cured and w^de whole of the said wound of his head.
Moreover, ^e s^^all f^rther understand, that in the time of this cute, we w^^^
^^mpelled to use dirt, purging, and phlebothornie, the which I do but thus
speak of in a Word, for that it was done by the direction of a learned
Phistci^^^ and so he was made perfect whole of this ^ound of ^is head, Now here
I will also briefly touch (...) (...) the fracture of the bone of his thigh,
and therefore I ende^ou^^d my self ^e^ the right placing of this fracture,
which was broken transnerse or cross wise. It is to be further noted, that of
fractured when they happen in bodies of evil disposition and temperature, they
often times resist cure, and are long or ever they ^ee made whole: which note
ye shall observe with all diligence and good consideration. But this patient
was a man of a young (...) body, and of a very good constr^u^ion. Then (...)
(I ^^y) he was b^ought into his bed, and so orderly laid upon (...) back,
(...) being done, I visited the fracture after this manner. First (...) made
two decent towe^s, and fastened each towel^, (...) (...) the (...), (...) (...)
other below the Strong (...) (...) (...), i. ^c. (...)* ^ie in strong bodies
but (...) weak person^ it is ^o (...) de^^^ed according to the^ strength.
fracture. Th^^ (...) two strong men ^o aprehend and take (...) of ^^ch towel^,
end I pla^^ my self very near unto the fracture: Then all things being
rea^i^, I caused them (...) to extend o^ stretch out the member: which being
suffi(...) ^ performed, I did ^l^^ate or lift up that part of the (...) (...)
was depressed. And again, I did also depresse down ^he other part of the
fractured bone which was borne up (...) ^^euated: which being reduced and
counited together, ar^ ^^^hely restored, as n^^re as I could, according to
natures form^r union, and being thus well joined, I did curiously keep close
the disse^^ered bones together, and then I caused the two men which ^^^ended
the member, by little and little to release the^ hands, whereby the patient
found himself greatly eased of his pains, the which we did understand by his
relation unto us. After this I did take a linen cloth, so large, as did not
only comprehend the fracture, but also covered over some part of the whole and
sound member: she which cloth I did wet in water and vinegar, and then I did
syred upon the same this remedy here prescribed.

(...)
Rec. ana. q. s. Albuminis ouorum Olei Rosarum Boli A^^oniaci Farinae volatilis
M^sce.

Some excellent men do also use to wet the said cloth only in Albumine onot^^,
and (...) Rosarum, ana. q. s. being well beaten (...), and afterward being
compressed ^ut again, and so apply it ^^to the part affected. And I my (...)
^aue als^ appro^ued it good: but I used the* foresaid re^^die with great
prosite, as I have declared, and therewith I compassed the member round three
or fourtimes: then with a convenient rouller made of soft linen cloth, which
also I wet in water and vinegar, called Posca, I did begin my roulling or
ligature directly upon the fracture, and so roulled it up twice or thrice about
the fracture, and then roulled it downwards, and in like manner ascending
upwards again above the fracture. Then after the same order, as before, I did
so roll it again with an other rouller of the same breadth and length, that
is to say, two yeards long and four fingers broad: then according unto the
good direction of Horatius Morus, and others, who says: Your manner of
roulling must neither be too straight, neither yet too loose: for by over loose
binding the bones may be moved: and by too straight or over hard girding, is
often hindered, and lets the distribution of nourishment into the part, and
so is hindered the engendring or breeding of the sodering humor, wherewith the
bones is knit and united, which is made, as it is truly said, of good
nourishment inclining to grossenes. Now, to come unto the manner and order of
placing of the splints, which was set upon the said roullers, which splints
were made of light willowe wood very plain and smooth: and being blunt and
round at both ends, well wrapped about, and also bolstered with towe, which I
placed upon the member round the breadth of Sp^^nts also made with the
^^abbards of swords I have ^^^d, with like ^^^^ite unto (...)ent.
a finger between every splint, and sometimes further of or nearer, as cause
required. Then with good strong tape I did moderatly and gently bind them well
together: which being done, I laid or placed the member as seemly and decently
as possible might be in a double linen towell roulled up at both the ends,
with a good quantity of great Rushes, such as our Chaundlers use to put in
their watching Candles, and I did make thereof a bed to lay or place the
fractured member in, whereby he could by no means any way move his broken
leg: but safely and quietly rested, as though it had been laid in that famous
Instrument, called of the learned Glossocomium, which Instrument serves to
extend or to stretch out a fractured member, and also serves for the use before
declared.

The manner, order, and true use thereof, was first revealed and plainly showed
unto diverse Chirurgions of this City of London, (when I was my self in
presence) by Master Doctor Foster, the Reader of the Chirurgerie Lector in the
Physicians College. And to conclude, after I had safely laid in his leg, as
aforesaid, then he rested so reasonable quietly for the space of fourteen
days: and then upon a sudden, without any reasonable cause known, there did
begin to rise a very paynfull Itch, with an inflammation: then I followed the
direction of Wecker, and somented the member first with warm water, to this
end and purpose that the humor which was enclosed might the more easily
euaporate and breath out: which done, I anointed the member round about with
Vnguentum populeon, and Vnguentum album, ana. q. s. then I used also this
plaster.

Rec. Emplastri Diachalciteos. viij. Olei Myrtillorum.. j. Succi granatorum.
ss. Albumin. ouorum nou. ij.
Misce.

After I did roll up the member again in the same manner and order, as is
before declared. And thus, by the use of these remedies, his Itch and
inflammation was removed and taken away without further trouble, and in a
reasonable time he was made whole also of the fracture of his thigh. And for
that it stood upon me to have great care and regard of the health of this
wounded man, I thought it nothing hurtful unto In matters ^* danger sh^^ not to
ask counsel, least when it is too late thou do then repent thee.
my credit to require counsel: And hereunto I did diverse times call (to
visit my patient) my approved good friend Master Banester, whose counsel
unto me herein was not a little profitable. To conclude, after I had cured and
healed him, both the patient and his friends seemed to be somewhat
discontented, and used some words, but to small effect, which kind of speech
is compared, by a learned man, unto mighty waters, that drown the people and
does it self no profit And forsooth the chiefest matter was (besides that
they were. ^oth to part from their money) only for that his fractured leg was
somewhat shorter then the other: but I told them again, that much might be done
in young persons, which in aged oftentimes did not so happily fall out, as we
do wish and look for. For example, calling then to mind that a few years
past, a youth, being about the age of ten or eleven years, whose name was
called Martine Aude, he did commonly resort unto ^ Brewers house in Bishops
gate streate, where he also did dwell: In the same Brewhouse was a horsemill
grinding of malt, and there this said youth, with other resorted to play, and
so running about the mill after the horse, did by chance unawares go so near
the mill, that suddenly the millstone did take (...) of his coat, and so did
draw him into the mill, and the mi^^^ne did run over his thigh and fractured
the bone Os femoris in diverse pieces: then by reason of his noise and crying,
the fellow that did lead the horse, very suddenly staie^, and so the mill,
otherwise all his whole body had been drawn in and crushed or broken in
pieces. Then I was sent for, and likewise Master George Baker, Surgeon:
which being both together, we placed again the fractured bones, and also
applied thereto convenient remedies. And so here to make an end without further
circumstances, he was by us in a reasonable time perfectly c^red. And now he
lives at this day, being a very strong and lusty man, without lamenes or any
other imperfection of that leg. Here I will conclude this brief observation,
which I have published for young practizers, which are, as I have said,
favorers of learning and lovers of art, as you shall perceive by the course
of my writing: but not for the learned, or men of great knowledge and
experience: neither, to my remembrance, I have in this whole discourse, by
bayne delusions published any strange paradoxes, or new found remedies, which
(as says Erastus) a man of many great gifts, judgment and experience, who (as
it is thought) was neither ambitious, nor affectioned, wills that al such
remedies should be shunned, and not used: his meaning is, except those which
are well approved and best in effect, and are found plentifully described in
the books of famous men which were before our time, as I have in this book
many times repeted, etc.

The cure of a Mariner, which had two of his ribs fractured or broken with a
violent blow of a capsten bar in one of her Majesty's Ships, which bruised
him very ^ore: at the same present time he was thrown down upon the carriage
of a great piece of Ordnance, which bruised him again very greatly in other
parts of his body: Therefore such as will take upon them to attempt the like
cures, shall not utterly be deceived of their intent and purpose.
I Think it good, without any longer discourse, so briefly as I can, here to
publish and plainly express the truth of my practice in this cure, and so
with all faithfulness, industry and diligence, to proceed unto the rest, for
the commodity of such as are not unthankful quarrel pickers, who, in the
burning flames of their wicked affections, move speeches more curious then
necessary, speaking evil of good, and good of evil: whereas we are
otherwise taught to embrace the good and to hate the evil: such is the nature
of the wicked which delight in their ungodliness. Blame me not (good reader
and loving brethren) though I speak so much, and so oftentimes, almost in
every place throughout this book, of the manifold abuses of scoffers and
scorners, who daily more and more increase in troops, and are puffed up, not
only against Some dead, and some alive.
me, with most haughty, stout, and stately countenances, but also against
diverse good men, that are far my betters, and endued with many goodly gifts
both in learning and knowledge in this a^^e of Chirurgerie. And I know full
well, it will be hard for a man of so weak a wit, and slender capacity, to
purchase any fruitful acceptance of quarrelling adversaries, being so
wickedly addicted. Though herein I confess my self, and my practice which I
have published, to be nothing in respect, as before I have said, but that I
have received from the head spring of knowledge, revealed unto us by others
^ound discourses and writings, wherein I have spent some part of my days in the
reverent study and practice of the same, partly for the advancement of the
art, and edification of others, being young practizers: yet could I never,
until this day, once hope to be unburdened of evil speakers, specially of
the rascal sort. And it is a wonder of the world to see, what blemishes or
deep scars of untruths they fix in men's faces, as hereafter more at large I
will declare, and yet lie continually watching to intrappe with deadly pursuit,
making a joyful and pleasant mellodie of their villainy and knauerie, to the
end we should win small credit of the godly: although we seek, by all
means possible, good people should be no longer deceived by lewd persons,
wherewith both town and country is sore pestered: unto whom I wish better
grace, and that they may leave of their wicked ways, so that all good artists
may be duetifully reverenced, and the lewd and ignorant suppressed, and
enforced to live in honest conversation. And thus I leave them here, until I
come to the conclusion, for that I have promised in my preface, not to shun
any such rotten roots as they come, or chance to lie in my way. And I will now
enter into the manner and order of this cure, which happened about that time
when the Emperors daughter passed the narrow Seas to marry with Phillip King
of Spain: I serving in one of her Majesty's Ships, it chanced then a great
tempest and wind to arise, so that the waves or billows of the Sea went very
lofty and high, we riding then at an Anchor near the French coast, and the
Mariners being greatly busied about the winding up of their cables and Ankers:
but whether it were by some (...), or by reason of the storm and tempest, I
know (...)* but upon a sudden the capsten turned about with great force and
violence, and did bruise and hurt diverse, specially one Ralfe Cowdale the
Bo^swaynes servant of the Ship, who had two of his ribs fractured and broken
by the force of the said blow of one of the capsten bars, he was therewith
thrown down upon the carriage of a great piece of Ordnance, which bruised him
again in other places of his body: so the patient did lie as a man fordead,
void of sense and understanding, and whether I dressed him or not, he said he did
not know. But after he was again revived, there followed perilous accidents,
as a pleurisy, spitting of blood, and great dolor and pains, which (as Guido
declares) be very dangerous: and the rather for that one of his ribs was so
fractured, and in such sort, that a little fragment or small piece of the ribbe
did separate it self, and being without all hold unto any part of the ribbe,
did continually without ceasing still torment and vex the patient with
vehement pricking upon the panicle that covers the ribs: neither could I
bring him to any ease, until I did make incision directly upon the fracture,
according unto the length of the ribbe, and so down unto the bone, and there I
did take out that spell or fragment of the bone, which was in bigness, thicknes
and length like unto a Barley corn, sharp at both ends like unto the point
of a needle. Then after I had made the incision, and taken out that small piece
of the ribbe, I put into the said wound Oleum Hypericonis cum gummis, and then
upon the same (after it was reduced, for the speedy vuiting or knitting
together of the fractured ribbe) this following.

Keble.
Rec. ana. q. s. Olei Rosarum Albuminis ouorum Bol. Armoniaci, and Farinae
volatilis
Misce.

The which I did spread upon a double cloth wet in water and vinegar, and
strongly wrong out again: but you shall understand, for that there was not at
that time in the Navy any one Physician to aid and assist us, I my self did
give him this drink.

Rec. Vini maluatici. iiij. Olei oliuarum dull.. j. Spermatisceti gra. xij.
Misce.

After he had received this drink, within one hours space he did cast most
part of this drink up again, with a good quantity of clotted blood: but at
night I gave him the same drink again, and in the like manner for the space
of three days, all which time he never did cast any more, but he did therewith
avoid by spitting much bruised blood. And here it is to be further noted, that
after the said piece of the bone of his ribbe was taken away, he did not
complain but very little of any grief in that part, but did take as quiet
rest, as a man in his case, but for that he was troubled with a cough, which he
had taken before he received his hurt: and for the more speedy cure of his
fractured ribs, I did give him to drink for the space of ten days morning
and evening this drink following, which he did take after he was let blood,
and had received a soluble purge gently to loose and cleanse the belly, for
the diuerting of humors, and also did partly take away his pains by the
helps of local medicines here also set down. And this is the description of
the said drink, the which he did take at twice being warmed.

Rec. ana.. ij. Aquae consolidae maioris and Aquae osmundae Regalis
Vini albi. iiij. Mellis com.. iij. Succi Liquiritiae. j. Theriacae opt. q. s.
Misce.

Then after with good bolstering and roulling I finished this order of
dressing. In the mean space I caused him to keep himself quiet, without
turning or moving of his body, as time and place did permit and suffer: so he
rested five days, and then I did dress him again, chiefly because of his
wound, although in all that time he never complained of pain, and then I
opened the wound and found it in a manner whole: then I dressed him as before,
and let him so rest five days: the tenth day being expyred, I changed my
course of dressing, and used these remedies.

Rec. ana.. iiij. Emplastri Diachalciteos Emplastri de minio
ana.. j. Olei Rosarum, and Olei Myrtillorum

Misce.

These plasters did wholly confirm and consolidate the fracture of the
ribs, and I caused him also to be anointed in certain other places of his
body where he was greatly bruised, with these resolutiue and dispersing
medicines, etc.

Rec. ana.. j. Olei Rosarum, and Chamaemeli.
Olei Spermatis. ss.
Misce.

And many times likewise I used Vnguentum Dialthea, and Oleum Laurinum, and
Vnguentum Vulpinum, and with this plaster following was dissolved all the
contused blood under the skin.

Rec. ana.. ij. Emplastri de muscilaginibus Emplastri meliloti Emplastri flos
vnguentorum
ana.. vj. Olei Chamaemeli, and Olei Rosarum

Misce.

The fifteen day being expired, I opened the wound again, where I did find
that perfectly healed, and the fracture also very apparent to have received
consolidation: then I dressed him, as before is declared. And with this manner of
method I cured him within the space of sixteen days. Now in the knitting up
of this note or observation, briefly compact together, it is to be remembered,
that in the time of this cure I used such diet as the place did afoord, which
was sparing enough in the highest degree, with phlebothomie, and euacuation of
the belly, etc.

The cure of a certain man that was thrust through his body with a sword,
which did enter first under the cartilage or grisle, called of the learned
Anatomists, mucronata cartilago, etc. The point of the sword passed through his
body, and so out at his back, in such manner, that he which wounded the man
did run his way, and did leave the sword sticking in his body: so the
wounded man did with his own hands pull out the sword, whom after I cured, as
shall be declared, etc.
A Special note or observation of a certain dangerous and desperate cure
worthy of admiration, which I cannot let pass, of a certain traueiler into
the East and West Indies, he being a very strong and valiant man, who (as I
said) received a wound through his body, that entered in under Mucronato
cartilago, which, by the wonderful work of God, the sword escaped the liver,
stomach, and the intestines or guts, neither any evil accidents happened unto
him all the time of his cure, but only the grudging of a fever, which was
shortly prevented with bleeding and loosing of the belly by soluble glisters.
Immediately after the hurt I was brought unto this cure, and also one Master
Doctor Wotton: but after I did behold the manner of his hurt, and seeing the
weapon so embrued with blood, I did in my mind greatly lament the miserable
estate he was in, and I told those that were in presence that I greatly doubted
there was no way of cure, but that death would presently follow: and so in
truth I refused to dress him, supposing he would dye under my hand. Then the
wounded man desired me, as ever I loved a man, that I would dress him and take
him in cure: for (said he) my heart is good, although my wound be great. Then I
called to my remembrance, that Celsus (a learned man) counsels us, that in
no wise we should meddle with him that cannot be preserved, nor to deal with
him that is stain already. Yet to counteruayle this, I had read in diverse
other good authors, that we ought to attempt all that may be done, either by
art or reason: but first warely to foretell what danger the patient is in,
before ye shall either make or meddle with him, that ye may defend your selves
from slander of evil speakers: for (say these excellent men) many by a
wonderful and merueilous manner do escape death and are cured, whereas if we
shall leave the wounded man destitute of all aid and help, and then he dye,
we shall worthily be esteemed wicked, and without all charity and humanity,
etc. But oftentimes it falls out, that many good men are unwilling to attempt
such cures, because of the frumpes, quippes, and taunts of those, who (as I
have before said) speak evil of good, and good of evil. For if at any time
it shall so fall out that some one paltering cure chance to Note.
escape uncured, as I have declared in other of my writings, yea though the
fault be in the disorder and ill disposition of the patient, yet a man shall
get more discredit and infamous reproaches thereby, then he has reaped
credit by all the most famous cutes he has done all the days of his life. I
answer again, I suppose no man that fears God will willingly do that which
redoundeth unto his patients hurt, and his own discredit. But we are in
these days so embayed with the slanders of blind buzzards and vaunting
varlets, who with the fragments or scrapings of their beggarly practizes, do
steal more credit for the curing of a Blayne, or a Byle, a cut finger, or a
k^^ed heel, then a right skillful and honest artist This manifest (...)
needs no witnesses.
can, or shall do with all the best cures he has done all the days of his
life. But to return, after much entreating, I presented my self unto this
cure, and then with two short tents artificially made, the one before, and the
other behind his back, which I applied into the wound, with Galen his powder,
mixed with Hare hairs and the whites of Eggs, and with pleggets upon the said
tents, and defensiues round about the wound, both behind and before: and so
with artificial roulling and bolstering he rested. Then forthwith I was
counseled by the said Doctor and others, to give him some excellent wound
drink, such as by our own practice we had approved. Then I told him of the
singular virtues which I had heard and seen of a certain drink called Potus
Antiochiae, which was first put in practice in London by one Master
Archenbole, a very skillful Surgeon, which drink (as I said) is called the
drink of Antiochiae, and was made then by him, and Master Yates, with others:
but I have never heard, or known of a certain truth, that it was ever made
before or since by any other: the more is the pity. But this present year (God
willing) both my self, and (I suppose) others that knows the excellency of
it will not be without it. The strange cures which the same drink has done, it
is wonderful to hear. But I do confess this wounded man was cured chiefly
with this drink. And five years after he was made whole, he did come to
London, partly to see me and to give thanks, in the presence of Master
Baylie, Master Beden, with others, and there again did show the places that
was wounded, both where the sword went in, and where it did come forth: since
which time I did never bear of him, neither do I know whether he lives or
not: so I did get, by the help of Master Beden, so much of this drink as
cured the man, and the same night he was hurt, I did give him of it to drink.
The manner and order of the ministering and making of it, is as follows.

Rec. ana. m. j. Bugulae Fragariae Consolidae mediae Consolidae minoris
Consolidae maioris Raphani rusticani Rubi Vrticae foeminae Osmundae Potus
Antiochiae.
Canabis Saniculae Crassulae Tanaceti Anagallidis masculi Auriculae muris
Violarum purpurearum
Gariophyllatae roots and leaves. m. v. Geranij cretici. m. v. Betonicae m. v.
roots and leaves. Pedis columbini. m. iij. roots and leaves.


Rubiae Tinctorum of the roots, the third part in weight of all the herbs
before rehearsed, first wash all the herbs clean, then after stamp them in
a stone mortar: which done, put them in a new earthen pot well nealed, and put
in also a gallon of good white Wine: then set them on an easy fire of coals,
and let it boil very gently, till the one half be consumed: then strain it
into a fair clean vessel, and add to it of the best and purest clarified
honey one pottle, so that there be of each an equal quantity, then boil them
together (as it is said in the ancient copy) the time and space ye may say
the Psalm of Mercy: which copy was written, as it is recorded, above two
hundred years ago. And here ye shall understand, that I have been very
diligent in attayning unto the true description of this famous drink. And I
have had diverse ancient copies, but none so true as those which Master Thorny
did friendly send me, and also Master Iarat, who has been very willing to
show me his book, wherein this drink was also described: and moreover, has
readily assisted me to give every hearh his true and proper name, which was
somewhat obscure in the ancient copies, as also has showed and found out the
herbs themselves each one in his time and kind: which drink (as my author
says) must be finished and made before Midsomer. And being performed, it is
to be kept in a glass vessel well stopped, and it must be given blood warm
one spoonefull at a time morning and euenening, first and last in well water,
three spoonefulles at a time, being sodden and kept upon purpose. And I know
this drink has been used to the profit of many, after it was ten years
old. As touching the rest of this cure, it was performed by local medicines,
as digestiues, mundificatiues, incarnatiues, and desiccatiues, etc.

Digestiues Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae Vitellorum ouorum number. ij.
Sir. Ros.. j. Masticis. j. Croci q. s.
Misce.

I used at every dressing with this digestive to take of Olei Rosarum. j. Mel.
Rosarum. ss. Misce.
And dipped the tents and pleggets in it, being first made warm. After it was
perfectly digested, then I did mundifie it which this mundificatiue, and such
like, etc.

Mundificatiue Rec. Terebinthinae. vj. Mel. Rosarum. iiij. ana.. iiij. Myrrhae
Iridis Aristolochiae
Farinae hordei q. s.
Misce.

After the wound was well cleansed, then I used this incarnatiue with great
profit.

Incarnatiue. Rec. Olei com.. iiij. Cerae nouae. j. Terebinthinae. ss.
Colophoniae.ij. Picis graecae. j. ana.. j. Thuris Masticis
Croci. j.
Misce.

He was cured by these ordinary remedies and such like in effect, which are
daily put in practice of all good artists, who have traced in the steps of the
old and ancient fathers and chief masters of Chirurgerie. And as it was of
late declared, by Master Doctor Foster, in a learned Lector, that the reason
why in these days we do not attain to do those famous cures, which were done
by the worthy Grecians and Arabians, and other ancient fathers, is, for that
we do not use those old and ancient remedies, which they did daily put in
practice, to their great credit, worship and gain.

The cure of a young man which received a wound into the right eye with the
point of a dagger.
THere was committed unto my cure a young man wh^^^ received a wound into his
right eye with the poy^^^ a dagger, so that Cornea, or the hornie membrane ^^
fall flat upon the crystal humor, by reason most part of the white humor
Albumineus issued out of the wound. He had been in cure with a certain Surgeon
three days, and then I was called unto the cure: I found him greatly payned
with inflammation, and he had also a sharp fever, and wanted sleep, etc. for
which causes, by good advise and diligent circumspection, he was appointed to
be let blood, and he received also glisters, and a very thin diet was
administered unto him, until all these accidents were removed. But for the more
speedy mitigating of his pains, there was used in like manner upon his neck
and shoulders, cupping glasses, and on his fore head and temples this repellent
medicine.

Rec. Emplastri Diachalciteos lib. ss. Olei Rosarum. ij. ana.. j. Succi
plantaginis, and Solani
Albumina ou. number. ij. Aceti Ros. q. s.
Misce.

And sometimes this. Rec. Olei Rosarum. ij. ss. Omnium sandalorum. ij. Bol.
Armeniae. ij. ss. Albumin. ou. number. ij. Vini granatorum q. s.
Misce.

And unto his wound in the eye, I did drop in this reme^i^ ^^^med.

Rec. Mucilag. sem. cidoniorum extractae in aquae Ros. ana. q. s. Tragaganthae
Lactis mulieris and Albuminis oui

Misce.

Then over all I applied thick pleggets of fine towewell wet in this same next
following, being also warmed a little.

Rec. ana. q. s. Lactis mulieris Vitellorum and Albuminis ou. Succi semperuiui,
and* Olei Rosarum
Misce.

With this manner of dressing I continued six days, I was constrained three
times a day to dress his eye, and also once again at midnight^ for over as
the medicine did grow warm, then the inflammation and pains increased. After
I had got the victory over the pain and inflammation, then there did
manifestly appear a certain quantity of matter, as it were imprisoned
between Cornea and Vnea, the which I did remove and take this away with:

Rec. Aquae Rosarum. ij. Vini albi.. j. Sir. Rosati solutiui. ss. Sacchari
candi. ij. Succifoeniculi. ss. Albuminis oui. q. s.
Misce.

After the matter was removed, then I changed this course and used these
remedies following, wherewith the eye was delivered from all the foresaid
accidents.

Rec. Tutiae praeparatae. j. Aloes cicarrinae. ss. Guido.
Camphorae. j. Aquae Rosarum lib. j. ss. Vini granatorum lib. ss.
Misce.

Powder that which is to be powdered, and mix all these together, and seethe
it upon the coals and reserve it unto your use. Last of all I finished this
cure with

Rec. ana. q. s. Mellis virginei Sacchari candi Wecker.
Tutiae praeparatae and Aloes
Misce.

Often I used this alone of it self, and sometimes dissolved it in Aqua
Rosarum, and at sundry times I used Collerium album, Sine opio, disolued in
Lactis mulieris and aquae Rosarum, ana. q. s. and thus he was cured and healed
of this wound of his eye. I could here set down other special cures of wounds
in the eyes done some by my self, and some being joined with other Surgeons in
this City, as Master Banester, Master Baker, with other. But this may
suffice for a brief note or observation of this cure.

The cure of a certain Clothier, dwelling near the North parts of this land,
which was daungerously wounded ^oure inches in breadth above the left knee, in
such sort, that the Rotula, or round bone of the knee did hang down very much:
whom after I cured, as hereafter shall be declared, etc.
NOt long since, a certain Clothier, with two of his neighbors, very early
in the morning, between four and five of the clock, did take their journey
from London toward the country where they did dwell. They had not traueiled
fully two miles, but they were set upon by certain robbers and thieves, who
wounded this man very daungerously, as is before ^^^l^ted, and there he was
taken: but his neighbors, being better horst, carried all their own and his
money away with them, which (as it was reported) did amount together to the
sum of four hundred pounds, which by that means was saved. So presently
being wounded, he returned to London, unto whom I was required to go with all
speed, for he had bled abundantly. Then after I had taken out the blood which
was congeled in the wound, I did prepare, without tar^ance, a sharp square
poynted Blood may not be suffered in a wound. specially if it be congealed.
needle, with a strong even and smooth silk thread, well waxed, therewith I
did take five stitches, one good ynch and more distant between every stitch:
and I did begin my first stitch in the very midst of the wound: neither did I
think it good to make the stitches too thick, because it does oftentimes
stir up accidents, as pain, inflammation, etc. Neither must the stitches be
set too thin, for then they will not sufficiently hold the sides of the wound
together. So when I had orderly performed the stitching of the wound, leaving
a decent part for the wound to purge at: the^ I applied thereunto Oleu^
Hypericonis cum gummis, and I stayed the bleeding with Galen his powder, which
in such wounds I will prefer before all other. I placed moreover above the
wound, a very good defensive, to repeal and keep back evil accidents from
the said wound: then with good bolstering and roulling, I safely ended this
first preservation. All which being thus finished, it was then demanded of me,
about what time I would undertake to cure him, for they said he was a man of
great trade, and did keep many poor at work, and could by no means long be
absent from his business. Moreover, they would further understand of me, if I
would warrant to cure him, and that without a mayme or imperfection unto his
traueiling. To these their demands, I answered, that I would make no warrants
at all, neither could I set any certain day or time when he should be whole:
but I told him, I would do as much as art did permit me, to the uttermost of
my knowledge and skill: And as touching the wound it self, I judged it very
dangerous, but not desperate and deadly, nor yet altogether without perrill,
partly by reason the wound was above the knee, and there the muscles being so
straungely cut at the very heads of them, and therefore in danger to be
deprived, to lose the action and use of that member, for that the muscles were
the instruments of voluntary moving. And moreover, the danger was the
greater, because the liggaments which bind the joints, were likewise separated
and cut, whereby ensues grievous accidents, very hurtful and dangerous: which
euilles oftentimes foreshews present death. All which to them was small
pleasure to hear, and therefore said unto me, they would consider of my
sayings: and so I departed, yet expecting my coming again to the second
dressing: but I was prevented, as hereafter ye shall hear: for in the mean
time they had conference with many other Surgeons, and some were of mine
opinion, and some were not. At the last, there was brought unto them a man,
which by his own report unto them, was a great traueiler, and by his diligence
in traueiling, he had attained unto great learning and skill in Physic and
Chirurgerie: yet (as hereafter it shall appear) in all the whole time of his
traueiling, he never learned to speak well. I trust no good man will here take
occasion to mislike my sayings, as some reaching wits have most injuriously
Many good men are subject to injurious reports, the subtle seeds of envy.
imagined: for God does know, I speak not in all this whole discourse against
any good and honest Artist, whether he be traueiler or not traueiler. And
therefore, if any carpe at me as they have done, secretly and openly, know them
by that mark what he is. I speak against none, but those that abuse all
places where they come, and are also seducers of others, bearing the names of
far traueiling Surgeons, and are nothing less. I do greatly commend and
do well allow, and accept of all those traueilers, which by their traueiling
do endeavor themselves to do good in the country and Common wealth where they
live and do dwell, and are favorers of those good men, which seek with all
diligence to put to silence the slanderous tongue and hidden hatred of
shameless abusers of the art and good Artists: who although I know they are
such as be drowned in darkness, yet their poor captious heads of late keep a
wonderful stir, as though they had been able to have builded Castles in the
air. And I think in deed there is no way for any man to escape the venomous
tongues of such malicious beasts. Now, as touching Commendations of certain
travelers, and of their traueiling
honest traueilers, I read that Hippocrates himself, though he were a learned
man, yet after he departed from his study, being first eighteen years of
age, and brought up in the Schools of Athens: at the last he gave himself to
traueiling, through diverse countries and kingdoms, searching (as it is said)
what they did know of the nature and properties of herbs and plants, and what
experience he had seen of them, that he did write down and commit to
memory. It is reported, that twelve years he did thus travel: after which
time he returned, and did come unto the Temple of Diana in Ephesus, where he
translated all the tables of medicines that were there before prescribed many
years, and put in good order that which was confused, and added many things
which he had found out by experience. And he was the first that put this art
in good order, as in those histories does more at large appear.

Now, after his good example and order of traueiling, or by any other honest
and lawful means, that may redound to the good of our country and Common
wealth, as is before rehearsed, I do not mislike, but commend it greatly.
Craving here pardon for my so many digressions, I will now return my speeches
again unto the forenamed magnificent Surgeon. This fellow, as I said,
being brought unto them, there they did signify unto him, who had preserved
and dressed him, with the manner and order of his dressing, and al such
speeches which I had delivered unto them, as concerning his wound, and the
dangers that I said might follow. Now, in the very forefront of his talk, he
said: Whatsoever I had said he esteemed it little, if the hurt were no worse
then he Never trust a warrenter. Nor a bosting bragger. A runnagate fugitive.
Nor a lying quack saluer.
could conceive and gather by their talk and information, he would warrant to
cure him, so that the marrowe of the bone were not touched with the weapon. Al
these words were pleasant unto them, and very thankfully received. But to come
unto the substance of this cure, (may it please the friendly Reader here to
commit to thy memory, that in my absence, before I did come unto the second
dressing of this wounded man, as after it was reported unto me, he did in
scornful manner take off all my medicines from the wound, and likewise did most
foolishly cut open all the stitches which I had made, saying unto them all, I
was in a wrong box, as concerning this cure: forsooth coloring his opinion
upon Marianus his author: for the fellow will be oftentimes breathles with
alleging of authors, when his mouth is full of lies, who would have all
wounds lie open without stitching. I answer, that all good Authors generally
command to stitch wounds of necessity, otherwise it would cause a great
deformity. But if he had meant small wounds in the face, etc. or bruised wounds,
where ye stitches will rot out, or in venomous bitings, or where the wound that
is stitched tends to impostumation, there to cut open the stitches I hold it
profitable. But to proceed, shortly after he repented when it was too late,
and he was constrained to confess his fault, and (as it is said of a learned
man) to excuse himself with noddies had I wist.

So he proceeded about his business, and did power into the wound his Oil or
Balm, and next applied his plaster, and then did bolster and roll it up
after his own fashion and good liking: which being thus finished, he gave him
in the morning to drink a most rare Quintisence: the incredible virtues of it,
and the rest of his only remedies shortly you shall hear. After his dressing
was thus finished, then I was sent for unto the patient, and forthwith without
delay, they did signify unto me what he had done, and that I should not need
to prepare any thing for the patient, for that was done already by one that had
warranted to cure him, and that without any mayme, and in a short time: for he
was one that by his great learning and long trautile, had attained to such rare
and singular remedies, as no other man in this part of the world had the like
for their wonderful virtues. And new (say they) since neither you, nor other
more could not warrant him, we thank you for your pains, and that you told
us so, and therefore we will trouble you no further at this time. Well (said
I) if that be the cause I care the less: but he that is now your Surgeon,
whatsoever he be, that has made you all these great promises, he might yet
have stayed till I had come unto you, for that you were without pain, or any
other grief, so that I might have taken off mine own medicines, and to have
scene in what state and manner I had left it. Then rises out of his Chair,
flering and gering this myraculous Surgeon, gloriously glittering, like the man
in the Moon, with his bracelets about his arms, therein many precious Jewels
and stones of Saint Vincent his Rocks, his fingers full of rings, a silver
case with Instruments hanging at his girdle, and a gilt Spatula sticking in his
hat, with a Rose and a Crown fixed on the same, standing upon his comparisons,
and said unto me, that he would open the wound, and if it were before my face:
for (said he) my business lies not in London, but abroad in the Country, and
with such persons, that I cannot, nor will not tarry for you, nor for no other
whatsoever. And now here he did begin to brag and boast, as though all the
keys of knowledge did hang at his girdle. For he said, he had attained unto
the deep knowledge of the making a certain Quintisence, which he learned
beyond the Seas of his Master, one Bomelious, a great Magitian.

This shameless beast let not to say, that if a man did drink of his
Quintisence continually, every day a certain quantity, the virtues thereof
was such, that a man should not dye before the day of the great Judgment, and
that it would preserve a man in that state he was in at thirty years of age,
and in the same strength and force of wit, although a man were a hundred or
six score years of age. Moreover, his plaster was aunswerable unto this, and
forsooth he called it the only plaster of the world, and that he attained
unto it by his great traueile, cost and charge, and that it was first sent from
God by an Angel unto a red hill in Almayne, wherewas in times past a holy man
which wrought great merueiles only with this plaster, and he never used any
other medicine but only this. His precious Balm or Oil he says no man had but
only he, and t^^^ it was as rare a thing to be had or found, as to see a
black Swanne, or a winter Swallowe. And he called it the secret of the world,
which is his common vaunting phraze: but God knows the medicines were no such
things, but only shadowed under the vizard of deceit, and a bayte to steal
fame and credit, and to catch or scrape up money, or ware: for all is fish
that comes into his net. Then this gawdie fellow, with his peerles speeches,
(...) (...) must stand as ^^awe* for his countenance (...) credit.
said, that he had done more good cures with his said Quintisence, his only
plaster, and his precious Balm, then any one Surgeon in England had done, or
could do, with all the best medicines and remedies they have. And moreover,
said, that he had spoken nothing but that which he would stand to, and prove
it. And that he did know that it was not necessary for us that be common
Surgeons (as it pleased the bragger to call us) to use such a number of
medicines as we do: for the best manner of curing (said he) consists not in
the number and multitude of medicines, etc. In deed (said I) I know the best
manner of curing consists not in the number and multitude of bragging words:
and therefore I told him, in Cast away your Chirurgicall Instruments, your
plaster boxes and saluatories, if Chirurgerie may as it were thus be ^ent o^
thrust up in a bottle (...) a bag.
his infected judgment, he did follow Thessalus, the ringleader of these rude
and rusticall reasons: For he said in like manner, if all those things which
Galen had superfluously written were omitted, the art might be learned in six
months. But if that (said I) were true yt you speak, I suppose then the art
might be learned in six days, if it did consist but only of your drink, your
plaster and Balm. And therefore I told him he was deceived in his
superexcellent skill, and that he was contrary unto all the best learned
Authors both old and new, who have published many excellent and approved
inventions, according unto the cause and nature of the effects which daily do
afflict the body of man: for which causes they have set forth great variety
of many singular and approved medicines: Some of them have property to
repel, and some do atract: some will appease pains, and some do resolve: some
do mollify: some do suppurare, and some which do mundisie: some incarnate, and
some that do cicatrise and conglutinate. Tush (said he) it is not your
manuists, nor your old basillicon men's practice, that is as plain as a
packstaffe, can be answerable unto mine, and I will never use any other
remedies, but as I have before spoken of. Then I told him moreover, that
Basillicon made after some men's description, is as good an Unguent as could be
used in the art of Chirurgerie, for son causes. And here further I asked him
what his meaning was by old basillicon men. He answered, it was a word which he
had learned amongst He learned it of slaunderers like unto himself, only to
discredit some persons envied.
some Surgeons about London. Then I told him again, yt there were in London
many reverent and skillful* Surgeons, although perhaps some of the^ have
been greatly abused and defaced with false accusations, by certain noisome
Serpents, lewd Sycophants, and also slanderous libelling knaves, who have been
rubbed on the gall for their vild tungs and abuses. Amongst which sort of gald
backed Jades, one ragged colt of the same breed (which never wise man thought
to be worth the drawing out of the mire) having as he openly showed a guilty
conscience, and would needs, forsooth, thrust himself in to make one of that
number, and being somewhat poreblind, played the part of Will Summer, taking
Rowland for Oliver, did strike him that was next him. But of this motlicote and
the rest, who now like scrich Owls, hide themselves in dens and deserts for
fear of the light, and so to be known. And of such wicked and ungodly false
speakers and The fruits of shameless malice.
backbyters, we shall say more of them at large hereafter, if time serves.
The which to do I would be loath if the persons were modest: but here is no hope
in them, because they are impudent: and yet God does know, I had rather
derogate from my own labors, then I would deface others without just cause:
for that charity forbids to publish any man in print, to the hurt of his
good name and credit. But as for these factious fellows, possessed with the
cursed spirit of envy, scornefulnes and disdain. Notwithstanding their picked
speeches, as smooth as a Slickstone, I think them, whatsoever they be, ^^fi^
members, to shroude themselves under the ro^ffe of any good or godly society:
for all such hateful persons, with their devouring tongues, may be compared
unto furious Dogs, which always bite and bark at stones. But these
despightfull and envious persons have never spared any whatsoever: For I read
that Plato, though he were a great learned Philosopher, does confess, that he
was never at any time in such hazard and perrill of his life, being in arms at
the beseeging of Corinth, amongst his known enemies, as he was in Greece by
Xenophon, and other his own scholars his supposed friends. And the only cause
hereof, as it is said, was hatred and envy: truly it had been good for such
untimely fruit if they had perished in the blossom. But all those whose
ungodly behavior is so treacherous unto their good friends, can by no means
possible be trusty and faithful unto men, of whom they have never been
beholding unto for benefits received. This may seem strange, chiefly unto
those godly persons, which have never been vexed, troubled or molested, with
the perilous storms and tempests of such unknown pernicious libellours,
which have opposed themselves, and have privily spread abroad false libels,
rumors and slanderous reports, hoping to enjoy the fruits of their labors.
They have ventured to make shipwreck of other men's good names and credit: so
that it is unknown unto me, as yet, what thing a man can so well do, or what
life he should lead, but that these beastlike men would take occasion by
surmising of evil, to quarrel or cauell at it. And I suppose, if time and
opportunity did serve, their cunning conueiance is such, though now perhaps
they will for a time lurk and ^^ere, like fraudulent Beware of ^^aude in
friendly looks.
Foxes, and disemble with the crafty Crocodile: yet is their natural
inclination at all times comparable in cruelty unto the furious and merciless
Tiger, or Tigers whelps: which euilles are infinite and hard to be avoided: as
histories witness of the one, so experience daily manifests the other. A
matter of such importance, and in my judgment, a thing not to be permitted or
suffered in any good government or Christian common wealth. But to leave these
pestilent wee^^ and ofscommes of the earth, and to return unto my former
matter, from the which I have digressed. And here it is to be noted, that I
departed from the aforesaid bragging counterfeyt, and fountain of mischief,
and as I think, the only scoffer and scorner of the world, who defaced some
good men that were absent, and extolled such as was like unto himself: but
within seven days after, where he promised a mountain, it proved a
molehill. And his precious medicines of such great admiration that would do all
things, did here receive a merueilous disgrace. For they could not work that
effect he looked for: and he that was before a secret supporter of the Trumpets
of sedition, and a deceiuer of others, by procuring of domestical hatred, now
he is, as it were, glad to creep and craule away by owl light, praying the^
most humbly to hold him excused, and to speak the best of him. And why*
forsooth he was presently to go into the country to attend upon no small Note.
personage, and there of force he must remain during pleasure. A stale blind
shift, hatched up in the dungeon of deceit, as easy to be espied, as the nose
on a man's face. Now again, he whose ignorance was shadowed with impudency,
and maliciously hidden under smooth and fair promises, and glorious boastings,
and by that means, at his own pleasure, would lay heavy slanderous burdens
upon other men's shoulders, is himself found out, and his own doings has
bewrayed himself what he is. But it is a most true saying of a learned man: If
our ancient fathers in times past should have been abashed at the ingratitude
and ill disposition of such hateful abusers, we should at this day have been
in profound ignorance, To be hated for doing of good, is not to be esteemed*
but to be reproved for evil, is the reward of evil.
and little difference between us and brute bea^^es. To make here an end of
this cousoner, it was given me to understand, that shortly after his departure
out of London, he had intelligence by some of his straglers, that the cure was
committed again into my hands: and he also hearing by them, that I had
promised to note his abuses, and did mean to display his doings unto the
world: For which cause he was malcontent, and conceived a great displeasure and
indignation against me, and said, I did but heap coals upon mine own head:
and therefore he, or some other of his breed, should very shortly, either by
book, letter, or libell deal against me in disdainful manner: as did
heretofore some such like crafty Crowders, void of humanity, or the good
graces of God, whereby they made them selves known of what sect they were.
Their meaning in deed was to pinch me privily, so that hereafter, they
imagined, I should be afraid to publish, or to touch their fraudule^t dealings
openly, because of their railing and lying speeches, wherewith they have
pursued me with all malice. But be it known unto all such brazen faced
raskals, whatsoever they be, either of town or country, I little esteem of
them, they do but lay abroad their own nakedness unto the world, and it is
corespondent unto the course of their life, which in the end will prove unto
themselves little praise, less profit or benefit.

And now finally to return and end, and so to come unto the cure, here you
shall understand, the seventh day being expired, at six of the clock at
night I was sent for, and very earnestly requested that I would take the pains
to come again and to speak with the patient. And to say the truth, he said
unto me, with no small grief of mind: now I perceive the difference between
such hateful abusers of your art, and other good men: nevertheless, I pray
you to hold me excused, for that lewd fellow that has hid his head and gone
his way, and has left me in this miserable case, he was first commended unto
me by friends of mine, which did give me to understand, where he had done a
great cure upon a gentleman that lay about the Strand, which gentleman after he
brought unto me, but his hurt was but a scratch in respect of my wound. But if
it were true (quoth he) that he had ever done the like cure, yet I perceive,
for all his unsavory eloquence, one Swallowe makes no Summer: and unto me
(says he) he has showed himself to be one of the vilest wretches that
lives, and the deepest disembler: with other speeches had according to his
life and living. And now to come (as I said) unto the cure, the seventh day
being expired, at night it was strange to see, that the wound, which at the
first he found without pain, or any other evil accidents, should in so short
a time be so oppressed with the abundance of evil humors, which did offend
both in quantity and quality: notwithstanding his celestial Quintisence, his
only plaster, and precious Balm, of such great efficacy, whose virtues at
the first, he did persuade, could not be comprehended in few words. Although
he had a very apt and able wit, and thereby did open the gates into the wide
fields of his magnificent skill, as I have before rehearsed, yet did he leave
his work filthy and unclean, like unto himself. But so near as I could, I
did follow nature as our guide, and applied unto the grief such mild and
familiar remedies, as are here set down, the which I used until the foresaid
accidents did decay and vanish away, and after cured him as follows.

A Fomentation.

Rec. Vini albi lib. ij. Aquae vitae. iij. ana.. j. Myrrhae and Aloes
Resinae pini. iiij.
Misce.

All these were boiled over a Chaffingdish of coals, and with warm stuphes I
fomented and bathed the wound.

Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae. vj. Vitellorum ouorum nu. ij. Olei
Hypericonis. j. Olei Lumbricorum. j. ss. Mel. Rosarum. ij. Masticis. ss. Hordei
q. s. Croci. j.
Misce.

With the said digestive I also used this decocted Balm, which did take great
effect in this cure, being used with the same digestive:

A singular decocted Oil or Balm.
Rec. ana.. iiij. ss. Olei Terebinthinae Olei Rosarum
ana.. iij. Olei Lumbricorum Olei Masticis
Olei Sem. lini. iij. ss. Vermium terrestrium. j. Terebinthinae clarae. iiij.
ana.. ss. Masticis My^^hae
ana.. ij. ss. Gummi elemni Ammoniaci
Sarcocollae. j. Croci. j.
Misce.

Let your Gummes be disolued in vinegar, and then add thereunto Centaurij
maioris, m. j. After the herbs be bruised, boil all together in a fair
vessel until it come to perfection, and ten days after set it in the Sun,
and for wounds in the sinews and joints it is approved to be merueilous good,
as it was well approved in this cure, with other. After I had first dipped the
pleggets armed with the digestive in the said Balm, then I laid thereupon:

Emplastrum T^^^pharmacum. M^s^^.
Rec. ana. lib. j. Lithargyrij subtilissime triti Aceti vini
Olei veteris lib. ij..
Fiat Emplastrum secundum artem

And then I anointed the member round about the wound with Olei papaueris, and
Olei Rosarum, ana.. j. Misce. Which being performed and done, then I laid over
all this Cataplasme, and so rouled it up according to art.

Cataplasma Clowes.
Rec. ana. m. ij. Fol. Ros. Maluarum Violarum
ana. m. j. Florum Chamaemeli and Meliloti
Lactucae m. ss.
Boil all these in sufficient quantity of milk, and when they be tender,
stamp them, and then take: Rad. altheae m. ij. Sem. lini m. j. Sem.
Foenugraeci m. ss. Misce.
Make hereof a Muscilage with white wine and water, then put in of this
muscilage. vi. and mix all together, then lastly add: Vnguenti populeonis.
ij. ana. j. ss. Olei Ros. and Olei Chamaemeli
Medullae panis. m. j. Farinae hordei q. s. Vitellorum ouorum number. ij. Croci.
ss.
Misce, and fiat Cataplasma.

Thus by this manner and order of curing, with convenient diet, purging and
phlebothomie, in a reasonable time his extreme Dolor and pa^nesis as it were a
ventose or cupping glass, in drawing matter to the affected place.
taging pains was greatly appeased, and the inflammation ceased. After that
the wound did tend toward digestcon, and the patient again well comforted,
then because the wound was very large and wide one part from another, I did
frame certain dry stitches, which greatly pleasured him, in bringing the
borders and sides of the wound together, and all the accidents being removed,
I left off the Cataplasma, and in the place thereof I used Emplastrum
Diachalciteos, disolued in Oleo Rosarum, and Oleo Myrtilorum, etc. And
sometimes in like manner I used for a defensive to take of Albuminis ouorum,
and Alluminis Rochi, made in very fi^e powder, and so well labored together,
ana. q. s. and applied it ab^^t the member, and it did also profit us very
mu^^: since which ^^^e I have seen it often put in use in the (...) C^^ntries
for a common defensive for all wounds (...) which gu^^^ot, by one Audrian, Grave
Hollocks Chi^^rgeon, a very learned and skillful man, which thing is also very
well known to be true by Master Goodrouse, one of her Majesty's Surgeons,
with others. And after I did leave the use of the digestiues, in the place
thereof I applied Vnguentum apij, sometimes mixed with the yolk of an Eg, and
also Vnguentum Resinae, a notable unguent for wounds (...) the joints, which
unguents are before in this book described. And herewith I in like manner used
the aforesaid decocted Balm. ii. and added also therewith of Lipsius. i. Misce.

This excellent mundisicatiue stayed also the thin gly^^^g humor that flowed
from the joint: which remedies be published in Folio 70. But by reason there of
some oversight, the doses are left out, with other faults in the forepart of
the book, which passed unawares, and cannot be helped until the next
impression.

Rec. Mellis com. lib. ij. Vitrioli albi. iiij. Succi caprifolij lib. iij.
Misce.


The order of making is before described. Now, after the wound was perfectly
mundified, and all accidents removed, then by the counsel of a learned man,
both in Physic and Surgery, I was required to used Vnguentu^ Nicotianu^,
which (he said) had wrought wonders above belief. But I found not that effect
in it that he and I looked for. Nevertheless, I acknowledge it to be a
medicine not to be dispraysed. But this Unguent, since it was first known, is
greatly bettered by Josephus Quercetanus, with others: so I left of the use of
Vnguentum Nicotianu^, after this description here following. And I used with
great profit unto the patient Vnguentum Basilicon magistrale, hereafter also
published.

Rec. Fol. Nicotiani lib. j.

Let the leaves be well stamped, and after strayned out, as strongly as
possible may be, then add thereunto: ana.. iij.
Cerae nouae Resinae and Olei com*


Let all these boil together unto the consumption of the juice, then add
Terebinthinae Venetae. iij. Boil all together a little, and reserve it unto
your use.

Vnguentum Basilicon magistrale.
Rec. ana.. ij. Olei Chamaemeli Olei Ros. completi
ana.. j. ss. Olei masticis Olei de Terebinthina Olei de semin. lini
Terebin. clarissimae.iiij. ana.. ij. ss. Sepi vitulin. Castrati Hirci
ana. m. j. Rosmarini Betonicae Caudae equinae Centaureae mayor.
Vermium terestrium lotorum cum vino.iij. Rubiae tinctorum a little bruised..x.
ana. m. j. Hypericonis, foliorum and Sem.
ana.. x. Masticis Gummi elemni
ana.. j. ss. Picis naualis Resinae pini recentis
ana.. iij. Serapini Galbani Armoniaci

Misce.

Disolue these three^ Gummes in vinegar, and bruise the other things, and so let
them rest, and after boylethem all together with a ^iath of odoriferous wine,
then strain them strongly, and put to the said strayning ana.. ij. ss.
Lithargyrij auri, and Argentei
Minij. ij.
Misce.

Boil these together again with a soft fire: afterward ye shall augment the
fire until the said ointment be black in color: which done, make hereof an
unguent with sufficient new wax, etc. This unguent is commended of Vigo, and
many other excellent men, to be singular good for all wounds of the sinews:
and also in other wounds it is of merueilous efficacy. And since it is thus
manifest unto our eyes, that many famous cures has been done by this worthy
unguent, truly I see no cause why we should withdraw our selves, and to
leave the use of it. Now here it is to be noted, if in all this time the flesh
offered to rise spungious, then I did rebate and take it away with Mercury
praecipitate, and sometimes with Allume combust in Aceto Ros. And with the said
unguents I also used this approved Oil, called Oleum Aparisij.

Oleu^ Aparisij. Note this for a special Oil for all wounds generally.
Rec. Olei communis veteris lib. iij. Terebinthinae Abietinae lib. ij. Vini albi
veteris and electi lib. ss. Olibani triti lib. ss. Frumenti purgati. iiij. vel.
vj. Hypericonis lib. ss. ana.. iiij. Valerianae Cardui Benedicti

Misce.

Infuse the herbs, being bruised, in white wine six or eight hours, then add
thereto the wheat and oil, and so melt them at an easy fire, to the
consumption of the wine. After strain them, and then put to the Turpentine and
Olibanum, and so boil it at a soft fire to perfection. I was greatly troubled
in the drying or skinning up of his wound, notwithstanding the use of Vnguentum
desiccatiuum, and Vnguentum deminio, or any other whatsoever, until I had used
therewith this remedy following.

Rec. Aquae vitae. iiij. Alluminis. iij. Camphorae. j. ss.
Misce.

Thus by Gods help and good medicines, I finished this cure with Desiccatiues
and Conglutinatiues, and he was again recovered: but the motion perished, for
he had the imperfection of a stiff knee, which constrained him to use a
leather strappe fastened unto the toe of his shoo, and again made fast unto
his body, and so he remains until this day.

Here were time and place to induce me to publish many other observations, but
I will not willingly molest the Reader with being too tedious. And I do
confess, I have showed my my self to be more willing, then able to perform
this work I have taken in hand. Nevertheless, I wish you much joy and
felicity in all your studies, with increase of knowledge, whereby you may
advance your fame, and credit unto your Art and profession, Amen.

Apply thyself and use thy wit,
to Lady learnings lore,
She Will garnish thee with wisdom great,
and knowledge more and more.
The conclusion, of a wicked brood of beastly abusers of Physic and
Chirurgerie, daily more and more increasing, to the utter undoing of many: as
here briefly shall be declared.
IN this my collection (gentle and virtuous reader) I mean by Gods permissio^,
and your courteous patience, here truly and faithfully to deliver unto thy
view, the manifold and injurious abuses of a disordered number of proulling
women, daily practicing Physic and Chirurgerie, within this City of London,
and the liberties of the same, whose knowledge and judgments (I say) is
fallible and uncertain, whereby they are the causes of many hidden mischiefs.
Therefore, without further protestation, I will as briefly as I can for
examples sake, as it were, point at a few, in respect of the rest: which
abusers are bred and crept in amongst us through sufferance, with whom,
notwithstanding I must be temperate and mild in this my writing, and not to
speak all I know: for their number is great, and they have many friends that
spread their fame far. There is (I say) known to be in London, which daily
do practice Chirurgerie, of strange women borne beyond the seas, called of
some, cunning or wise women, more in number, then there are of Surgeons
lawfully allowed and admitted, according unto the laws and statutes of this
Realm, being fit men to do her Majesty service in their Art. There be also
in like manner at this present to be found in London, besides those aforesaid,
of our own Country women, that has neither wit, nor art, which daily
practice Physic and Chirurgerie, I will say little of their dealing in
Physic, because it is also openly known, far more in number then there is
of the strange women. But all these abusers practice Chirurgerie, without any
penalty and punishment, and the most part of these have husbands of diverse
honest trades and occupations, and thereby are very well able to live and
maintain themselves, according to their calling. Yet all that will not serve
the turn: for my good mistress his wife, will needs become a Physician and a
Surgeon: and (forsooth) he must follow her presumptious mind to paynt her out
in s^^kes and veluets in the highest Such (...) (...) cannot be enough ^poke^
of.
degree: for that carries credit to her cunning, and brings in mouie
plentifully. A thing greatly to be lamented, or rather pitied, that these blind
and ignorant women should be thus fostered and suffered: for they are and will
be the causers of many evils, whereby her Majesty shall have great want of
sufficient and skillful Surgeons to be found in England able to do service
in the time of wars. And unless God of his merciful goodness do move the
hearts of godly Magistrates for sp^^^^ redress, they will be the only
overthrow of Chi(...) in this land. For it is come to pass at this day, (...)
^^n being of any credit or account, that has brought (...) in learning, the
which is greatly to be required in a good Surgeon, but he refuses to put
him to be an apprentise unto the Art of Surgerie. And why? Because there are
in these days, in town and country, such a number of abusers that practice
Chirurgerie, which are the only doers and cause of all these evils. It may
seem incredible, that there is not at this present time of sufficient and able
Surgeons to be found in London, scarce half the number which were lately
employed, in her Majesty's service, with General Norice and Sir Fraunces
Drake: And yet the greater fort of those yt are gone, are very poor men, and
so poor in deed, that some of them went out very slenderly furnished: some
with a little Chirurgerie stuff in a scholars satchell: other some in
budgets, and bags, being very unfit furniture to serve in her Majesty's
service. Unfortunate and unhappy shall that Soldier be, that tastes of these
Surgeons wants. And the chief causers of these evils, are those abusers
aforesaid. Moreover, what a pitiful thing is it to hear, that at their
departure from their poor wives and children, leaving them in such extreme
necessity, (...) they arrived at the first Port, their wives and children
complained, and craved to have some succor and relief. But who has succored
or relieved them, that is best known to themselves. And if their necessity be
such at their going out, what will be their state in time? Or else, if by
fortune of wars some of them be cut off, then these poor women and children
may live in great misery. And the causers of these euilis be these abusers,
aforesaid. Also I cannot in this place pass over in silence, since it is come
Disordred shifters and abusers of Chirurgerie.
unto my memory, a new litter of abusers of Surgerie, and the professors
thereof, and they are start out of their kenell of late, devising amongst
themselves a trade never seen, nor heard on before: and these do hunt after
hurt and wounded met, and al other persons whatsoever, be it master or
mistress, manseruant or maid, etc. if they be affected with any kind of grief
belonging to Surgerie. With all such persons they will take acquaintance,
although (peradventure) they never saw some of them before: and then like
petty foggers, or counterfeyt brokers, craftily will inquire what Surgeon
looks on them: and if they say they are unprovided, then they will cast a
figure, and offer them their service presently to fetch the only man in the
town. This proffered service many takes very kindly, and promising to acquit
his courtesy if he will perform his sayings. Then without further ado, packs
away this petty fogger, devising where he may make his best market. And in the
end, finding a fit man for his purpose, he begins to babble for his brokerige
after this manner. There is a friend of mine (says he) and one of my old
acquaintance is wounded and hurt, etc. and for very good will I am come to you
before another, because I know you are a skillful man. Nevertheless, I am a
good fellow, as you know, and therefore I will look to have a share for my
pains, because I bring the cure unto you. What is your meaning? (says he) It
is thus, if you do make three pounds of the cure, I will then have of it
twenty shillings, and you shall have twenty shillings toward your medicines,
and twenty shillings more for your pains: and yet you may say I do befriend
you: for I have had diverse times the one half of others. An old saying, need
makes the old wife trot: The good man had rather give part of the fruits of
his labor unto this proulling fellow, wherein he has no right, then he would
sit still, and want to sustain himself and his family. These injuries are
most grievous that bring thus with them innumerable of inconveniences. And
remedy there is none to bridle such pillars and poullers. O Lord, what a sort
of these evils follow immediately one after another! Consider, I beseech you,
how Chirurgerie in these days is promoted and advanced, when such men, which
have a long time practiced this profession with credit and good liking, are
constrained, for want of maintenance, to give over the Art clean, and now
forced to live by other kind of trades. And the causers of all these abuses,
are the abusers in this book published.

Thus courteous and loving Reader, I have waded into the very bottom of mine
ability, but yet I confess I still find nothing answerable unto my well
meaning: yet always I rest in this hope, that that which I have here in all my
discourse spoken without offense unto any good man, may the eas^ier be past
over without any grief to me at all: but if any do here at pick quarrels, or
malign my doings, mark them well (as I have before said) and you shall
perceive them to be some of those galdbacke Jades which I have touched to the
quick.

Now last of all, only it rests, that if it shall please God that these my
labors be so happy, as to content my loving Patrones (I mean, all the true
professors of Chirurgerie wheresoever) referring the view unto their good
considerations, censures, and judgments, expecting all your friendly
supportation: and thus I leave you in the Lord, who knows that all our
labors are done in vain, except he in mercy prosper them.

Amen.
Finis
William Clowes, Master in Chirurgerie.

When valiant Mars, with brave and warlike band,
In foughten feeld with sword and sheeld does stand,
May there be mist a Surgeon that is good,
To salve your wounds, and eke to stay your blood*
To cure you sure he will have watchful eye,
And with such wights he means to live and dye,
So that again you must augment his store,
And having this, he will request no more.
THE SVRGEONES CHEST


With willing mind good Reader I thee crave,
To weigh the toil, and careful pains men have
Which once begins to do such Works as this,
May sometimes err, and run his pen amiss.
depiction of surgical instruments

With heart I crave, read, view and see,
If better you have, impart it with me.
Now slaunderer say thy worst,
with malice and defame:
In God I only trust,
all glory to his name.
depiction of surgical instruments

A TREATISE OF THE FRENCH POCKS, WRITTEN by John Almenar a Spanish Physician.
Chap. 1. Of the beginning and definition of this disease.
IT is concluded by certain wise men, that this disease which amongst the
Italians is called Gallicus, that is to say, the French disease, should now be
named Patursa, which is by interpretation, a disease filthy and Saturnall. It
is a filthy disease, because it makes women to be esteemed unchaste, and
irreligious. It is Saturnall, because it took the beginning from Saturn when
he entered into Aries, having the rest of the heavenly aspects helping
thereunto. And albeit that influence have ceased, it is not necessary that
the disease should cease, because many infected bodies remained, whereby
others have been infected: Hereof it may be concluded, that this disease shall
continue many years, and therefore let men take heed that by other men's
example it may be said of them: Happy is he whom others danger make wary.
The disposition which proceeded of the celestial influence making impression
into the bodies, did burn the humors in respect of Aries, which sign is hot
and dry, and after this burning cold and dry humors were engendered on
Saturnes part, which sign is by nature cold and dry. These cold and dry or
melancholic humors carried to diverse places bring diverse pains, and in the
skin bring forth diverse kinds of pustles or wheales. It may be thus defined.
The French Pockes or The Defini^^^^
Patursa is an universal or popular ill disposition in the parts of the body,
consisting principally in the liver and veins, and their humors, whereof ensue
these accidents, to wit, pains and wheales in all the body. The efficient
cause is touched, when it is called universal or popular, that is, proceeding
from the influence of the heavens: the formal, when it is called an evil
disposition: the material, when it is said to be in the parts: Also the
difference is touched, when it is said that pains do ensue it, etc.
Concerning the end, the bodily Physician intermedleth not: but the spiritual
Physicians affirm them to be sent for the punishment of sin. Wherefore they
which would be delivered, and escape this, let them take heed of sin, and
apply their minds to God: for only God cures infirmities, as Mesues says in
his treatise (...)*
de Appropriatis. Of this definition do follow many and profitable
consequences. First, that this disease is one, and not many, as some have
insufficiently affirmed, because there could not be given one definition of it,
neither had it always one only efficient cause, neither would one kind of
cure agree, neither had it one name: which is absurd, as partly has appeared
already, and shall more plainly be showed hereafter. The second consequence
is, that they are deceived, which think they have found the head or fountains
of this disease, to be the pain in the joints and pustles in the face,
because the former definition agrees not unto them. Moreover, all the pains
are not in the joints, neither are all the wheales like red pustles in the
face. Therefore neither this disease nor the cure of it can be referred unto
them, as it shall be hereafter showed. The third consequence, that they which
cure only wheales, or only look to the pains, do cure imperfectly. For who
can cure perfectly the h^ada^h, or the dryness of the tongue, or thirst, which
come from a Fever, unless he first ^^^e the Fever. For the accident
follows the disease, as the shadow does the body, Gal. lib. 3. de accident.
And therefore the pains cannot be cured as the pustles, except the disease be
first cured, because these are either accidents, or conjoined sicknesses, which
follow the principal, and do presuppose, it must be first cured, as Auicen
testifies tract. 1. sen. 3. and in many places. The fourth consequent, if any
do join the cure of the Empiricks with those which think they cure orderly,
as the annoynting of the Empiricks, and the purging of the Physicians, yet the
cure is insufficient, because by those medicines the il complexion which is
fixed in the parts cannot be removed. And this was the cause, that many have
thought themselves cured, when they were not. And if any have been cared, it
was, by reason that the humors were thoroughly purged by solutiue medicines and
unctions: which avoided, nature was stronger and superior to the disease and
that evil complexion, and expelled it. This had not so fallen out, except the
nature had bin strong, and the impression little: but where the strength was
weak, and the impression strong, this disease could not be expelled. This
difference in the strength of nature, and the impression has been the cause,
that some have been cured without medicines, some with medicines, others could
not by any means be cured. Now we will show that way which both reason and
experience has taught to heal all, not only by removing with medicines the
humor which procures actual pain and pustles, and has ability prepared to
the same, but also that evil complexion which infecteth the humors (they being
first purged) as order requires, wherein the treasure of this cure consists.
I could infer many other consequences, but because it is tedious to use many
words in things not available to the cure (as Galen says) 1. de regim. acut.
This shall be sufficient. It remains to determine of the causes.

Of the causes of the french Pockes. Chap. 2.
THere is a twofold kind of causes, because some are first, some corporal:
and those of two sorts, partly antecedent, partly conjoined. That which is
first, or original in this disease, is twofold, whereof the first is the only
influence or corruption of the air, from whence we must charitably think,
that it infected those which were religious. The second is conversation, as by
kissing, and sucking, as appears in children, or by carnal copulation, as it
has happened to many, and very often, but by other means, and chiefly by the
influence or corruption of the air, very seldom. It may be also caused by
other means of conversation, which I leave to thy consideration. It is
sufficient to know by experience, that this disease is contagious, and by
probability of reason wherein it is like to other contagious diseases, it may
be so accounted. Hereupon Auicen says in ye 2. of his 1. concluding his
treatise of the dispositions of sicknesses. Some there are which pass from one
to another, as the Leprosye, Seabs, Pocks, pestilent Fevers, rotten apostemes.
Now of the autecedent causes, there are four kinds, as there are four
humors, which may be the matter of this disease through their ill disposition,
whereby they are apt to receive the impression hereof: to wit, blood, choler,
fleame, melancholy. The conjoined cause is double, one is the cause of the
disease, and it is the humor which being first infected or altered by the
original causes, infecteth the parts and other humors, and therefore it is
said, the first original causes move the antecede^^. But the couioyned cause
of the accidents is that h^^^^ which immediately procures pains and whea^es.
But h^ere it may be demanded, whether the evil ^^^litie in the humor, which
is the autecedent cause, may be a disease. It seems it cannot, since a disease
affects a li^^^g thing, but the humor lives not. Whereto it may be answered,
that the humor which is in the liver and veins* infected with this evil
quality, may be the subject of a disease, so it be granted that that ill
quality have not attaynted the part, because it may hinder digestion in the
liver and veins, and engender corrupt humors: therefore by the definition of a
disease, it appears to be a disease. Now to the argument, it is answered,
that it is sufficient that a living thing be the subject of denomination, or be
that which is named diseased, it must not be that wherein the disease is
settled, yea that is most stable, that the humor is the subject wherein the
disease is settled. And if it be said, how can the humor be an antecedent
cause, and yet a disease be in it as in a subject. I answer, it is an
antecedent in respect of the pains and pustles, because it is apt to flow to
the places of pain and pustles: it is a conjoined cause, in as much as it
causes an ill complexion in the member: it is the subject of a disease, in
respect it has a disposition, whereby the action of the member is hurt,
whereupon it is called diseased. If you consider these things well, you shall
comprehend all the difficulties which may be incident to the definition.

Of the signs of the french Pocks. Chap. 3.
THe signs are, hurt in the yard, especially corroding, heaviness of the
head, and pain in the neck, which by little and little are spread toward the
shoulders and spade bones to the joints, first in the arms, then in the
legs, and sometime in the muscles and sinews which are in those parts, the
pain increases in the night, and decreaseth in the day. The cause is, that
nature is then retired home, and stronger, as also in regard of the moistness
and coldness of the night, the matter is increased. In the day, nature is
drawn from the sense hereof, and does not so much move the humors, partly
being weak, partly occupied in other actions. I will show the signs of the
causes respecting the pain and pustles, as others also in the tree of signs
hereafter set down. If the pain be sharp, and quickly arising, and the
pustles little, of a citron color, vlcerated, and the skin rough, they come
of choler. If the pain do slowly come forth, the pustles broad and whitish,
they are of fleame. If they have great itching, and some heat, they proceed of
salt phlegm. If they be black and small, not very paynefull, they are of
melancholy. If they be red, and not paynefull, they are of blood. You shall
find these sigues intermedled if you view others: for as corruption seldom
happens in one only humor (says Galen. 1. regim. acut.) even so you shall
seldom find the signs foretelling one only humor. Therefore you must gather
all the signs in your mind, and comparing them together, attain to that
which is principal, and according to that humor dispose your cure.

The Prognostications.
Melancholic persons are most fit for this disease in regard of their
likeness, according to Aristotle. 2. de generat. Things which have affinity,
do easily change. Auicenna says, 21. There is an easier conversion into
proportionable things, then into contraries. They especially are apter which
are melancholic by burnt choler, then choleric: thirdly, sanguine persons
through the abundance of their humors: Phlegmatic persons are least subject.
Amongst these, they which have thin bodies are apt, but especially such as
are full of ill humors, and use melancholic meats, as pulse, old flesh, and
such like. When this disease is new, it is curable, but when it is old, it is
hardly cured, and the older the worse, because that ill disposition takes
deeper root. Therefore they which have this disease, let the^ seek present
remedy. They which have many pustles and little pains, are more easily cured
then they which have the contrary. They which have nodes or knots, are more
hardly healed. Young persons (if other things concur) are more easily cured
then others: whereupon Galen says, It is not possible that the aged should be
healed rather then youth. 2. prognost. It remains to speak of the ture.

Of the cure of the French Pocks. Chap. 4.
WE suppose the cure of this disease to consist in these 7. things. First, in
solublenesse: second, by diminutiue purging: thirdly, digestion of the matter:
fourthly, perfect purging: fifthly, alteration of the parts: sixthly, comforting
of them: seauenthly, correcting the accidents. But because an error committed
in the six things not natural does more hurt, according to Serapion 5.
practicae 2. Cap. And Auicen says, that every ill complexion is not cured by
the contrary, but good diet many times suffices: therefore first we must set
down the order in the ^^xe things not natural. Whereupon, albeit they which
are sound, keep order, yet that is called conseruatine, and this curatiue.
Since therefore all cure is by contraries according to Galen 3. Artis. and
Auicen 4. 1. and this disease is very dry, the order of diet must be inclyning
to moystnesse. And because in regard of the essence it is hot, coming of
adustion, and in respect of the humors cold, because the humors are cold and
dry: the order in things active must be temperate, and in passive must incline
to moisture. And although in consideration of opening, digesting, and
attenuating the humors, it is requisite to appoint hot things, nevertheless
there must be mingled with them cold, and comfortable to the liver and veins.
Therefore in active things let the air incline to heat, but in passive let it
be wholly moist. Let it be sweet, and moved with the wind. In Summer this may
be done by strowing the leaves of Willow, Umes, ^lagges, Rushes, Roses,
Uiolets, mingling Bays with them and other sweet herbs, and sprinckling them
with water. In meat and drink the diet must not be slender. For Hippoc.
says: Thin and strayt diet in long diseases, are hardly endured. Let
therefore his bread be neither hot, nor above three days old, well sodden and
leauened. His Wine white, clear, of a mean temper between sweet and harsh,
mixed with sodden water, or with the water of Buglosse, Borrage, and such like,
especially in the declining of the disease, for at other times much matter
might be carried to the places affected. Therefore if there be variable pains,
let him drink Claret Wine until the declining. Let his flesh be Capenets,
fleshy, but not fat, and Chickens, ^idde, Veale, Lamb of a year old: the
flesh of Pheasant, Partridge, and little Birds, although they may be permitted,
yet household flesh is better, because it is more moist. Amongst Fishes, may be
allowed such as live in rocks, have skales, live in good water, and of them
may be a dish prepared with Almond milk, the cummin seeds, and a barley
ptisane. Amongst Herbs, Borage and Buglosse are the best, according to the old
verse.

Borage good, how sweet is thy food:
Thou art green ever, decaying never:
Borage does say, I rejoice always.
Also Spinach, and in process of time, Fennel, Parsley ^ingled with Lettuce
and Spinach, and of these herbs and cychory may be made a salade with vinegar
of Grapes. All pulse and herbs (except chiches) are to be avoided. All meat
made of Milk must be eschued, yet perhaps Milk may be permitted, if the liver
be not inflamed, nor stomach, so that the corruption of it is suspected.
Hereupon, says Auicenna, in the cure of the Leprosy, Milk is one of the
fittest medicines. Now in respect of the affinity this disease has with that,
it may be herein permitted. Sodden or potched Eggs agree well. Spices to
comfort, but very little, and especially Cinamom may be granted, therefore
this powder may be used in meat: Take Caroway seeds, Amss^eds, Ameos,
Parsley, Smalladge, Marioram, Betony, Cummin, Calamint, Penniroiall, Hysope,
Spicknard, P^pper, of each. i. Maioram, Balm, Basil, Grains, Gal^^gall,
Liquirice, of each. i. This powder is sit for them which have a weak stomach
and a cold brain, it reioy^eth the heart, quickneth the senses, and
wonderfully comfor^eth the memory. Temperate fruits are not unmeet. In
active things, fruits moderately hoate and moist are co^tienient. as ripe
sweet Mulberies, ripe Grapes, sweet Apples, Dates, and such like, which must
first be roasted under hoare coals: also, Almonds, Damask Prunes, and dried
Peaches smothed, infused in wine of Pomgranats, are good. Let his sleep be
moderate, for too much hurts, according to Hippocrates, 2. aphoris.
Notwithstanding, it is less hurtful to incline to overmuch sleep then
overmuch watching: but be careful to make his sleep te^perate, for Auicen in
ye 3. of the 1. ca. 9. says, Moderate sleep strengthens nature. Let him
avoid sleeping in the after noone, unless he have not slept by reason of pain
in the night. Moderate motion after meat, when the first and second digestion
have avoided their superfluities, is good. Nevertheless, it is safer to offend
in too much rest, then too much motion, especially rest is requisite in taking
of medicines, therefore the Empiricks keep them in their beds, for then is
nature wholly employed to expel the disease. Anger, rage, sorrow, fear and
care must be avoided. It avails to be merry, to rejoice, to hope well of
health, to be confident, to use friendly and loving company. Carnal copulation
must be moderate, and after the third digestion. The belly must be soluble, if
not by nature, then by art, each other day taking this clis^er: take Mallows,
Fumitory, Mercury, of each one handful, Borage half an handful, make a
decoction, whereof take sufficient, and add four ounces of Oil, two drammes
of salt, let it be ministered fasting.

For the first intention, take of Cassia newly drawn, and the Lenitiue
electuarie, of each five drammes, with Sugar make a ball to be eaten: these may
be tempered with Fumitory water, or such like. You may give also Manna and
Cassia, of each six drammes, and temper it with the other, for them which are
rich: or make this clyster: Take Beetes, Mallows, Camomill flowers, of each
one handful, boil them, then put to them si^e drammes of Hiera Picra, Cassia,
and Sugar, of each one ounce: four ounces of common Oil, two drammes of salt,
let him take it fasting.

For the second i^te^^^^n, which is the diminishing of the matter, take
Violets, Borrage, ana.. iii. Liquirice sliced, Rasins stoned, ana.. ii. Prunes,
Sebesten, of each five in number, Senna leaves, Epithymu, ana.. i, sees the^
all: take hereof so much as will temper Cassia newly extracted, Elect. Indi.
of each i.. ss. or as much of confect. Hamech. make a ball with Sugar, or
temper them as is said before, or, Rec. Pill. faetidarum, de fumoterrae, ana.
i. make three pills with honny of Roses, and give them after Supper, or early
in the morning.

Concerning the third intention which is the digesting of the matter, take
syrup of Fumitory and Buglosse, of each six drammes, of Cychory water,
Endive, Hoppes, of each one ounce, and use this five days: afterward, give the
Purgation before set down, and then take another syrup: take syrup of
Stichades. i.. of Fumitory,. ss. Borrage water, Hops, and Endive, ana.. i. When
sire or seven days are past, let him take the solutiue medicines, and then a
stronger syrup, to wit, de Epithymo, with Fenell water. Take the roots of
Smallage, Feuell, Parsley, Buglosse, Ru^cholme, Asparagus, (the pith being
taken out) Maydenheare, Borrageflowers, Balm, Doder, Polypody, Thime, Rasi^s,
of each equally, boil them, and strain them, adding a little Vmeger, and some
Sugar, let it boil once again, hereof let ye patient drink one great
draught warm, if he loath this decoction, give him these waters with Sugar:
take the water of Ceterach, Fenell, Borrage, Buglosse, Fumitory, of each one
ounce, give it to drink with a little Sugar. But because the matter is so
rebellious, that it cannot be digested by inward medicines, there must be
things outwardly applied, which may help to digest it, so that although the
matter be never so stubborn, yet by inward and outward means it may be
overcome. And do not marvel at the applying of outward medicines to digest
(...). For Gilbertus says in the cure of the compound ^ectian Fever, it is
requisite to digest the matter by fomentations, plasters, and such like:
therefore keep this order, that in the first and second day, the patient take
the syrup: on the third day, annoint him with the ointment afterward
described, in all parts, applying a little of the unguent lightly upon the
legs, arms, soales of the feet, and palms of the hands, and this to be
done when he goes to bed, and let him take his syrup in the morning, so that,
in the sixth day he has taken six syrupes, and has been three times
anointed, and then give him a solutiue medicine, and the humors which ought to
be expelled by the mouth, shall be diuerted to the lower parts, and so shall
he escape the hurt in the mouth. The days following, use it in like sort,
strengthening the digestion, and also the unguent, by adding Triacle and
Quick^iluer. You may also foment those places, with the decoction of Melilot,
roots of Holyhock and such like, using this in the morning, thus there shall
be three ways to digest the matter, syrupes, unctions, and fomentations. Now
follows the description of the unguent. Take three pound of butter, The
Oyn^ment.
one pound of swines grease, neither too new, nor too old, one ounce and a
half of Triacle of ten years old, one ounce of Mithridate, two ounces and
an half of Quicksiluer, Lytharge of gold, common Salt, of each one ounce, make
heerof an ointment, incorporating with them as much water of Fumitorie and
Scabiose, as can (...) mingled. This Ointment is the proper (...) of this
disease, and the last and greatest secret amongst those things which are
outwardly applied. Amongst inward means, the principal and greatest is the
water of distilled Triacle, as shall appear.

The fourth intention, which is the avoiding and purging of the digested
matter, is first in a potion. Rec. Electuarij lenitiui, Cassiae newly
extracted, ana.. iij. Electuarij Indi minoris. Confect hamech ana.. j. give it
with water, or the aforenamed decoction in the morning, and let him sleep one
hour after. These medicines may be tempered with water of Buglosse and Endive,
or Fumitorie, and such like, or adding in stead of Cassia, six. of Manna, for
rich persons. Or let this medicine be prepared for the rich. Take Liquorice
sliced, Raisins, of each. ii. Sebesten four in number, Borrage, and Buglosse
flowers, of each half one handful, four Senna leaves, one. of Tamarinds: let
them boil in sufficient water of Borrage and Fumitorie. Take two ounces of
this decoction, and infuse in it four scruples of Rhewbarh, two scruples of
Agaricke, four grains of Spicknard, let them infuse eight hours, then
strain them forth, and put to them Electuar. lenitiui.. vj. Electuar. Indi
minoris, Confect hamech. ana. j. ss. Let him take this potion. This is but set
down for example sake. These Pills are convenient; de Harmodactyll. de
Fumoterrae, ana j. Foetidar.. ij. Make Pills with sirrupe of Stichados for one
time: let the patient take them in the morning* and sleep upon them three or
four hours. All these things are set down for examples: for it is the
Physicians duty to vary or alter according to O^ (...).
necessity. These Purgations are to be taken in the sixth day, as is before
showed, and the same order to be kept.

For the fifth intention, make a bath, or steuph, with sweet of Buglosse water
in the beginning, as is aforesaid. Let this stuff be often used after the six
or seven days be ended: and let him drink this water, which is the best and
singular, and the greatest secret and last refuge in this disease.

The sixth intention, which is the comforting of the parts is thus performed.
Rec. Laetifican. Galeni. iij. Diamusc* dul^is. vj. aromatic. gariofil.. ss.
Electuar. regum. j. Conseruae Buglossae, Cidonior. Boragin. ana.. j. Syrupi de
pomis q. s. Fiat Electuarium. Hereof let him take. ii. or a spoonefull, or take
Andromachus Treacle of ten years old. i. Mithridate. ss. seeds of Citrons,
Bole armoniake, of each. i. Incorporat these together, and with Musked
Rosewater make an Electuary, whereof let him take the quantity of one Hasell
nut, or a dragme: also if he be weak, this restauratiue con^ection may be
made. Take sweet Almonds, Hasell nuttes, of each one ounce, fistick nuttes
half an ounce, six dragms of the common cold seeds, Penidior, brawne of a
Capon, of each three ounces, with Rosewater make morsels or l^zenges. Hitherto
avail cordial bags, which it were too long to rehearse.

For the seventh intention, which is the correction of the Auicen says)
sleupefactiues are to be seared. And Mesues says: If you can eschew it, it is
not good to give the^: leave them as much as you may, and try first those which
assuage pain, and do plainly give ease, as Dill, Camomill, Melilot, Holihocks,
yolks of Eggs, woman's milk, and such like. For pustles use either the former
An ointment*
ointment, or this. Take Turpentine, Goats fat, of each one ounce, red Lead,
Gold Litharge, burnt Allom, of each one ounce, oil of Bays two ounces, so
much Wax as will suffice, make an ointment.

For vlcerated Pustles, Fistulaes, Canker, Rec. Fuliginis nitri, Litharg.
Tartar. roasted in Colewort leaves under the coals, Gold ore, Pepper,
Frankincense, yolks of Eggs, of each. iiii. the root of Elecampane, Dockes
sodden in strong Lees, of each. ii. the juice of Fumitorie, of Docks, of
wormwood, Celandine, Elecampane, great Beans, Sothernwood of each. iii. white
Hellebor, Soap, Brimstone, of each. ss. let all the iuyces boil, be skumde,
and strayned, and after the Docke, and Elecampane roots be beaten, and put
in, afterward the Soap, then the powders specified first, then put to it common
Oil, Swines grease, and Wax, of each. ii. Quicksiluer extinct in Swines
grease. i. make an ointment, which is of miraculous force in these cases. For
the nodes or knots, take roots of Holyhocks, sees them in white Wine, and
beat them with Capons grease, and apply them: or take the mucilages of
Linseedes, and Holyhocks, of each. ii. Spike oil, oil of sweet Almonds,
Camomill, of each. ss. one ounce of Butter, Gum Arabic, and Dragagant, of
each. i. make an ointment which has marvelous force to resolve and mollify.
To this purpose serves a Serecloth of mucilages, the juice of Hyssope, and
such like. Also the ointment used for Scabbes avails in this case. Take four
ounces of Turpentine well washed, two ounces of Butter washed, one dragme of
Salt, Succi critrangulorum, yolks of Eggs, of each 3. in number, one ounce of
oil of Roses, mingle these to an ointment. I could here write many other
appertinent medicines, but because the principal cause being removed, the rest
is easily cured, these shall be sufficient.

Now, for the hurt in the mouth (if it fall out) take white and red Roses, of
each hal^e a handful, Camomill, Sage, of each a handful, boil them in white
wine, and strain it, put to the expression two dragmes of Allume, syrrupe of
Mulberies, Honey of Roses, of each half an ounce, two ounces of Wine* of
Pomgranats, mingle them, and let him herewith wash his mouth often, or* in
^^^ad of wine the water of Plantaine, Nightshade, Scabiose, or Houseleeke may
be added, and five graynes of Camphyre, or half a dragme of Philoniu^ may be
put to it, as the pain requires. But these stupefactiue medicines are to be
taken heed of. The pieces of green Gowrdes holden in the mouth are profitable.
It is good to wash the mouth with milk, mingling with it the water of
Nightshade, or water Lillies. I could add many mo: but because no hurt shall
befall the mouth, if you deal as I have said before, I cease, and come to
show the way how to avoid this disease.

What cautions must be observed to escape the French Pockes. Chap. 5.
THey which are careful to escape the French Pockes, let them first eschew
sin. For it is commonly said, Adversity follows Iniquity: especially let
them beware of riot. For it is said in the third of Job, Riot is a devouring
and consuming fire. And the spiritual Physicians do say, that diverse diseases
follow diverse sins, as the quotidian Fever comes for pride, the Gowte for
slothfulness, the Leprosy for riot, and so of the rest.

Seeing therefore this disease is likened to the Leprosy, it is to be ascribed
to Riot. But because these things perteine to an other Physician, this shall be
sufficient. Therefore we counsel on our behalf, that men beware to converse
much with them that are infected, principally from carnal copulation with an
infected woman: for this disease is contagious. Therefore says Auicen in the
2. of the 1. in the conclusion of his treatise of diseases. Some diseases pass
from one to an other, as the Leprosy, Scabbes, small Pocks, pestilent Feauers,
yea rotten Apostumes. Since then this disease is near to the Leaprosie or
Scabbes, it must be thought contagious.

Moreover, such things as do engender ill humors, especially melancholy
nourishment, must be avoided, as was showed in the order of the six things not
natural. And if it happen the yard be hurt by carnal copulation, it must be
helped presently with this washing. Take Rosemary, Sage, Camomill, of each one
handful, boil them in white Wine, to which being strained, put two ounces of
the Wine of Pomgranats, half an ounce of honey of Roses, wash the yard or
infected place with this, after spread upon it this powder, Rec. Litharg.
auri, cerussae, ireos nucu^ cupressi, ana.. i. make them into powder, and apply
it after the washing, and if this powder be too strong, put to it Mastick,
Myrrh, Frankincense, of each one dram. But for more security, when man or
woman has companied together, let them wipe themselves clean with a clean
lumen cloth, and beware the women's clothes, for they are infected: and this A
good caveat of a bawdie Spanyard.
done, yet for more security, let him or her wash the place with warm water,
or white Wine, for because of the frication of the parts, some slyme sticks
to the yard, which causes infection to the yard and the body, therefore the
use of this order will be good to avoid that infection and filthynesse.

Certain difficulties are dissolved which may be propounded touching this
disease. Chap. 6.
IF the reason be demanded, why this disease begins Doubt, 1.
in the secret parts (...) some fools annswere, that it comes by reason the
humors in that place are most meet to be corrupted: but if this were a
sufficient reason, almost all diseases should have there beginning in that
place. Therefore it must be say^, that between those parts, and the quality
of this disease, there is such conformity, and this came by means of that
^^fluence: for every thing works not upon every thing, but a certain upon a
certain. Arist. 1. phys. so this disease is readier to be first taken in the
yard, then in the neck, head, shoulders, and not in other places. Therefore
Doubt. ^.
the influence at that time was an enemy to the head and yard. And if it be
demanded why it has the termination by the mouth? it may be answered, that
this proceeds of the property of Quicksiluer, which does draw humors to
those parts: or better thus, that Quicksiluer by his heat does warm, and make
thin the humors thus prepared, to expel them by the uppermost parts:
therefore Paulus affirms it to be hoate and moist in the fourth degree, to
whom, I do rather stick then to Auicen, who makes it cold in the second
degree. And if it be demanded, why the mouth does stincke? can. 2. cap. 2.
Hereupon also comes pain in the head, and hurt in the mouth, as it may be
gathered of the nature of it, unto this may be added the burnt, putrified ill
humor, which may make the same accidents, and therefore it is no marvel if
there be so great pains. Now the especial remedy is, that when the humor
begins to be expelled by the mouth, it be diuerted by medicines ministered
upward and downward, to bring it to the lower parts. If it be demanded,
Auicen. 1. 1. And if it be demanded other melancholic diseases: again,
because it is a long disease: for Auicen says, 1. 3. cap. 2. That sickness
which is prolonged, is wholly cold: and it is confirmed, because we see this
matter to putrify seldom, or to cause a Fever: hereupon, says Galen:
Nothing does properly corrupt of cold or dry, 2. Book of Complexions.
Therefore this must be said so to be, because the disease is cold and dry. If
it be demanded, why some medicines seem to help in Auicen, There is no
passion from a thing accustomably used. 4. 1. Hereupon, we see some beasts to
be contrary, and enemies at the first meeting, but by usual conversation,
that enmity ceasseth, then they become tame, and the strife is ended between
them: this must be also accounted amongst the qualities. And if it be said on
the contrary, that the agent and patient being duly situated, of necessity
an action must follow, it is answered, that in this case there is action, but
so small, that it is of no force. Or it may be answered, that by custom, the
disposition of the patient is altered, whereupon it does follow that change of
medicines (so that they be not from the purpose) is very profitable: as Auicen
says in the place alleged. If it be demanded whether bloodletting is
thereof with the blood: wherefore cupping is less disliked, but with this
caution, that the cold humors be not made more crude, nor the hoate more
inflamed, according to Auicen 4. 1. Beware thou bring not thy patient to one of
these two things, either to the boiling of choleric humors, or cruditie of
cold humors. In this case cruditie is more feared, then boiling, and therefore
it is seldom convenient, and by experience it has hurt more, then it has
helped. If it be demanded Auicen, The cause of extended pain, is either
windynesse, or an humor that stretches the nerve or muscle, as if it drew it
to the extremities. Neither is it true which some think, that this is a
breaking pain, because they think the matter to be between the bone and the
skin, grounding themselves on the saying of Auicen, The cause of breaking
pain, is windiness between the bone and the skin, which covers it.
Auicen speaks not of the skin immediately covering the bone, for that is
insensible, In this, and perhaps some point or two more, the Authors judgment
failed him: as in some things we fail all.
but he speaks of those which do not immediately clean to the bone, as the
skin covering the ribs, or skull, and such like. Since therefore this pain
is not in those places, it ought not to be so called. If it be demanded, to
what pustles the pustles in this disease are like? I answer, to those which
are called of Auicen, pustles in the face, who says, that Asafati is a high
bank of vlcerous pustles. Nevertheless, Auicen says, 4. 1. 5. I purpose not
to be long in this matter, as others have done, who not knowing the nature and
causes of a disease, and by consequent not the cure, have only trifled about
names, whose works I know not to what end they have been printed. If it be
demanded, why the pains answered, because then the humors are moved, and also
made thin in their curing, or digestion, which comes by the benefit of the
unction, according to the Aphorisine. 2. part.

Fevers and pains are more increased in the laboring to suppuration, than
when matter is fully digested. And therefore it is a most singular secret, to
minister the^ solutiue medicines, that, before the humor be purged at the
mouth, it may be carried downward: and by this means the mouth shall not be
hurt, as I have often tried. Or if he have Pustles, or vlcerated places, there
must drawing medicines be applied, that the humor may be there avoided, and be
diuerted from the mouth. Hervpon is inferred, that that is the more true
opinion which says Quicksiluer is hot, than that which says it is cold,
since by it the humor is made thin and moveable, as has been showed. But
contrariwise, Vincentine Ajax Siculus a learned young man, says: Quicksiluer
causes cold diseases, as Palsies, the falling sickness, and such like: as
says Auicen can. 2. therefore it is cold. For like is engendered of like, as
it is in the Physics. To this it is answered, that this might be true, if of
it self it procured these diseases, but it causes them accidentally, to wit,
by weakening, since it is contrary in nature to the sinews and brain, because
it is hot and moist: and the natural complexion is helped of the like, and is
hurt by the contrary, as it is 3. Art. Galeni: The more hot parts have need
of more hot medicines. Therefore the brain and sinews, through their
weakness, engender cold humors, and also do easily receive them. Thus the
solution is plain, because it cannot be that any thing should bring forth a
thing diverse from it accidentally, as heat cold, and cold heat, etc.

It was also demanded often by a witty young man Franciscus whether Quicksiluer
be fit in this disease, seeing by consent of all Authors it is an enemy to
the sinews, and this disease most commonly is in the sinews. He says
further, The report of all is not vain. 7. Ethic. But almost all say that
Quicksiluer is contrary, and do therefore ^^allow vnctio^s, etc. To these I
have answered, that Quicksiluer is agreeable for the reasons before alleged.
But I answer to the first argument, that although it may have some hurt in it,
yet when it is corrected (as is showed) it is not so much but the help is
more. Or it may be said, that therefore Quicksiluer is contrary to the
sinews, because the constitution of it is contrary to the natural
co^stitution of the sinews: but in as much as the sinews are distempered to
cold and dry, and that ill temperature is removed, until they come to their
good temperature, it may be said it is absolutely necessary. Therefore some
things in sickness are good, which in health were unmeet, and would bring the
body to decay. To the second reason I say, that it must be noted that
Aristotle says: It is not altogether vain. For he would not have it to be
utterly false, for it is true in part, in as much as Quicksiluer has some hurt
in it. Yet it is not therefore to be rejected utterly, especially when it is
corrected. For Galen says, 9. de tuenda sanitate. It is hard to find such an
help as has no hurt in it.

It was further demanded by him, why the pains are James Roger, a subtle
youth. Unto this it is answered, ye emptiness in the place is of more* force
to gather, than the motion to resolve. Whereupon, says Auicen* Fen. 2. ^an. 1.
The largeness which is in the joint is fit to receive matter flowing unto it.

The declaration of the tree of signs. Chap. 7.
ALL the signs of a disease are taken, either from things not natural, or from
things natural, or from things beside nature. From things not natural thus,
in what air the patient remains, what meat, drink, what exercises he
uses, what sleep, what watchings* he has. From natural things thus, what
age he is, what is his custom, what his profession, his strength, his
complexion, etc. From things besides nature in three sorts, of the action hurt,
the quality altered, the excrements changed. From the action hurt three
ways, whether it be the animal, vital, or natural. The animal is double,
sensitive, and motive. The sensitive is double, inward and outward. An example
from the motive faculties thus, whether and how the whole bodies or the parts
can be moved? Examples from the outward sensitive faculty, how he hears,
sees, smells, tastes, as, what pain he feels, what he tastes in his
mouth. Examples from the inward sensitive faculties thus: what imaginations he
has, what judgment, what memory, what dreams. Concerning the vital
faculties, let them be inquired in the six things not natural. From the
natural actions in two sorts we gather observations, from the estate of
ministering parts, or things ministered. Example of the first is, how his
appetite is, his retentiue faculty, his digestive, his attractiue, his
expulsive: to wit, how the party goes to the stool, makes water, has ye
course of flowers, uses venery, and such like. Examples of things ministered
are, how he is nourished, and enquiring of all other actions, whether the
action be diminished, corrupted, or utterly lost. From the quality changed,
as, how his breath smells, what sweat, what ulcers, what wounds, what
matter, what is the color of his tongue, eyes, and whole body, what moisture,
dryness, roughness, smoothness, hardness, softness in the tongue, belly,
and rest of the body. From the excrement changed, as, what be, and how much
are the excrements of the eyes, nose, ears, mouth: what vomiting, belching,
urine, stools: what filthiness in the head and feet, what sweat in the
whole body: yawning, stretching, loathing, may be referred to the natural
actions which expel, since they proceed of nature laboring to expel. From
things not natural thus, that he used a diet increasing blood, or being
practiced in delectable things, as a Musition, or Player, or because he used
such meat and drink as engender blood, to wit, potched Eggs, stones of
Cocks, strong wine, and such like. From natural things, because he is full of
flesh, of a sanguine complexion, young man. From things besides nature, and
first from the action hurt, as, heaviness in the eyes, head, beating in the
temples, stretching, yawning, loathing, much and deep steep, troubled senses,
slow imaginations, weariness without labor, great pulse, swift and fast,
fullness of the veins or arteries. From the changed quality, as, redness in
all the body, chiefly in the veins of the eyes, fullness of them, swelling in
the mouth. From the changed excrements, as vryne gross and red, dark and
red, rosy red. In egestions there appears no sign: the spettle is sweet,
sometime mingled with blood: blood issues out of ye nose, or the gummes, or by
menstruall flux, or by the Emroydes, or other places* much sweat stinking like
to a Goat, and red wheales: also to these may be added, that the party
dreameth, he sees red things, or blood streaming, and that he swimmeth
therein. Therefore 4. Collect. it is read of Galen, that he commanded one to
be let blood, who dreamed he was washed in a tun of blood: others not
consenting, enjoined him exercise, so the party dyed.

The signs of Choler from things not natural, as he used Signs of Choler.
vehement exercise in hot air, he used hot and dry meats increasing
choler. From things natural, that he is a choleric young man. From things
beside nature, and first from the action hurt, the patient has great thirst,
disquietnesse, pain in the right side of the forehead, great light does hurt
him, he has sometime hunger with swoning, a weak appetite, loathing,
pricking like to the points of needles, raging, great biting in the avoiding of
excrements and urine, a swift pulse with hardness and extension. Here may
consequently be added touching dreams, since it seems to pertain to the
action hurt, as, that he sees things of a Citron or fiery color, that he
brauleth, and sometime dreameth that he flies. From the quality changed, as,
yellowness of the face and eyes, as it is in the Jaundies, bitterness of his
mouth, dryness and roughness of the tongue, dry nostrels. From excrements
changed, as, red urine, Citronlike, fiery, Saffronlike, his stools like
Saffron, his spittle bitter, his vomit choleric, green, bitter, of a Saffron
color, moystnesse of the eyes and nostrels sharp, choleric, little, and from
the ears not much. The signs of phlegm from things not natural, as fullness
Signs of Fleagme.
of mea^e, idleness, long sleeps: from things natural, that he is of a
flegmaticke complexion, a Fisher, salt, etc. From things beside nature, and
first from the action hurt, little thirstinesse except the phlegm be salt,
weak digestion in the time of health, a sharp appetite, much sleep,
sluggishnesse, idleness, the parts dissolved, heaviness of the eyes,
forgetfulness, pain in the hinder part of the head, giddiness, blindness,
ill appetite, longing after sharp and sour things, loathing, belching, heavy
pain, coldness, whose hurt is notably perceived in the head and stomach: for
there is much phlegm gathered, as says Auicen. 13. 3. and Mesue in Appropriat.
a rare, slow, and easy pulse. From the quality changed, as, cold sensibly
perceived, white color in the face and body, the tongue ouerwhite, too soft,
fullness in the body, the face soft and swelled: from the excrements changed,
as, urine white, discolored, dark yellow, his stools phlegmatic, slimie,
watrish, his spittle slimie, watrish, much, and rather harsh then bitter, much
superfluity au^ided by the nose and palate: his dreams of water, snow,
rain, and such like, which are to be referred to the action not hurt. The
signs of melancholy first from things not natural, as, he Signs of
Melancholy.
used much musing, care, fear, etc. Also melancholic meats, from things
natural, that he is of a melancholic complexion, often incurring melancholic
diseases, from things beside nature, and first from the action hurt, he feels
heaviness in his head, and rather on the right side, his mouth hoate, his
appetite corrupt, and sometime greedy like to a dog, much watching, much
s^litarinesse, pain in the Splen^, hardness, silence, many meditations,
weeping, or a desire to weep, a settled countenance, sluggishnesse, the sides
stretched, little sleep, if there be not sharpness, with fleagme, or
sowernesse in the mouth, an ill pulse with hardness, the body decaying. From
the quality changed, duskinesse, or blackness appearing in the body,
hearinesse of the body, the black Morphew in the lower eylid, and that is a
most strong sign, as says Auerrois Coll. 4. the eyes being black and clear.
From the excrements changed, brine black, or dark, green, blew, his stools
black or duskie, little spettle and sharp, sower belchings, blood black, and
congealed when it is let forth: his dreams full of terror. Here also may be
added from things which help or hurt. Here notwithstanding must be observed,
that those three kinds of signs set down by Galen, to wit, from things
substantially remaining, from accidents and actions may be referred to these
three, or these three reduced to them: and if it were thus set down as
appears in the tree, from things natural, and not natural, from hurtful
and helping may be also here placed. Notwithstanding, all these may be reduced
to the three set down by Galen, as appears to him that well considers the
matter.

FINIS.
Certain other approved Remedies, very profitable also for the cure of the
French disease: gathered for the benefit of young Students in Chirurgerie.
A special good Turbith minerale.
REcipe Mercurij viui saepius aceto and Sale loti, parts ^eware none of our
blind or common practizers, that brag of every new invented medi^en, which
they gleane or steal from others, do with unwashed hands presume to give or
minister this worthy remedy without the counsel of the learned. Georg. Melich.
vj. easque cum auri purissimi part vna optime permisce, ita vt auro in
fictili fusorio liquato, and iam refrigescere incipienti, mercurius in altero
calefactus fictili addatur, and rudicula diligenter misceatur. Addatur deinde
tantundem aquae fortis, qua aurum soluitur, fiatque praecipitati puluis.

This kind of Turbith is prepared with great pains, and it serves for the
Collicke, Quartaines, and for Morbus Gallicus: but it requires a time and
charges, as is aforesaid: but being made, it ought to be put in a glass
vessel, and so to be set in the embers, and when it has continued a time,
whereby the strong water may euaporate forth by force of the fire, then it is
become Praecipitat, but if you will make Turbith, then you must wash it very
well, and do it according to art, and so to minister it with discretion,
which does cure the imperfections aforesaid, without danger.

The order of the taking the foresaid Turbith minerale.
FIrst let the patient be purged with some good purgation meet to purge that
sickness: but if the blood be very foul, as most commonly it is, let blood
also the next day: if the patient be strong, give him xiiii. graynes of
Turbith-minerale, and roll it well up in* Butiri recentis q. s. and make one
pill and gild it: but remember before you take the pill, that ye drink a good
draught of Mutton broth, and at every time they do vomit, give presently some
Posset Ale, mixed well with Sugar. And thus you shall take three of these
pills together, having a day respit between, according as the strength of the
sick patient will serve. And for healing of their mouths, take Posset Ale, and
mix with it Honey of Roses: and if the mouth grow foul and furred, put into
the iniection so many drops of oil of Sulphur as will make it tart: and also
to heal it up with some other good lotion, if need so require.

White Praecipitate.
THis is a secret, and is of very excellent force for the taking away of dead,
proud, or superfluous flesh, and for cleansing of ulcers, but it moves
greater pain than the other, because the other is made with Aqua fortis, and
this with oil of Sulphur: Therefore this ought to be applied when the other
will not serve, and this is the making thereof.

Rec. Argenti viui, and olei ex Sulphur, ana parts aequales, in cuc^rbita,
horas xxiiij. macerentur, deinde igne vrgeantur, donec humiditate omni absumpta
albescant.

An Electuary to confirm the cure, and to prevent the coming again of Morbus
Gallicus.
Rec. rad. torment. and angel. semin. fraxini ana.. ij. Augeri^s Ferrari^^.
cort. citri, cinnamoni, semin. card. benedict. ana.. j. ss. rament. tenuiss.
ligni iudici. ss. theriacae and mithridati, ana.. iij. sir. de cort. citri q.
s. misce: fiat Electuar. liquidum.

A water for pustules and spots in the face in Morbo Gallico.
Rec. mastic. olibani, tragagant. ladani, ana.. j. succi Auger. Fe(...).
limonum j.. aquae plantag. and ros. ana.. ij. sumach, tartari rubri, coralli
albi, borac. ana.. ss. sublimati in pulu. redacti gra. iij. bulliant simul in
vase vitreo lento igne ad quartae partis consump. postea fiat colatura
clarificata and aromatizata cum granis aliquot mosci.

An Ointment for the same.
Rec. albumen vnius oui rece^t. agitetur donec spumescat, ^^^^^. (...).
deinde add sublimati and camphorae ana. gra. iiij. agitentur iterum simul,
and misceantur donec vnguenti formam recipiant. Cum quo biduo aut triduo
pustulas omnes and maculas delebis.

A water to take away the scurfe and scales of the skin and face.
Rec. amigdal amararum, farinae fabaru^ and orobi. ana. (...) F^^^.
. j. alluminis, boracis, mastic. olibani, tragagant. ana.. ss. succi limonum..
ij. aquae plantag. rosarum, and liliorum alb. ana.. iij. lact. caprini recent..
iiij. mixta omnia diligenter destillentur lento igne, more solito.

A Powder for the heat of the reins and bladder, and for ulcers in the
vrinary passages of Morbus Gallicus.
Rec. gra. halicacabi, paria vij. sem. cucumeris, portulacae* ^ug^r. F^^r.
and papaueris alb. ana.. iij. amyli, rament. ^boris, glicyrrhizae. rad.
torment. ana.. ij. margaritarum orient, coralli albi. and rubri. ana.. j.
zacchari ad pondus omnium fiat puluis.

A decoction of Guaiacum.
Rec. ligni guaiaci. lib. j. ss. cort. eiusdem.. iiij. liquirizae. ^* ^.
. vj. polypodij.. iij. fumariae. m. ij. summitatum, lupulorum, m. j. macerentur
horas. 24. in lib. 20. aquae puriss. deinde in vase terreo coquantur ad
medietatem prunis luculentis 5. aut 6. horas, and percolentur: postea quotidie
in aurora illius aquae dabis.. vj. and est decoctum forte. Pro decocto tenui,
in idem lignum iam coctum infundas aquae. lib. xx. and iterum coquas ad
tertias. Sub decoctionis finem adds liquiritiae rasae and contusae.. ij.
passull. mund.. iij. Absoluta decoctione add cinamomi.. ss. ad saporis
iucunditatem, fiatque decoctio.

A most rare and singular drink for the cure of Morbus Galicus, coming with
extreme aches, etc.
Rec. Limaturae guaiaci.. vj. Zarzae parillae.. iiij. ana.. j. ss. Corticis
guaiaci. Rad. helenij sicci.
ana.. j. Rad. and so. verbasculi. Pol. card. bened. Rad. Iridis viridis. Sem.
anisi. Faeniculi. Petroselini.
Succi verbasculi.. iiij. Sennae Alex.. iij. Polypodij. q. s. Agarici. Trochis.
ana.. j. ss. Hermodact.. ij. ana.. iiij. Colocinth. Staechados.
ana.. vj. Mechoacan. Rad. asari.
ana.. ss. Rad. foen. Petroselini. Glycirrhizae.
Vuarum pass. rub.. iiij. Ficuum incisorum number. x.


Infundantur omnia in lib. xvj. Ceruisiae fort* lup. per xxiiij. horas coq. ad
dimidias ante finem ebull. add bugloss. boraginis, violarum, capill. anthos
ana. m. ss. Et cum saccaro albo dulcoretur. Dos.. viij. vel 6. mane tantum.
Rec. Ceruisiae. fort. lup. lib. xvj. coq. ad lib. viij. cum predict.
ingredientibus cui add bugl. borag. viol. cap. ven. anthos ana. m. ss. and cum
saccaro dulcoretur: seruetur pro secundario potu.

A Cerote for Morbo Gallico.
Rec. Axungiae porc. non omnino vetustae and a membranis Botallus.
optimae purgatae lib. j. pingued. gallinae.. iij. ol. de terebint.. ij. ss.
euforbij castorei. ana.. iij. styracis calamitae.. j. ss. cinabrij.. ij. ss.
cerae. q. s. ad formandum ceratum quod non coinquinet, in fine add argenti
viui optime comminuti.. iij. quae omnia simul misceantur donec frigida sit tota
massa, ne quod grauius est, in fundum descendat.

A purging potion for Lucs Venerea.
Rec. rad. enulae campanae and hederae. ana.. iiij. anthos, capilli veneris,
calaminthae, pulegij, gallitricum, arthemisiae. ana. m. j. cort. rad.
cichorij.. iii. cort. rad. foenic. and apii. ana.. ii. sennae. i. polipodii..
x. croci. i. agarici trochiscat.. i. ss. bruise that which is to be bruised, and
boil all together in ten pints of saire water, until a pint be wasted,
then put thereto mellis despumati. lib. i. sacchari. lib. i. ss. let it boil
together again until two pintes more be wasted: then when it is cold, let it
be filtred three or four times, and so every morning take a pretty draught
fasting, and sweat after it, for it is a most singular drink if it be used in
his due time according to art.

An unguent for Lues Venerea.
Rec. axungiae porc. lib. j. ol. chamomillae, anethi, masticis and laurini.
ana.. i. styracis liquidae.. x. rad. enulae campanae.. iiii. rad. ebuli.. iiii.
squinanti, staechados, euphorbii. ana.. iiii. vini maluat. lib. i. powder that
which is to be powdered, and boil all together to the consumption of the wine,
strain it, and add thereto lithargirij auri.. vii. thuris, masticis. ana..
vi. resinae pini puriss.. ss. terebint. venet.. i. argenti viui extinct. cum
saliua hominis.. iiii. fiat vnguentum.

A most excellent Cerote for pain in the joints, proceeding of Morbus
Gallicus, and for ulcers after they be well cleansed.
Rec. Olei Chamomillae, spicae and liliorum. ana.. ii. axungiae porci. lib. i.
seui vitulini. lib. i. euphorbii.. v. thuris masculi.. x. ol. laurini.. xviii.
pingued. viperi.. ii. ss. rad. enulae campanae, and ebuli ana.. ii. squinati,
staechados and arthemisiae. ana. m. i. vini maluat. lib. ii. powder that which
is to be powdered, and boil all together, unto the consumption of the Wine,
strain it, and add thereunto Litargi auri. lib. i. terebint. venet.. ii.
cerae albae.. viii. styracis liquidae.. i. ss. extract. croci.. ss. boil these
together to the form of a Cerote, and being taken from the fire, and cooling,
add thereto argent. viui extinct. cum succo limonum.. iiii. labor all well
together, until the Mercury be incorporate, then use it as art does require.

An Unguent for Morbus Gallicus.
Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib. j. Butyri recentis. vj. Olei Andreas Matthiol.
Note this unguent for a secret of mi^e own experience.
Laurini. iiij. Olei Vulpini, Hypericonis, Terebint. ana.. v Styracis liquidae
lotae in aqua Chamomillae, and vino Cretico. ij. Olei Sulphuris Chynic.. ss.
Cynabrij. j. ss. Argenti viui extincti. vj. Mercurij sublimati. j. Cerae albae
q. s. Fiat vnguentum.

A fume for the drying of Ulcers, and expelling the venomous infection
proceeding of Morbus Gallicus.
Rec. Cynabrij. iij. Myrrhae, Thuris, ana. j. Aloes hepat. Andr. Matthew.
Sandarachae, Styracis calamitae, and Benjamin. ana.. iij. etc. Puluerizentur
Crasso modo.

A purging Electuary for Morbus Gallicus.
Rec. Turpet. albi and Gummosi, Hermodactilorum, Rutae Andr. Matthew.
agrestis ana.. iij. Diagredij.. ss. Gariophilorum, Zinziberis, Cinamomi, ana..
ss. Piperis gra. ij. Squinanti, Spicae, Epithimi, Salis gemmae, ana ss.
Santalorum Citrinorum alb. and rubr. Croci, ana. j. Mannae Calabriae. ss.
Rhabarbari. ij. Zedoariae. ij. Sacchari lib. ss. Cum aqua Buglossae Fiat
Electuatium, vel tabulae.

An Unguent to open a Bubo, when it is come to suppuration.
Rec. Mercurij sublimati,. ij. ss. Vng. Populionis. iij. Opij Nicholaus Massa.
gra. v. Lapid. haematitis. j. Fiat vnguentum. And so apply it to the safest
part when you will: open it long wise, but not round, and it will open without
any great pain.

A fomentation to be used in the ripening of a Bubo, proceeding of Morbus
Gallicus.
Rec. Rad. altheae, and Liliorum, ana. ij. Rad. acori, Helenij, I. P.
Sem. lini, Foenugrae. Anisi, Foeniculi, ana. ss. Maluae, Violar. Parietarioe,
Chamomilloe, Meliloti, Anethi, Origani, Artemisiae, ana. m. j. Let all these be
prepared and boiled in water and wine equal portions, so much as will suffice,
and so according to art foment the place grieved both in the morning and
before supper.

A Cataplasme that does cease pain, and bring a Bubo to suppuration.
Rec. medullae pomorum coctorum.. iii. foliorum acetosae coct. sub cineribus
cum butiro recenti salis expert.. ii. rad. cynoglos. crud.. iiii. farinae
triticeae in vitellis quatuor ouorum solutae.. i. axungiae suillae veteris. q.
s. Mix them well together, and make a Cataplasme accordingly, and apply it to
the grieved place.

A Cataplasme for a schirrous tumor proceeding of Morbus Gallicus, and is to be
used after the unction.
Rec. rad. brioniae crudae.. ii. sigillae mariae crud.. iiii. axungiae porci
veteris.. vi. croci. ss. fiat Cataplasma.

Pills to purge in Morbus Gallicus.
Maceratur precipitatus in aquis cichoriae, buglossae, scabiosae post 24. horas
posito super prunas vase, in vaporem resoluantur aquae, and siccus relinquitur
puluis, miscetur hic cum spec. aromat. rosat. and diamarg. frigid. and cum
theriaca vel mithridato formentur pillulae magnitudine cicerum.

A Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth and jaws proceeding of Morbus Gallicus.
Rec. plantag. and caudae aequi. ana. m. i. rosarum, balaust. summitatu^
absinthii, and salic. ana. p. i. hordei integri. i. nucum cupressi,
lenticulorum, sumach. ana.. iii. decoquantur sufficienter in aquae partibus x.
and vna aceti, and in colatura dissolve mel. ros. vini granat. and diamori.
ana.. i. fiat gargarismus.

A Clister drawing back the matter, that causes pain in the head, in Morbus
Gallicus.
Rec. betae, altheae, mercurial. rutae, fol. lauri, cataputiae, vrticae ana. m.
i. rad. polipodii.. i. cort. genistae and sem. cartami contusi. ana.. ss.
s^orum staechados and chamomillae. ana. p. i. fiat decoctio and in colatura
dissolve succ. rad. yreos per residentia^ depurati.. i. dia catholici, hierae
pi^rae, diaphenic. ana.. ss. ol. rutac. de castor. and anethi ana.. j. mellis
anthosati.. x. salis com.. ij. fiat clister.

Pills for Alopecia ex Morbo Gallico.
Rec. rhabarbari, agarici. ana.. ij. aloes.. j. argent. viui Rondolet.
extincti in succo rosar.. iij. cinamomi, ambrae, ana.. j. myrrhae, masticis.
ana.. j. cum terebint. excipiantur and formentur pill. 8. pro. j. capiat pro
prima vice.. j. deinde.. ss. postremo.. i. pro diuitibus add limaturae auri
aut pannorum auri.. iiij.

A sweet water to cicatrize ulcers, and to heal the itch.
Rec. aquae rosar. lib. ij. vini albi. lib. ij. vrinae pueri. lib. j. I. B.
malecorij.. iij. balaustij.. ij. aluminis vsti.. iiij. vitri combusti.. ij.
mercurij sublimati.. iiij. mastic.. vj. ligni aloes.. iiij. cort. guaiaci..
iiij. cassiae ligneae. ij. mellis. lib. ss. sanguinis draconis.. ss. misce, and
ad artem distillentur, dein iterum dicta aqua distilletur, addendo mosci.. ss.

A most excellent ointment for the itch and scabbes.
Rec. olibani.. iii. ol. laurini.. i. falis grossi.. vij. axungiae I. B.
porcinae,. j. ss. argent. viui extincti.. iij. cerae albae.. ii. ss. misce,
fiat unguent. quo vngantur manus and pedes vesperi contra ignem luculentum
donec cutem intrauit totum.

A Collirium for ulcers of the yard of Morbus Gallicus.
Rec. vini albi. lib. i. aquae rosarum, and plantag. ana. lib. ii. Ambrosius
P^^^us. (...)
auripigme^ti.. ii. virid. aeris.. i. aloes, myrrhae. ana.. ii. terantur
subtilissime, and fiat collirium.

An Iniection drying ulcers, and cicatrizing without pain.
Rec. aquae fabrorum lib. ss. nuc. cupressi, gallarum, cort. Ambros. P^^^us. 558
granat. ana.. i. ss. alluminis rochae,. ss. bulliant omnia simul, secundum
artem, fiat iniectio.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
GOod Reader, in viewing certain old Books of Chirurgerie, I happened to
light upon this written coppie, and perusing it thoroughly, I thought it a
work very profitable and necessary for all godly professors of our Art: for
here they shall find in brief, certain judgments and aphorisms, of most
imperfections, which daily assaulteth man's body, not only in the exterior,
but also in the interior parts: which diseases, or griefs, are easy to be
found, because it goes alphabetically, first in latin, and then in english. It
is a work, (as I judge) gathered out of diverse Authors, as well of Physic, as
of Chirurgerie, by some that was willing to profit his country and common
wealth. A collection in mine opinion worthy the publishing and setting forth,
although I know it will not please the humors of some captious heads, that
will neither do good themselves, nor suffer others: as I my self, and other
good men, have tasted of their sclanderous toongs, and unmannerly backbiting
taunts. But thou (good Reader) whatsoever thou art, if thou love thy country
and common wealth, or do take pleasure in our so worthy an Art, having a
care to discharge thy calling with a good conscience, then (I say) thou will
not only find great profit and pleasure thy self, by carrying these small
sentences in memory, but also thou will be thankful to any that shall take
pains in so woorthye a thing.

FINIS.
De Apostematibus.
Apostematis tempora quatuor. The four times of Apostemes.
1. Beginnning. 2. Augmentation. 3. State. 4. Declination.

INitium cognoscitur ex humorum Initium Apostematis.
in aliqua part corporis coaceruatione.

The beginning is known by the gathering of humors in any part of the body.

Augmentum ex doloris and tumoris incremento.

The augmentation is known by the increase of pain and Augmentum.
swelling.

Status, quoniam dolor neque accidentia, crescunt, aut diminuunt, Status.
sed quasi in centro sistunt.

The state is known, when as neither the pain nor accidents do increase or
diminish, but do stand as it were in a stay.

Declinatio fit per accidentium and doloris decrementum. Declinatio.


The declination is known by the diminishing of the pain and accidents.

Apostemata quatuor intentionibus curantur, scilicet, resolutione, Intentiones
4. in apostematibus curandis.
suppuratione, putrefactione and induratione.

Impostumes are cured by four intentions, viz. by resolution* suppuration,
putrefying and hardening.

Apostemata quae non cito ad suppurationem vel declinationem Ad suppurationem
vel declinationem ^^rde prou^^entia. Rubri coloris.
perueniunt, curatu sunt difficilia.

Impostumes that come not speedily either to suppuration or declination, are
hard to be cured.

Rubro color Apostemata cum prominentioris partis mollitie citissime curantur.

Impostumes that are red in color, with softness in the upper parts, are
easy to be cured.

Apostemata ad suppurationem iam peruenta celeri gradu Ad suppurationem iam
peruenta.
curanda sunt.

Impostumes that are come to suppuration, must speedily be cured.

Apostema si suppurationem recusat, neque declinare omnino Suppurationem
recusan^^.
concedet, malum.

Impostumes that come not speedily to suppuration or declination, are evil.

Apostematis augmento* vtere mollificantibus. In augment^ vtenda.


In the augmentation of Impostumes, use mollificatiues.

Apostemata pulsationem habet dum humores vertuntur Pulsationem habentia.
in putrefactionem, and sic fit in arterijs.

Impostumes do beat whilst the humors do turn to putrefaction, and so it
chances in the arteries.

Apostematis corruption ex abundantia materiae vel eiusdem Apostematis corruption.
materiae malignitate, aut prauitate prouenit.

The corruption of Impostumes comes by abundance of matter, or by the
malignitie, or vileness thereof.

Apostematum quaedam terminantur per insensibilem resolutionem, Apostematum
Terminatio.
and hoc est valde bonum, and quaedam per virulentiam, and hoc est pessimum,
and si fuerint in locis ex directo cordis, aut prope, mortale est.

Some Impostumes end by insensible resolution, which is very good, and some
turn to a poisoned quality, which is very evil, and if those be in places
against the heart, or near unto it, it is deadly.

Apostematum quaedam sunt de materia calida, and terminantur Apostematum materia
in die 20. and quaedam de materia frigida, and terminantur in 40. die.

There be some Impostumes which come of hot matter, and they are ended in xx.
days, and some there be which proceed of cold, and are ended in xl. days.

Apostematum quaedam sunt cum faebribus continuis, Apostematum febre.
and si expuant saniem ante 7. diem, impossible est quod euadant: quoniam quum
tam cito natura generat saniem, natura no inuenit omnino viam, vnde eam
expellat: and si virtus est debilis cito morietur: si multa bona signa apparent
(dicit Hyppocr.) vita pollicetur.

Some Impostumes have continual fevers, and if they spit matter before the 7.
day, it is impossible for them to escape, because when nature so speedily
engenders matter, she finds not sufficient way to expel it: And if the
party be weak, he dies speedily: but if many good signs appear (says
Hyppocrates) he may live.

Omne apostema de materia adusta, sicut Anthrax, Carbunculus De materia adusta.
and formica, pessimum est and mortale, praesertim cum febre.

Every Impostume coming of burnt matter, as Anthrax, Carbuncle and Formica, is
evil and deadly, especially if it come with a Fever.

In omni Apostemate est triplex morbus, viz. Morbus Apostematum morbi.
consimilis, ratione malae complexionis; Morbus officialis, ratione tumoris;
and morbus communis, ratione solutionis continuitatis.

In every Apostume is a threefold disease, viz. Morbus consimilis; by reason of
his evil complexion, Morbus officialis; by reason of the swelling and Morbus
communis, by reason of the solution of Continuitie.

Tribus modis accidit membrorum corruption, primo, Me^brorum (...).
ex vene^o calido vel frigido vnde complexio partis naturalis corrumpitur,
secundo, quando spiritus naturales in membro residere prohibentur: Postremo,
per venenosorum medicamentorum administrationem, vt Realgar, Arsenicum, etc:

Corruption of the members chances three manner of ways, first of venime
either hot or cold, whereupon the natural complexion of the part is
corrupted: secondly, when the natural spirits cannot be suffered to settle
in the member: thirdly, by the administration of venomous medicines, as
Realgar, Arsenick, etc.

In declinatione ac fine Aposthematum, desiccantia frigida, In declinatione^^
^ine quae fug^enda.
and repercutientia materiam in membro claudunt, vt inde malam qualitatem
indueret and omnem putrefactionem contraheret.

In the declination and end of Impostumes, cold desiccatiues and
repercussiues do shut the matter in the member, whereby it obtayneth an evil
quality, and draws to all kind of corruption.

Materiam repercutientia indurabunt qua longiori tractatu Repercutie^tia.
morabit.

Repercussiues do harden the matter, and make it continue longer in cure.

Mollificantia and resoluentia tam augmentatione quam In augmento and statu res
vtendae.
statu conueniunt.

Mallificatiues and resolutiues are convenient, as well in the augmentation, as
the state.

Materia fluctuante pernitiocissima sunt repercutientia. Materi^ fluctuante.


If the matter be flowing, then repercussiues are most pernicious.

Cerebri Apostema, Lethargum, Apoplexiam, and mortem Cerebri Apo^tema.
asciscit.

Impostume in the brain, brings Lethargy, Apoplexy, and death.

Pulmonum apostema Vlcera, Fistulas, inortemqne excitat. (...) Apostema.


Impostumes in the Lungs, bring Ulcers, Fistulaes and death.

In cord congestum syncopem, mortemque adfert. Cordis Apost.


Impostumes in the heart bring sowning and death.

In hepate, putrefactionem humorum, digestionis debilitatem, ^^^^^ Apost.
and mali moris vlcera.

Impostumes in the liver brings corruption of the humors, weakness of
digestion, and ulcers of hard curation.

Fluxus ventris in Apostemate hepatis, malum. Fluxus (...) ^^ium.


In Apostumes of the liver, flux of the belly is evil.

Omne apostema hepatis generat opilationem, and opilatio Apostema liepatis
(...) (...).
indigestionem, indigestio aquositatem, and aquositas Hydrop^sim, quare omne
apostema hepatis est causa hydropis.

Every Apostume in the Liver causes stoppings, and stoppings causes want of
digestion: want of digestion, watrishnes: and watrishnes the dropsy. Therefore
every Impostume in the Liver, causes the dropfie.

In Renibus elongatum morbum mortemque. Renum Apostem.


Impostumes in the Kidneis, brings a long disease, and death.

Intestinis gracilibus mortem. Intestinis gracilibus.


Impostumes in the small guts bring death.

Graves affectus mortemque in vesica. Vesicae Apost.


Impostumes in the Bladder, bring grievous accidents and death.

Quae in collo incidunt Cancros, Fistulas, vlceraque aegrae Colli Apost.
sanationis pariunt.

Impostumes in the neck, bring Cankers, Fistulaes, and ulcers of hard
curation.

In oculis, visus defectus, and nisi curata citissime sint, obcaecationem. In
oculis Apost.


Impostumes in the eyes, bring decay of fight and blindness, if they be not
speedily cured.

In ano apostema Terminat in fistulam, vel vlcus difficilis In Ano.
curationis.

Impostumes in the fundament brings Fistulaes, or ulcers of hard curation.

Apostemata virgae ex continua calidorum humorum influxione Virgae Apost.
proueniunt, quae si cum vlceratione contingant rarissime membrum ad integram
sanitatem reducitur.

Impostumes in the yard do come by the continual flowing of hot humors:
which if they chance with vlceration, the member is hardly or never brought to
his natural soundness.

Apostemata in pectore senum difficillime sanantur. In pectore senum.


Impostumes in the breasts of old persons are hard to be cured.

Circa iuncturam apostema, circumiacentium partium Circa iuacturam.
actiones mancas quodammodo reddit.

Impostumes about any joint do in a sort maime the actions of the parts lying
round about.

In spina, totius corporis debilitatem, propter neruorum In spina.
inde emanantium, copiam.

Apostumes in the back bone, bring debilitie to the whole body, by reason of
the plenty of nerves thence arising.

Circa linguae radices mortem, vel pessima accidentia. Circa linguae radices.


Impostumes about the roots of the tongue bring death, or very evil
accidents.

Facilis sunt curationis in carnosa part concitata. Pa^tibus carnosis.


Impostumes in any fleshie part are easy to be cured.

Emunctorijs quae incidunt, citissime curanda veniunt. Emunctorijs.


Impostumes in the emunctorie places, must be speedily cured.

Promotum apostema ex venenosa materia, omni cura statim A venenosi (...).
foris est extrahendum.

Impostumes that come of venomous matter, must be speedily drawn to the
outward parts.

Durae matris apostemata ex vini potione, aeris mutatione, I(...).
vel alicuius ossis punctione proueniunt.

Impostumes in dura matter do chance by drinking of wine, changing of air, or
the pricking of some bone.

Septem attendenda in apertione iam suppurati abscessus. Seven things to be
noted in the opening of ripe Impostumes.
1 PRimo, vt sectio fiat eo loco quo materia continetur. First, that incision
be made in that place wherein the matter is contained.

2 Secundo, vt fiat in loco inferiori, quo melius purulenta illa colluuies
euacuari possit.

Secondly, that incision be made in the lower part, whereby that venomous
matter may the better be euacuated.

3 Tertio vt fiat secundum rugas and processum musculorum.

Thirdly, that it be made long wise after the lying of the fibers and muscles.

4 Quarto, vt vitentur nerui, venae and arteriae quoad fieri potest.

Fourthly, that in the making of incision, the sinews, veins and arteries be
eschued as much as may be.

5 Quinto, vt non tota materia semel atque affatim educatur, praesertim in
magnis abscessibus, ne scilicet ex nimia subitaque inanitione, and spirituum
resolutione virtutis sequatur prostratio.

Fifthly, that the matter be not all at once or wholly taken out, especially in
great Impostumes, least by overmuch and sudden emptying and resolving of the
spirits, there follow utter weakness and throwing down of the faculties.

6 Sexto, vt blandius and minimo quam fieri potest dolor locus tractetur.

Sixt^y, that the place be handled gently, and with as little pain as may be.

7 Septimo, vt facta apertione locus detergatur, carne impleatur, and ad
cicatricem, more aliorum vlcerum perducatur.

Seauenthly, that after incision is made, the place be mundified, filled with
flesh, and skinned after the manner of other vicers.

Apostema in via maturationis esse, potestis iudicare, cum Apostematis in via
matu^a (...). e^^^ cog(...).
quaedam est leuitas circa partem molestam cum doloris mitigatione.

You may judge an Impostume to be in the way of ripening, when there is felt a
certain lightness about the affected part, with asswaging of the pain.

Resolutiuorum applicatio calidis apostematibus, and in Apostematibus cal^^is,
resolu^^tia tug^enda sunt.
augmentatione facit incrementum corruptionis: talia namque parts subtiles
resoluunt, sed quae gressa est sinunt in membro putrescere.

Resolutiues applied to hot Impostumes, and in the augmentation, do increase
the corruption: for they resolve the subrill parts, but suffer the ^wosse
matter to pu^rifie in the member.

Repercutientia in locis emunctorijs sunt valde periculosa, Repercutientia
locis emu c^^^is no^ ^unt adiubenda.
vel si aliqua venenositas in loco inest.

Repercussiues in the emunctorie places are dangerous, especially if there be
any venom in the place.

Immatura repercutientium applicatione putredo sape Imma^ura rep^^^^t (...).
gen* ratur.

By the mordinate application of repercussiues, corruption is oftentimes
engendered.

Frigida and humida maturantia calidis apostematibus and a chole^a cum sanguine
pronenientibus debent applicari. Apostematibus calidis qu^ vtenda sunt.


Cold and moist maturatiues ought to be applied to hot impostumes, those that
come of choler and blood.

Sed calida and humida calidis adhibita humores in congeriem ^ugienda.
coaceru^t, vnde dolor confestim multiplicatur.

But hate and moist maturatiues to hot impostumes, gathers together the
humors upon heaps, whereupon fo^^h with the pain is increased.

Alopecia est mutatio crinium in candorem quum crines Alopecia.
veretes radicitus excidunt.

Alopecia is a changing of the hear into whiteness, when the old hears do
fall off by the roots.

Alopecia quae a lepra prouenit raro aut nunquam curationem Alopecia a lepra.
admittit.

Alopecia coming of a Leprosy, is hard, or never cured.

Atra bilis veluti niger sanguis si exierit in debilitatis hominibus, mortale.

Melancholy, or like unto black blood, if it avoid from weak persons, is
deadly.

Angina ad pulmonem s^pe transit, tum intra septem dies mors sequitur.

The squmancy goes often to the lungs, and death ensues within seven days.

Aetas, tempus, locus, victus, consuetudo mutat morbos.

Age, tune, place, diet and ^ustome, alter diseases.

Atra bile orti tumores semper dolorosi.

Tumors coming of melancholy, are always paynefull.

Aegritudinum prauarum nolite onus suscipere ne mali medici nomen subeatis.

Take no desperate cure in hand, least thou bear the name of an evil
Physician.

B.
BRonchocele est tumor iuxta fauces, differens ab eo Bronchocele.
quod in scroto nascitur.

Bronchocele is a swelling beside the jaws, differing from that which
springs in the codde.

Bronchocele si inest a natura non curatur.

If this swelling come by nature, it is incurable.

Si non inest a natura curatur difficillime.

If it come not by nature, it is hardly cured.

De brachiorum vulneribus.
AN fieri posit indicat pars affecta potissimum, sic vulnerata.

The affected part does chiefly show whether* it can be healed.

Plicaturae cubiti sunt periculosa propter venas magnas.

Wounds in the bought of the arm are dangerous, because of the great veins.

Cubiti suspecti propter spasmum and inflamationes.

Wounds are to be suspected in the Cubite, because of the Crampe and
inflammation.

Ex bile flaua and sanguine nati tumores, nunquam dolor destituuntur.

Tumors of yellow choler and blood, are ever full of pain.

Cancer in pectore vel collo aegre ve^ nunquam curatur. Cancer in pectore vel
collo.


A Canker in the breast or neck is hardly or never cured.

Cancro vel veteribus vlceribus immundo corpore incidentibus Acuta medicamina.
acuta medicamina adhibita semper nociua.

Sharp medecines applied to Canckers or old ulcers in an unclean body, do
always hurt.

Cancer qui in propatulo grassatur non facile saluti consentit. Cancer qui in
propatulo grassatur.


A Canker that eats outwardly, is hardly cured.

Cancer non vlceratus atque iam confirmatus curationem Cancer non vlceratus.
non admittit, nisi radicitus extirpetur, aut per sectionem, aut per vstionem.

A Cancer not vlcerated, and thorougly confirmed, can not be cured, except it
be wholly removed either by incision, or cauterization.

Cancer vlceratus qui est in venis, neruis and ossibus difficulter Cancer
vlceratus.
curatur.

An vlcerated Canker in the veins, sinews and bones, is hardly cured.

Cancer antiquatus incurabilis existit. Cancer anti quatus.


An old Canker is incurable.

In canis rabiosi morsu pessimum est signum and mortale Canis rabidi morsus.
permixtio rationis and abhominatio aquae mundae.

In the biting of a mad dog, it is an evil and deadly sign to rave and
abhor fair water.

Canis rabidi morsus quadraginta dierum spatio reclusus foret.

The biting of a mad dog should be kept open the space of forty days.

Carbunculus minus lethalis est primum ruber, deinde Carbunc^l^s.
citrinus appare^s, qui vero liuescit aut nigricatiugular.

That Carbuncle is less deadly, which is first read, and after yellow, but
that which w^xeth swarty or black, is past all help.

Calida suppurationem faciunt, cutem emolliunt, extenuant, Calid^.
dolorem leniunt in spasmo, distentione and ossibus fractis.

Hot things do ripen, mollify the skin, extenuate, and assuage pain in
crampes, crickes, and broken bones.

Calor gignit carnis effaeminationem, neruorum incontine^tiam, Calor.
mentis stuporem, h^morragiam, lipothimiam.

Heat causes neshnesse of the flesh, shaking and trembling of the sinews,
dumpishnes of the mind, issue of blood, and sounding.

Carnis supercrescentis causa est humiditas, and mala abstertio.

The cause of superfluous or proud flesh, is too much moisture, and want of
mundification.

Corpora exercitata, morbis minus obnoxia esse solent.

Those bodies yt are exercised, are least annoyes with diseases.

Ex intemperie calida citius quam ex frigida aegri intereunt, ob ignis in
agendo celerem efficaciam.

Men dye of a hoate distemperature sooner then of a cold, because of the swift
force of fire in working.

D.
DIslocatio grossis, pinguibus, and teneris, contingen^ Dislocatio in grossis,
pinguibus and teneris corporibus.
corporibus aegre sanatur.

Dislocations in gross, fat, and tender bodies, are hard to be cured.

Iuncta cum apostemate dislocatio difficulter curatur. Dislocatio cum
apostemate* Dislocatio cum fractura.


A dislocation with an impostume is hard to be cured.

Dislocatio cum adherente fractura difficulter curatur.

A Dislocation with a fracture is hardly cured.

Si coxa excidit, mucores ibi nascuntur, crus contabescit Coxae dislocatio.
and claudicat.

If the hippe be dislocated, there gathers in the place watr^sh matter, and
the thigh withers away, and halteth.

Quaedam iuncturae sunt facilis dislocationis vt genu. Iuncturarum dislocatio.
quaedam difficilis vt digitorum and cubiti: quaedam medio modo, vt coxae and
scapulae.

Some joints are easy to be dislocated, as the knee: some hard, as the fingers
and cubite, and some indifferent, as the hippe, and shoulderblades.

Quae facilis sunt dislocationis faciliter restaurantur: quae difficilis
difficulter: quae medio modo, mediocriter.

Those joints which are easy to be dislocated, are easy to b^e restored*
those which are hard, hardly: and those which are indifferent, indifferently.

Dislocatio illa est deterior quae est cum ligamenti fractura, D^^^ocatio cum
ligam^^ti (...).
qua os cum osse coniungitur and alligatur, and vt plurimum fit in capite
anchae and spatulae.

That dislocation is the worst which comes with the fracture of a ligament,
whereby one bone joins with another, and for the most part it chances in
the head of the shoulder blade and hippe.

Quando iunctura ad omnes parts positionis sine difficultate Iunctura non
dislocata neque separata esse cognoscitur.
mouetur, non est dislocata, neque separata.

When the joint without difficulty may be mo^ed every way, it is neither
dislocated nor half put forth.

Mandibula quando ad interiora dislocatur, os remanet Mandibulae dislocatio ad
interiora.
apertum: and dentes inferioris mandibulae posteriores sunt dentibus mandibulae
superioris.

When the iawe is dislocated inwardly, the mouth remains open, and the teeth
of the nether iawe stand more backward than they of the upper.

Quando autem ad exteriora dislocatur, clauditur os, and a^^^iri Ad exteriora.
no^ potest: apparet imminentia mandibulae ad extra, and priuatur loquela.

But when it is dislocated outwardly, the mouth is shut and cannot be opened,
and there appears a part of the ^awe sticking out, and speech is taken away.

Dislocatio humeri quandoque fit ad inferiora, and ^entitur Dislocatio ^* me^i.
sub axillo in tactu capitis* vert^b^i, ac si esset ouum, and in part
superiori concauitas que tactu facile comprehenditur.

The shoulder sometime is dislocated toward the inferior part thereof, which
may be (...) under the ar^ehole, as if it were an Egg, and in the upper part
is a cauitie, which by touching is easily perceived.

Ancha, si dislocatur ad anteriora, tunc pes est longior, and Anchae dislocatio
ad ante^iora.
and non est possibile plicare pedem, nisi cum dolor, and non potest ambulare
nisi super calcaneum, and multoties apostematur inguen, and retinetur vrina.

If the hippe be dislocated toward the forepart, then the foot is longer, and
it is not possible to bow the foot without pain, and the party cannot go
about upon the heel, and oftimes the flancke does impostumate, and the urine
stops.

Quando fit dislocatio ad interiora tunc pes dislocatus Ad interiora.
redditur longior, quoad visum, altero, and genu eminentius, and non potest
duplicare pedem suum apud inguen inflatum and apostematum, quoniam caput coxae
iam introiuit in ipsum.

When the hippe is dislocated inwardly, then the leg on that side seems
longer than the other, and the knee more eminent, and he cannot double his
leg to his flancke being puffed up and impostumated, because the head of the
hippe has entered into it.

Si dislocatur ad exteriora, abbreuiatur pes, apparet in inguine Ad exteriora.
profunditas and in eius opposito eminentia, inflatio in posterioribus, and
gen^ ad interiora subuersum.

If the hippe be dislocated onewardly, the foot is shortened, there appears
in the flancke a hollownesse, and over against it a part standing out, a
swelling in the hinder parts, and the kne^e bowing inwards.

Cubitus dislocatus retrorsum distendi minime potest, intror^um Cubi^i
dislocatio intrors^^.
pl^cari nequit.

If the cubite be dislocated backwards, it cannot be stretched out: if inward,
it cannot be bowed.

Dextrorsum vero aut sinistrorsum dislocatum, forma iuncturae Dextrorsum a^^
sinistrorsum.
and modus possibilitatis motionis ostendit.

But if the cubite be dislocated either to the right or left side, that is
easily known by the form of the joint, and the possibility of the motion.

Si pulsus brachij in cubito dislocati tangatur, tangenti vena Pulsus b^achij.
diuisa sentitur.

If you touch the pulse of the arm that is dislocated in the cubite, it
seems as though it were a vein divided.

Manus dislocatus introrsum, digitos flectere nequit, cum Manus di^^oc^tu^
int^orsum and e^t^o^s^m.
extrorsum dislocatur, digitos non potest extendere.

When the hand is dislocated inwardly, the fingers cannot bow, when it is
dislocated outwardly the fingers cannot extend.

Mandibuloe dislocatio si celeriter suppeditetur and symptomatibus Mandibuloe
dislocatio.
destituatur, in duodecim diebus curatur, sed si symptomatibus coniuncta sit,
periculosa fit.

A dislocation in the iawe is fully cured in twelve days, if it be taken
speedily in hand and void of accidents: but if any accidents do happen, it is
dangerous.

Vertebrae si dislocantur, semper periculosum, saepe lethale Vertebr^r^m
dislocatio.
est.

A dislocation in any of the vertebres, is always and for the most part
deadly.

Humeri dislocatio in xx. diebus restauratur. Humeri dislocatio.


A dislocation in the shoulder bones is restored in xx. days.

Digiti dislocati in xij. diebus curantur. Digiti dislocatio.


A dislocation in the fingers is restored in xii. days.

Coxa dislocata in xxx. diebus restituitur. Coxa dislocata.


Dislocations in the hippe are restored in xxx. days.

In calce, tarso, and pedum digitis, dislocatio non penitus In calce tarso and
pedum digitis dislocatio.
donec xl. dies praetereant, firmatur.

A dislocation in the heel, insteppe and toes, is not restored in such sort
as the patient may go upon it, until xl. days be ended.

Dolor a quatuor causis mouetur, viz. ab incisione, erosione Dolor.
membri, alicuius fractura, and distentione; vt in apostemate.

The causes of pain are four, as incision, corrosion, breaking of some
member, and distention as by impostumation.

E
AB erysipelate putredo and suppuratio malum. Putredo aut suppuratio ab
erysipelate.


Putrefaction and suppuration coming of Erysipelas, is evil.

Ab exterioribus si vertitur ad interiora malum, ab interioribus autem ad
exteriora, bonum.

If Erysipelas do go from the outer to the inner parts, it is evil, but
contrariwise it is good.

Erysipelas exquisitum raro terminatur suppuratione, sed Erysipelas exquisitum.
magna ex part insensibili transpiratione, seu resolutione.

A perfect Erysipilas is seldom cured by suppuration, but for the most parts
by insensible transpiration, and resolution.

Erysipelata circa caput, curatu sunt difficillima, ad^oque Erysipelas circa
caput.
periculosa esse solent; vt nisi efficax consequatur auxilium, interdum
affectos strangulent.

Erysipelas about the head is hard to be cured, and it is so dangerous, that
if it be not speedily helped with most excellent medicines, it sometime
ch^keth the patient.

Symptoma pra^^m est, si osse nudato ca^o circu^stans ab Erysipelate occupari
videatur.

The bone being bare, if Erysipilas be in the flesh round about, it is a very
evil accident.

In curatione erysepelatis quatuor scopis est vtendum. Erysipelatis curatione
scopi quatuor.


In the curing of erysipelas, there are four rules to be observed*

Primus scopus consistit in vitae recta institutione, atque

The first rule consists in the right ordering of life, and observing of
diet.

Secundus, humoris ad partem affectam co^fluentis (quem

The second consists in the turning away of the humor flowing to the affected
part (which they call the antecedent matter.)

Tertius in humoris, qui iam in partem aegram influxit,

The third consists in the euacuation of the humor, which has already
flowed (...) the affected part (called the matter conjoined.)

Quartus circam symptomatum correctionem, ac propu^sionem

The fourth consists in the correction and expulsion of accidents.

F.
FIstula est vlcus concauum, sordidum, latum inferi^^s, Fistula*
and strictum exterius, quod modo clauditur and modo aperitur.

A fistula is a hollow and filthy ulcer, broad within, and narrow without,
which sometime shuts, and sometime opens.

In pulmonibus fistulae aegre vel nunquam curantur. In pulmonibus.


Fistulaes in the lungs, are hard or never cured.

In stomacho, intestinis, and vesica aegre vel nunquam curantur In stomacho
intestinis and vesica.
fistulae.

Fistulaes in the stomach, small guts and bladder, are hardly or never
cured.

In oculis, faucibus, ventre, sede, and iuncturis aegre sanantur In oculis,
faucibus, ventre, sede and inncturis.
fistulae.

Fistulaes in the eyes, jaws, belly, fundament, and joints, are hard to be
cured.

Fistulae in partibus carnosis procul dubio curantur, tametsi Partibus carnos^^
foramina multa appareant.

Fistulaes in fleshy parts are undoubtedly to be cured, although many holes do
appear.

Fistula lachrymalis est difficilis curationis propter oculi Fistula
lachrymalis.
propinquitatem and sensibilitatem, and inueterata, vix curatur, ob magnam
carnis duritiem.

The lachrimall fistulae is hard to be cured, by reason of the vicinitie and
sensibility of the eye, and being old, it is scarsely ever cured, by reason of
the great hardness of the flesh.

Si fistula fuerit in carne, sanies est alba, si in osse, est sicut In carne,
osse, and neruo.
lotura carnis, si in neruo, est nigri coloris.

If the fistulae be in the flesh, the matter is white, if it be in the bone, it
is like washing of*flesh, if in the sinew, it is black in color.

Si ad os, vel cartilaginem, vel neruum, vel musculos, vel In osse,
cartilagine, neruo, musculis, thorace, vulua grandibus ve^is and arterijs.
thoracem, vel vuluam, vel ad grandes venas, arteriasque penetrauerit: semper
periculosum, saepe pesti^erum est.

If a fistulae pearce either to the bone, cartilage, sinewe, muscles, matrice,
or small ^eyues and arteries, it is always dangerous, oftentimes pestiferous.

Si fistula fuerit in aliquo loco cuius sinus penetrat ad oculos, vt iuxta
nasum, incurabilis est, quia nec incisionem, nec aliquam medicinam ibi
administra^e possumus, propter teneram substantiam oculorum.

A fistulae in any place that has his passage to the eyes, as beside the nose,
is incurable, because we can neither make incision, nor minister thereto any
medicine, by reason of the tender substance of the eyes.

De fracturis ossium. F.
FRactura cranij magna, aegre persanatur. Cranij fractura.


A great fracture in the skull is hard to be cured.

In fractura cranij febris acuta, spasmus, tremor, alienatio Signa mortalia in
fractura cranij.
mentis, syncope, vocis abscisio, rubedo, and tenebrositas oculorum, timorosa
and mortalia signa, praecipue si maneant and non remittantur.

A sharp fever, crampe, trembling, alienation of the mind, sounding, loss of
speech, redness and darkness of the eyes, are fearful and deadly signs in
a fracture of the skull, especially if they remain still, and vanish not.

Denigratio durae matris quae non mundificatur cum Durae matris deuigratio.
melle, significat mortem.

If the blacknes of Dura matter cannot be mundified with honey, it is death.

Tumor magnus in fractura cranij, praecipue si cito euanuerit Tumor magnus in
fractura cranij.
sine causa rationabili, malum.

A great tumor in the fracture of the skull is evil, especially if it vanish
soon away without a reasonable cause.

Tumor paruus and saniei bona digestio, bonum. Tumor paruus.


A small tumor with a good digestion of the matter is good.

Caro rubra in consolidatione cranij, bonum. Caro rubra.


Red flesh in the consolidation of the skull is good.

Signa cranij fracti sunt, contusio magna, separatio cutis Signa cranij fracta.
ab ossibus, apoplexia, vertigo, vocis destruction, sonus rancus percusso capite
cum virga, stridor dentium filum retinentium dum perc^titur filum, humiditas
per fis^uram pullulans retento anhelitus.

The signs of the skull being broken, are these, a great contusion, a
separating of the skin from the bone, apoplery; giddiness, destruction of
the voice, a hoarse sound being stricken with a rod upon the head, g^^shing
of the teeth* holding a thread betwixt them when the thread is stricken,
moisture coming out by the ri^t when the breath is holden.

Craneo fracto patiens se multas candelas videre putat, saepe nisi sustineatur
cadit, non v^^ro intuetur lucem, neque pannum dis^^r^^ fu^^^rt.

The skull being broken, the patient thinks that he sees many candles, he
falls often if (...) not holden, he cannot endure to behold the light,
neither can he suffer a cloth to be torn.

Sanguis si inter cranium and meningem inciderit ad putredinem Sanguis inter
cranium and meningem.
vertit, nec non symptomata nociua adfert.

If blood fall between the skull and hard membrane, it will turn to
putrefaction, and bring evil accidents.

Sanguis si fluxerit per nares, aures vel os, post casum, vel Signa partium
intestinorum laesionis.
ictum, laesam esse aliquam partem internam necesse est, quanquam fractura vel
ossis depressio extra non appareat.

If blood issue foorthby the nostrilles, cares, or mouth, after a fall or
stroke, it must needs be that some inward part be hurt, although the fracture
or depression of the bone appear not outwardly.

Fractura cranij in plenilunio est verenda.

A fracture of the skull in the full of the moon is to be feared.

In fractura cranij, terminus ad centum dies, vel secundum alios, ad 46.

A fracture in the skull is cured in a hundred days, or as some say in 46.

Cubitus firmatur plurimum diebus. 30. Cubid fractura.


A fracture in the cubit is for the most part cured in thirty days.

Brachium and tibia si rite curentur diebus circiter 40. occalescunt. Brachium
and Tibia.


Fractures in the arm or leg, if they be rightly cured, are confirmed in 40.
days.

Costa post vnum and vigesimum diem ferrumen implet. Costa.


A fracture in a ribbe, is in 21. days souldred.

Corporibus macilentis fracturae perbelle sanantur. Corporibus macilentis
fracturae. Florescente inuentute fracturae.


Fractures in lean bodies are easy to be cured.

Florescente iuuentute fracturae modico negotio cura^tur.

Fractures in flourishing youth are easy to be cured.

Quaecunque fracturae ijs insunt corporibus quibus requies Corporibus requiem
habentibus.
benigna conceditur facile admittunt curationem.

Fractures in those bodies that may rest, are easy to be cured.

Fracturaeomnes iuncturis vicinae aegre solidantur. Circa iuncturas.


A fracture near the joint is heart to be cured.

Os frustatim comminutum difficile coalescit. Os frustatim co^minutum.


A bone broken all to shiuers is hardly cured.

Os in naribus perfractum december dierum spatio consolidescit. Narium fractura.


A fracture in the nostrilles does consolidate within the space of ten days.

Fractura quae cum dolor, vel inflammatione, aut carnis Cum dolor
infla^matione, aut carnis contusione.
contusione incidit mala est.

A fracture with pain, infla^mation or confusion of the flesh, is evil.

Fractura in decrepitis and cholericis, ac ijs vicissim qui sero In decrepitis
and cholericis.
aegrotabunt, cura longa commoratur.

Fractures in old and choleric persons, and those especially which are sick
toward night, are hard to be cured.

Fractura per longum interuallum non restituta aegre curatur. Fractura
inueterata.


A fracture long vnrestored, is hardly after cured.

Fractura transuersim os secans, perfacilis curationis. Transuersim os secans.


A fracture overthwart the bone is easy of curation.

Fractura symptomatis priuata facile curatur. Symptomatis priuaca.


A fracture without accidents, is easy to be cured.

Fere intra 14. and 21. diem sanescunt, maxilla, iugulum, scapula, Maxilla,
iugulum, scapula, os tali, calx, manus, and planta.
os tali, calx, manus, planta.

A fracture in the iawe, cannell bone, shoulder blade, hecle, hand, and middle
of the foot, is commonly cured within 14. or 21. days.

Inter 27. and 40. diem humeri and foemora sanescunt. Humeri and foemora.


Fractures in the arm and thigh, are cured between 27. and 40. days.

Coxa diebus quinquaginta coalescit. Coxa.


The Hippe is restored in fifty days.

Pes sexaginta dierum spatio, si quiescat, consanescat. Pes.


A fracture in the foot, if it may have rest, is cured in 60. days.

Fractura vlnae vel radij, si per se contingat, amborum Vlnae vel radij.
comminutione pericu losior est.

If one of the bones of the arm be broken only, it is more dangerous than
the breaking of them both together.

Fracto membro applicanda sunt doloris sedatiua and apostemationis Medicamina
fracto membro applicata.
remouentia.

The medicines which are applied to fractures ought to assuage pain, and
remove impostumation.

Frigus, conuulsiones, tetanos, denigrationes, rigores febriles Frigus.
efficit.

Cold causes Cramps, stiffness of the sinews, blackness and feuerous
shiuerings.

Frigus inimicum est ossibus, neruis, cerebro and dorsali medullae.

Cold hurts the bones, the sinews, the brain, and the marrowe of the back.

Frigida sistunt sanguinem posita iuxta parts sanguinolentas.

Cold things do stay blood, being laid nigh the bloody parts.

G
GAngraena difficulter curatur, and si transit in sphacelum, non nisi per
sectionem sanatur.

Gangraena is hard to be cured, and if it turn to Sphacelus, it cannot be
cured but by incision.

Si carnem and neruum vsque ad os laedat, non curatur.

If Gangraena hurt the sinews and flesh even to the bone, it is incurable.

H
HAemorrhagia prouenit aut per abundantiam, aut erosionem Vnde prouenit.
vasorum.

Flux of blood comes either by abundance, or by corroding of the vessels.

Haemorrhagia quae prouenit propter debilitatem cerebri Propter debilitatem
cerebri.
vix aut nunquam curatur.

Flux of blood which comes by weakness of the brain, is hard or never
cured.

Haemorrhagia e naribus quae extendit se vltra libras quatuor Haemorrhagioe e
naribus quantitas.
est mala, and si vltra octo, est pessima, and si extendit se vsque ad xx. vel
xxiiij. vltra viuere non potest.

Bleeding at the nose, if it exceed four pound is evil, and if it come to
eight it is most bad, and if it extend to twenty or four and twenty pound,
he cannot live any longer.

Haemorrhagia quae ducit ad colorem pallidum aut viridem, Ducens ad colorem
pallidu^ aut viridem aut liuidum aut fuscum.
aut liuidum, aut fuscum, pessima est and mortalis.

Bleeding which changes the color to be pale, green, swartish, or sallowe,
is very evil and deadly.

Haemorrhagia ducens ad syncopem, and si sit cum frigiditate Ducens ad syncopem.
extremitatum est mortalis.

Flux of blood which causes sownding, is deadly: or if it be with coldness
of the outward parts, it is also deadly.

Haemorrhagia quae venit subito and cum impetu, est mala, Haemorrhagia subito
accidens.
si vero contingit cum alleuatione patientis, est bona.

Bleeding at nose that comes sodeinly and vyolently, is evil: but if the
patient be lightened by it, it is good.

Haemorrhagia narium menstruis deficientibus, bonum. Menstruis deficientibus
prodest.


Bleeding at the nose is profitable to them which want menstrua.

Sanguis e naribus profluens, and aluus turbida, tollit surditatem. Tollit
surditatem.


Bleeding at the nose and loosenes of the belly, takes away deaffnes.

Haemorrhagia in Haemorrhoidibus bonum. Haemor^hoydibus valet.


Bleeding at the nose to them that have the Hemorhoydes, is very good.

Conuulsio ab hemorrhagia lethale. Conuulsio ab haemorrhagia.


The Crampe coming after flux of blood is deadly.

Fluxus haemorrhoidalis si sit temperatus, facit multa iuuamenta, and
praeseruat a multis a gritudinibus melancholicis Aegritudines a quibus ^lu^us
haemorrhoidalis praeseruat, temperatus tamen.
adustis, and corruptis, sicut est mania, melancholia, pleuresis, lepra,
morphea, hydropisis, ptisis, malum mortuum, quartana, passio splenis, etc.

If the flux of the Hemorhoydes be temperat, it brings many commodities, and
preserves the body from adustion of humors: and many melancholic and corrupt
diseases, as Madness, Melancholte, Plurisie, Leprosy, Morphewe, Dropsy,
^tisicke, Malum morbum, a quartaine Agewe, diseases of the Spleen, and such
like.

Si ^luant vltra temperamentum, omnes praedictas aegritudines Fluxus
haemor^hoydalis intemperatus.
generant.

If the Hemrhoydes do slow beyond the measure of the constitution, it
brings all the aforesaid diseases.

Fluxus Hemorrhoidum temperatus cognoscitur cum Fluxus haemorrhoydum temperati
cognitio.
sentiunt se alleuatos and melius comedentes.

The temperate flux of the Hemrhoydes is known when the patient feels him
somewhat light and eased withal, and has a good appetite to his meat.

Cum autem sentiunt se grauiores, cum malitia appetitus, Fluxus haemorrhoydum
superflu^ cognitio.
and cum foedo color, tunc iam superfluit fluxus, quare statim constringendus
est.

But when the patient feels himself sad and heavy, with naughty appetite,
and filthy color, it is a sign that the flux has passed the just
temperature: and therefore it ought to be stayed presently.

Hemorrhoides curant melancholiam and nephrtiicam Melancholiam and neph^eticam
passionem curant. Fluxus antiquus.
passionem.

The Hemorrhoydes do cure melancholy and pain of the back.

Si fluxus haemorroidum sit antiquus non omnes subito restringantur, sed vna
remaneat aperta.

If flux of the Hemorrhoyd veins has continued long, they ought not all to
be suddenly stayed, but one must be left open.

Curati citius pereunt, non curati, i. paliati longo tempore Cura.
viuunt.

They that be cured of the Hemorrhoydes of long continuance do dye soon, but
if they be not cured but kept open, they live long.

Hernia carnosa raro aut nunquam sine incisione curatur.

Hernia carnosa is hard or never cured without incision.

Hernia ventosa cruciatus ingentes febrimque excitat, and nisi accurate
respicitur periculosa valde est.

Hernia ventosa brings great torments, and a Fever, and except the carefully
looked unto, it is very dangerous.

Hernia aquosa si semel testem humore suo vilescit, difficile aut nunquam
absque incisione medetur.

Hernia aquosa, if once the humor has defiled the testicle, it is hardly or
never cured without incision.

Hernia varicosa propter varices inflatas and circa testiculam incrassatas
difficillime absque incisione sanatur.

Hernia varicosa by reason of the swelled veins that are puffed up, and
thickened about the testicle, is hard to be cured without incision.

Hernia zirbialis inueterata raro aut nunquam sine incisione curatur.

Hernia zirbialis of long continuance, is hardly or never cured without
incision.

Hernia intestinalis in senibus difficile curatur.

Hernia intestinalis in old persons is hard to be cured.

Hernia humoralis inueterata testem putrescit, ideoque non nisi per incisionem
curatur.

Hernia humoralis of continuance does putrify the testicle, therefore it can
not be cured without incision.

Hernia inguinalis saepenumero in apostemationem degenerat, in fine quoque si
non celeriter succuratur, in fistulam vel vlcus cancrosum vadit.

Hernia inguinalis turns oftentimes into impostumation, and in the end, if it
be not speedely cured, it either becomes to be a fistula, or a canckrous
ulcer.

Hernia saniosa difficillime nisi in principio auxiliatur, quoniam materia eius
venenosa, non solum vnum testiculum in quo oritur, verum etiam alteru^
corrumpit.

Hernia saniosa is hardly cured, except it be taken in time, for the poisoned
matter therein contained, does not only corrupt the testicle which it began
in, but also put^^fieth the other.

Hernia zirbialis, intestinalis and ventosa, semper si tempestiue accipiantur,
victus ratione and ligatura conuenienti aut leuantur aut penitus sanantur.

Hernia zirbialis, intestinalis and ventosa, are always eased or cured by
trusses, in time, and by good diet.

Hernia ventosa medicamentis calefacientibus and slatum discutientibus curatur.

Hernia ventosa is cured by medicines warming and dissoluing wind.

Hernia aquosa per actuale cauterium inter bursam and testiculum optime curatur.

Hernia aquosa is best cured by an actual cautery between the codde and the
testicle.

Omnis hernia initio, praesertim in pueris facillime curatur.

Every rupture in the beginning, especially in children, is easy to be cured.

Omnis hernia cum dolor ac inguinum tumore difficile curatur.

Every rupture with pain and swelling of the flancks, is hard to be cured.

Hernia cum Hydrope let hale est.

A rupture with a dropsey is deadly.

Hernia nulla per incisionem, sine vnius testiculi amissione curatur.

There is no rupture cured by incision, but that one of the testicles is taken
away.

Hernia vltra septem dies, antiquata appellatur, quoniam tunc labia vulneris
interius indurata sunt.

A rupture after seven days is called old, because then the lips of the
breach in wardly are hardened.

Relaxatio sine incisione in principio facile curatur.

A relaxation is easily cured in the beginning without incision.

Relaxatio facilius quam hernia completa curatur.

A relaxation is easier cured then a rupture complete.

Differentia inter relaxationem and rupturam hoc modo cognoscitur, si aliquis
stet supra pedes suos and impellat anhelitum versus inferiora, si de facili
tunc descendant intestina inferius, ruptus est, si non, relaxatus est.

The difference between a relaxation and a rupture, is thus known, let him
that doubts, by reason of some strain, whether he be broken or no, stand
upon his feet, and force his breath toward the inferior parts, if then the
entrails do easily descend downwards, he is broken, if not, he is but
relaxed.

Lues venerea se omnibus coniungit aegritudinibus, aegritudinesque Lues venerea.
omnes in genere secum associat.

Lucs vencrea joins with all diseases, and all diseases do join with it.

Lucs venerea con^agiosa est, si cum mulieribus immundis coitu accidit.

This disease is contagious, if it chances through carnal copulation with
unclean women.

Causa antecedens est quando humores per malignitatem, Causa anteccdens.
and morbi contagiosi venenosam qualitatem corripiuntur.

The antecedent cause is, when the humors are defiled by the malignitie and
venomous quality of the disease being contagious.

Causa primitiua est coitus cum mulieribus immundis atque Causa primitiua.
foedis, pustulas venenosas in vtero habentibus.

The primitive cause of this disease, is carnal company with unclean and
filthy women, having venomous pustles in their secret parts.

Postquam lues venerea in secretis partibus oritur, adeo venenosa est, vt per
totum corpus transit, a capite ad pedes.

After lues venerea has begun in the secret parts, it is so venomous, that it
spreads through the whole body, from the head to the foot.

Sanguis in lue venerea vniuersaliter corrumpitur, ideoque Producit, pustulas,
scabies venenosas squamasque c^ustosas.
pustulas, scabies venenosas, squamasque crustosas producit.

In lues venerea the blood is corrupted through the whole body, and so
produces pustles, venomous scabbes, and crusty scales.

In luis venereae curatione, neque anodina, neque paliatiua Quae medicine
fugienda sunt in luis vene^cae curatione. Lentigines.
medicamenta adhibeantur.

In the cure of lues venerea, neither asswaging, nor palliatiue medicines are
to be used.

Lentigines sunt infectiones cutis faciei, vt plurimum, and aliquando cutis
totius corporis.

Freckles are infections (for the most part) of the skin of the face, and
sometimes of the skin of the whole body.

In lentiginibus si corpus fuerit vniuersaliter multum repletum I en^i^i^^^ in
co^po^en ^^tum rep^^^o.
siat phlebotomia de basilica.

In a sreckled body, if the body be much replete universally, it is good to
open the basilica vein.

Si autem non fuerit tanta repletio, and infectio fuerit in toto Si sue^t in to
to corpore, si in facie.
corpore fiat de Mediana, and si in facie fiat de Cephalica.

But if there be no such repletion, and the infection be through the whole
body, then open Mediana: but if it be only in the face open Cephalica.

Scarificationes in tibijs, aut inter spatulas, aut sub mento Bona vtenda in
lentige^^bus.
multum valent in lentiginibus.

For freckles, scarifications of the legs, or betwixt the shoulderblades, or
under the chinne, do greatly profit.

Lepra est morbus consimilis corrumpens figuram and formam, Lepra.
and compositionem membrorum and finaliter soluens continuum, proueniens de
materia melancholica sparsa per totum corpus.

The Leprosy is a disease of like manners, corrupting the figure, form and
composition of the members: and finally making breach of continuitie, it
comes of melancholic matter dispersed through the whole body.

Lepra postquam venit ad manifestam corruptionem formae Lepra ad manifestam
corruptionem accedens.
and figurae non curabitur, sed vitam prolongare possumus, and impedire cu^
medicaminibus, ne materia venenosa and melancholica, ad cor and membra
principalia vadat.

After that the Lepro^e comes to manifest corruption of the form and figure,
it is incurable: but we may prolong life, and hinder by medicines that the
venomous and melancholic matter come not to the heart and principal members.

Lepra incipit primo ab interioribus, and postea manifestabitur Leprae initiu^.
in facie and extremitatibus, and iterata reuertitur ad interiora; and tunc est
mors, quia membra nobilia ruinam sustinere non possunt.

The Leprosy begins first from the inward parts, and after is discerned in
the face and outward parts, and being renewed turns to the inward parts
again; and then comes death, because the principal members cannot sustain
ruin.

Lippitudo obesis corporibus and aetate confectis sine aliquo Lippitudo.
incomodo nunquam curatur.

Blear^dnes in fat and old persons is never cured without a discommoditie.

M
De Medicamentis.
MEdicamina calida corporibus siccis macilentisque applicata Medicamina (...).
calorem humiditatemque naturalem extingunnt.

Hot medicines applied to dry and lean bodies, do extiuguish natural heat
and moisture.

Desiccantibus non indigent quatuor haec, viz. vlcus contusum, Desiccantibus
non indigent 4. hac.
distractum, dolorosum, and apostemosum.

These four noede no desiccatiues: that is to say, an ulcer with contusion, an
ulcer with distracted lips, an ulcer with pain or impostumation.

Nimis infrigidantia, vlcera nigri coloris, and cerulei reddunt. Infrigidantia
nimia.


Excessive cooling medicines do cause vleets to be black and blew of color.

Incarnatiua abstergere minime debent. Incarnantia.


Incarnatiues ought not to wipe.

Incarnantia antequam mundificandi vim habent, applicata, supers^uam
carnositatem generant.

Intarnatiues used before mundi^^catiues, do cause proud flesh.

Quae ad inijciendum conueniunt necesse habent vt cum Ad (...) n^unt.
melle rosarum, allumine, lixiuioque vel aqua marina, quoniam talia
obscoenitatem absumunt and humorem defendunt, conficiantur.

Medicines convenient for iniections must be made with Mel rosarum, Alume,
Lee, or salt water, because they take away filthy matter, and defend the
humor.

Medicamina locis neruosis, venosis, and arteriosis, vel circa Locis, ne^^osi^
ven^sis and ar^er^sis vel circa tes^^culos medicamina applicata.
testiculos applicanda, ob earum partium sensibilitatem facillima sint oportet,
sed super ligamenta fortiora possint applicari.

Those medicines which are applied to sinewie, veynie, and arterious places, or
about the testicles, ought to be gentle by reason of the sensibilitie of those
parts: but about the ligaments stronger may be used.

In carne vlcerata si peracutus sit sensus, cauendum a causticis Carne ^^^rat^
cum sensu per^cu^^.
and ab omnibus peracutis medicamentis.

In vlcerated flesh, if there be most sharp sense, take heed of Causticke
and all sharp medicines.

Corpora imbecilla atque loca sensibilia leaves medicinas Corpora imbecilla
atque loca sensibilia.
applicari quaerunt.

Weak bodies and tender places do require soft and gentle medicines.

Medicamina vnctuosa minime conueniunt, nisi aliorum Medicamina vn^tno^a.
acuitatum auferendi causa.

Unctuous medicines are not convenient, except for the taking away of others
sharpnes.

Medicamen incarnans desiccare quoque oportet ac aliquantum Medicam^^ incarna^s.
excedere natural membri temperamentum.

An incarnatiue medicine ought also to dry, and somewhat to exceed the
natural temperature of the member.

Concaui vlceris cura per exiccationem and mundificationem Concaui vlceris cura.
aggreditur.

A hollow ulcer is cured by exiccatiues and mundificatiues.

Medicamina exiccantia teneris humidisque corporibus Medicamina exiccantia.
consentiunt.

Exiccatiue medicines are expedient for tender and moist bodies.

Membra humida magna exiccatione non egent. Membra humida.


Moist members need not great drying.

Desiccantia and cicatrizantia, non autem mollificantia, vlceribus Medicinae
quoe conueniunt vlceribus mulie^u^ in partibus pudibundis.
mulierum, in partibus pudibundis, conueniunt.

Desiccatiue and cicatrizing medicines are convenient for ulcers about the
priuities of women: and not mollificatiues.

Exiccantia admittit sanies tenuis and acuta* e contra crassa Sanies tenuis and
acuta, crassa and densa.
and densa abstergentia.

Thin and sharp matter requires exiccatiues: and contrarily thick and
gross, abstersiues.

Vlceribus conferentia tum exiccare tum abstergere debent. Vlceribus
conferentia.


Those medicines which do both dry and wipe are most expedient for ulcers.

Digerentia vulneribus detritis in primis, posteaque quae Vulneribus detritis
quae vtenda sunt.
mundificandi vim habent adhibeantur.

Digestiues must first of all be used to bruised wounds, and afterward
mundificatiues.

Incarnantia vulneribus concauis ante ea quae consolident Vulneribus concauis.
expediunt.

Incarnatiues are expedient to be used in hollow wounds before consolidatiues.

Quaecunque per triduum nihil valent, adhibita, postquam Nota generalis.
reijcienda.

Those medecines which in three days compass prevail nothing, are afterward
to be rejected.

Melancholia aut spargitur ad totum corpus, aut ad partem: Melancholia quomodo
corpus excitat. Feb* melanchol. Lepra. Morph^^.
si ad totum, aut putrefit aut non: si putrefiat, tum generatur febris
melancholica: si non putrefiat, tunc aut mittitur ad carnem aut cutem; si ad
carnem, generat Lepram, si ad cutem, morpheam.

Melancholy is either dispersed thorough the whole body, or to part thereof:
if it be sent to the whole body, it does either putrify, or not: if it
putrify, then it causes a melancholic Fever: if it do not putrify, then it
is sent either to the flesh, or to the skin; if it be sent to the flesh, it
engenders the Leprosy; if it be sent to the skin, it causes the morphew.

Melancholia est matter caecitatis, apoplexiae, spasmi and Caecitatem apoplexiam
spasmum and furorem excitat.
furoris.

Melancholy is the mother of blindness, apoplexy* cramps, and madness.

Melancholiae signa sunt metus and tristitia. Melancholiae signa.


The signs of melancholy are fear and sadness.

Membri alicuius amputatione tria praecipue sunt consideranda. Membri
amputatione considerationes.


In the cutting off of any member, three things are chiefly to be considered.

Primo, vt fiat sine dolor incisio. ^


First, that the incision be made without pain.

Secundo, vt sanguinis vitetur fluxus. ^


Secondly, that flux of blood may be eschued.

Tertio, vt cauterizetur sieve actualiter, sieve potentialiter, ^
tam exiguo cum dolor vt art inueniri queat.

Thirdly, that the cautery either actual or potentiall be done with as little
pain as may be devised by art.

Morphea est cutis defoedatio maculosa. Morphea.


The Morphewe is a spotty filthiness of the skin.

Si morphea fuerit nouella, curabilis est, si antiqua, incurabilis Vtrum
morphea sit cura
est: vel cum magna difficultate. bilis aut incurabilis.


If the Morphew be of small continuance, it is curable, but if it be of long
continuance, it is hardly or never cured.

Si morphea occupauerit modicum spatium, curabilis est, si magnum, difficilis.

If the Morphew be contained in small space, it is curable, but if it spread
very far, it is hard to be cured.

Si locus morpheatus pungatur cum acu in superficie cutis, ita vt non
profundetur vltra cutem and sanguis exierit, curabilis est, si autem aquositas,
incurabilis est, aut cum magna difficultate.

If the place that is affected with the Morphewe be pricked with a needle in
the upper part of the skin (so that it go not past the skin) and that the
blood does issue out, it is curable, but if moisture come forth, it is hard or
never cured.

In morphea a principio, sanguine dominante aut corpore Phlebotomia in morphea.
plethorico existente, materiaque morpheae in venis adhuc remanente been potest
fieri phlebotomia, sed postquam notabiliter apparet extra, and aegritudo sit
confirmata, nullo modo adhibeatur, quia materia traheretur ab externis ad
interiora.

In the Morphewe, bloudletting may well be used, at the beginning when blond
does abound, or in a body full of evil humors, and the matter of the Morphewe
remaining yet in the veins, but after it does manifestly appear outwardly,
and that the disease be confirmed, bloudletting may in no wise be used, because
the matter thereby would be drawn from the outward parts inwardly.

Membrorum durities a tribus casibus euenit, nempe a calore nimio, ab humorum
coagulatione and a repletione.

There be three causes of hardness in any member, as great heat, the
impaction of humors coagulated, and fullness.

Cognita, and vsu ac ratione probata, remedia, ignotis ac nunc primum inuentis
sunt praeponenda.

Those medecines which are known and approved both by reason and experience,
are to be preferred before those which are unknown, and but newly invented.

Non verbis sed remedijs conuenienter vsurpatis restituitur sanitas.

Health is not restored by words, but by medecines conue mently used.

Scientia sine experientia haud magnam medico apud aegrum fiduciam conciliat.

Knowledge without practice, wins to the Physician small credit of his
Patient.

Praxis est operatio, theoriae regulis and legibus co^fentiens.

Practice is an operation agreeable to the rules and laws of Theoricke.

Artifex qui magnum aliquid and laud dignum praestare vult, in notitiam
proprij subiecti diligenter debot incumbere.

That workman which would show some great things that is praise-worthie, let
him diligently apply himself to the knowledge of his proper subject.

Boni medici officium est morbum sanare, aut certe in meliorem statum, and eum,
quem natura fert, deducere.

It is the office of a good artist to heal the disease, or to bring it into a
better state, and that which agrees to nature.

Qui artis operibus, doctisque de art lectionibus frequens non interfuit:
hocque solo, quod multa legerit, se pro nobili chirurgo venditat, long
fallitur, and impudens est.

He that has not been conversant in the works of the Art, nor at the Lectures
of the learned, but esteems himself for an excellent Surgeon, by this only,
that he has read many things, is far deceived, and very impudent.

Nihil vnquam laud dignum praestabit qui sibi auro non vsu chirurgicum
magisterium parauerit.

He shall never perform any thing worthy praise, which obtains the degree
of a Surgeon by money, and not by use.

Medicos and chirurgos subinde mutare, aegris raedium non leuamen est.

To change often the Physicians and Chirurgions, is a burdening, and not a
lightning to the Patient.

Etsi in longum tempus se morbus protrahat, non est tamen quod se ab aegro
medi^cus distrahat.

Although the disease continue a long time, yet it is not for the Physician to
withdraw himself from the Patient.

Magna magnorum vasorum vulnera lethalia censentur.

Great wounds in the great vessels, are esteemed deadly.

Vt morbi sic remedij species esse debet.

As the kinds of the disease are, so ought the kinds of the remedies to be.

Ossise palato abscessus putroris insert periculum.

The swelling of the bone out of the palate, brings danger of putrefaction.

Haemorthagiam calor incitat, frigus refraenat.

Heat moves bleeding at the nose, but cold restrayneth the same.

Quibus vlcera in cruribus sunt, hos neque ambulare, neque stare, neque sedere,
sed in lecto quiescere oportet.

They that have ulcers in their legs, must neither walk, stand, nor sit, but
lie in their bed.

Mordacia and acria omnia medicamina mundis vlceribus sunt infensa.

All manner sharp and biting medecines are hurtful to clean ulcers.

Austro flante vulneratorum membrorum prompta est syderatio.

When the Southern wind blows, the parts are more disposed to
putrefaction.

Vlcera rotunda nisi in aliam figuram deducta fuerint non facile coalescunt.

Round ulcers, except they be reduced into another figure, are hardly cured.

Vlcus erysipelatosum purgationem per inferiora postulat.

An ulcer with Erysipelas requires purging by the inferior parts.

Nemini nisi abdominoso tristitia prodest.

Sadness is profitable to none, save only to them that are corpulent and foggie.

Ignauia calorem naturalem debilitat and extinguit.

Slothfulness weakneth and extinguisheth natural heat.

Morbi frigidi senibus sunt infensi ac solutu contumaces: inuenibus vero non
ita infesti and rebels.

Cold diseases are hurtful to old men, and very hard to be resolved: but to
young men not so troublesome and rebellious.

O
OEdema vt plurimum terminatur per resolutionem Eius terminatio.
seu exhalationem, raro per suppurationem, saepissime per conuersionem seu
permutationem in nodos and alia apostemata.

Oedema for the most part is cured by resolving or euaporation, seldom by
suppuration, and very often by turning or changing into knots or other
impostumes.

Quandiu lippa est aquosa and subtilis, aegritudo est in principio, Principium.
and cum incipit ingrossari and dealbari tunc est in augmento, and cum lippa
est multa, claudens palpebras, Augmentum. Status.
tunc est status: and cum incipit minui, tunc est declinatio: and lippa quae
habet frusta parua est mala, sicut dicit Auicenna.

When the blearednes is watrish and thin, than the dise ase is in the
beginning: and when it waxes thick and white, than it is in the augmentation:
and when the blearednes is great, closing the eylids, than it is in the state;
and when that begins to diminish, than it is in the declining: and
blearednes which has little pieces is evil, as Auicen says.

Opthalmia quae est in hieme cum particularibus concurrentibus Opthalmia in
hieme.
in frigiditate, tardius venit and tardius recedit, and est magis periculosa
propter clausionem pororum.

That Opthalmia which chances in winter with particulars concurring in
coldness, happens slowly and goes away slowly, and is more dangerous by
reason of the shutting of the pores.

Illa autem quae est in aestate, citius venit and citius recedit. Opthalmia in
aestate.


That Opthalima which is in Summer time, comes sooner, and goes away sooner.

Opthalmia si male curetur malas reliquias dimittit sicut Reliquie opthalmiae.
est macula, pannus, tela, and ita de alijs.

If Opthalmia be not well cured, it leaves behind it evil relics, such as
is the bloody spot, pannicle, web, and such like.

Opthalmia quae antiquatur, in qua non proficiunt medicamina, est pessima inter
omnes, quoniam significatur humor corruptus inuiscatus, corrumpens nutrimentum.

Opthalmia, that is inueterated wherein medicines are not available is the
worst of all, because it signifies a corrupt slimie humor corrupting the
nourishment.

Si panaritio non subito succurritur, corrumpit primam iuncturam digiti, quae
cum osse deperditur and manat ab eo sanies subtilis foetida, quando ad
putredinem deuenit.

If a felon be not speedily helped, it putrifleth the first joint of the
finger, which together with the bone is utterly lost, and when it comes to
putrefaction there flows from it thin stinking matter.

Infrigidantia a principio sunt applicanda ad confirmationem Medican i^a qua
panant^^ sunt applicanda a (...)
prohibendam, sed post principium eorum vsus inculcat materiam, and auget
dolorem.

Cold things must be applped in the beginning to hinder the confirming of the
grief, but the use of them after the beginning, impacteth the matter and
increases the pain.

Si videris hoc apostema ad exituram disponi, applica maturantia, and cura eo
modo, quo aliae exiturae curantur.

If you perceive this impostume to grow to a tumor, apply maturatiues, and
cure it in that order as other tumors require.

Verum si dolor intensissimus perseueret, and nullum appareat signum exiturae
futurae, find digitum lateraliter ab vngue vsque ad os, and statim sedabit
dolor.

But if the intolerable pain do remain, and no sign of any tumor appear,
then make incision all along the first joint of the finger hard by the side of
the nail to the very bone, and presently the pain will cease.

Omnes pustulae si negligantur and non mundificentur in In scabiem conuertuntur.
scabiem conuertuntur.

All pustules if they be neglected, and not mundified, they turn into scabbes.

Pustulae si fuerint de causa calida ad impetiginem and serpiginem Decausa
calida ad imperiginem and serpiginem vergunt.
and alia mala accidentia vergunt.

Pustules that come of a hot cause do turn to Impetigo, and Serpigo, and
other evil accidents.

Si autem fuerint de phlegmate post scabiem in fistulam conuertuntur.

Pustules that come of phlegm after the Scabbe do turn to a De phlegmate.
Fistula.

Si fuerint de melancholia difficile curantur. De melancholia.


Pustules that come of melancholy are hard to be cured.

Pustulae liuidae in vlla part corporis emergentes, citoque Pustulae liuidae.
euanescentes malum portendunt.

Pustules that be of swartish color appearing in any part of the body, and
suddenly vanishing away, are a sign of eutll.

Putredo oritur cum vapores humidi in membro includuntur; and ibi adeo impediti
sunt, vt euaporari nequeunt.

Putrefaction comes when moist vapors are included within the member, so as
they cannot cuaporate.

In putredinem humiditas and calor cito transeunt, si non bono regimine
gubernentur.

Moisture and heat being not well governed, will speedily turn to
putrefaction.

Putredo a narcoticis nonnunquam accidit.

Putrefaction is often caused by the application of slupefactiue medicines.

S
De Sanguine.
SAnguis tenuis, totum per corpus non dispersus, externa Sanguis tenuis
sola inflammat, erysipelas nothum generans.

Thin blood not dispersed through the whose body, ^nslameth the outward
parts, causing a bastard Erysipelas.

Sanguis substantia grossus and calidus carbunculos parit. Sanguis grossus and
calidus.


Blood that is gross in substance and hate, causes Carbuncles.

Sanguinis naturalis copia phlegmonem parit. Sanguis naturalis.


Abundance of natural blood causes Biles.

Iudicium de sanguine emisso, ex substantia.
SErum multum tanquam aqua citrina concreto sanguini Serum multum.
innatans, vel potum liberaliorem vel iecur infirmum, vel imbecilles renes vel
eosdem obstructos ostendit.

Much whey like unto yellow water, swimming aloft of congealed blood, shows
either much drinking, or a weak Liver: or weak or stopped kidneyes.

Spuma innatans nisi fluoris impetu nata est, incendium, Spum^
atque feruorem eius humoris monstrat, cuius colorem prae se fert: rubra
quidem, sanguinis; flaua, bilis* alba, pituitae; liuida, melancholiae.

Froth swimming aloft, except it be by the force of the flux, shows burning
and heat of that humor, whose color it bears, as if it be red, it comes
of blood, yellow, of choler, white, of phlegm, swartish, of melancholy.

Sanguinis durescentis color per summa rubicundus, boni Color rub^*cundus.
vtilisque sanguinis est index.

The color of congealed blood being red above, is a sign of good and
profitable blood.

Sanguini innatat nonnunquam pingue quiddam and adiposum Pingued^.
instar telae aranei cohaerens: hoc, si admodum pingue and obesum sit corpus,
ex ipso sanguine causam habet, qui est in adipem pronus. Sin corpus strigosius
sit minusque obesum, idipsum colliquari and marcescere portendit.

There swimmeth sometimes in the blood a certain fatness, cleaving together
like a Spiders web: if the body be very fat, it was caused of such blood,
which is inclined to fatness: but if the body be very lean, the same is a
sign of the withering and decay thereof.

Si diffiso sanguine, grana quaedam arenularum aemula offendantur: Gra^^
arenularum.
aiunt vel elephantiasin vel ad hanc propensionem notari: quanquam
obseruantibus nihil tale deprehensum est.

If in the blood being cut, certain graynes like sand be found, some say it
signifies the Leprosy, or an inclination thereunto, although they that have
observed, have not found it any such thing.

Si sanguinem grave olere (quod rarum est) contigerit, Gra^^ ^lens.
putredinis corruptionisque immensae est inditium.

If it chance that the blood stincketh, which happens seldom, it is a sign of
very great putrefaction and corruption.

Scabies in decrepitis est difficilis curationis aut impossibilis. Scabies in
decrepitis.


The Scab in old age is very hard or impossible to be cured.

Scabies foeda vlceratione foetida, multas parts corporis Scabies foeda cum
vlceratione faetida.
occupans, and corrumpens, habet malam radicem, and approximatur ad malas
aegritudines, and difficilis curationis valde.

A filthy Scab, with stinking vlceration, in many parts of the body
corrupting, has an evil root, and draws near the nature of evil diseases,
being also very hard of curation.

Scabies si fuerit parua, modicam partem corporis occupans, Scabies parua.
sine magna angustia, and non somnum auferens, facile curabitur, and e
contrario contrary.

A small Scab, occupying but a little part of the body, without any great
anguish, and not diminishing sleep, is easily cured, and contrariwise,
contraryly.

De Strumis.
Strumae paruae facilius curantur, magnae difficilius. Strumae paruae and
magnae.


Small wennes are easy to be cured, but great ones are hard.

Strumae mites facile curam recipient, malignae aegre. Strumae mites and
malignae.


Wennes without pain and anguish are easy to be cured, but those which are
froward, will hardly receive curation.

Strumae superficiariae facile sanantur profundoe difficulter. Strumae
superficiariae and profundae. Stru^ae recentes and inuete^a^ae.


Those wennes which sye near the skin are easy to be cured, but those which
lie deep within the flesh, are hard to cure.

Strumae recentes discuti and resolui possunt, inueteratae discuti and resolui
nequeunt.

Wennes of small continuance may be resolved, but those which are inueterated,
can not be resolved.

Dolor and calor ostendunt strumam vel in suppurationem Dolor aut calor.
ire vel in fistulam aut cancrum degenerari.

Pain and heat in a wenne, declares the same either to turn to suppuration,
or else into a Fistulae or Cancker.

Qui breui atque angusta sunt front, and compressa habent Qui stru^^^ obnoxij
su^^.
te^pora, ac maxillas amplas, strumis sunt obnoxij.

They that have a short and narrow forhead, and their temples compassed with
large jaws, are incident to have wennes.

Strumae non facile maturescunt and plerunque iterum iuxta cicatrices ipsas
resurgunt.

Wennes are hardly ripened, and oftentimes they do rise again beside the
cicatrices.

T.
TInea est scabies capitis cu^ squammis and pilorum euulsione, Tinea quid*
and color cinericeo, and odore foetido and aspectu abhominabili.

Tinea, or the skall, is a scabbe of the head, with scales, and falling of the
hear, in color like unto ashes, stinking savor, and in sight abominable.

Tinea si sit recens tamen cum difficultate curatur. Tinea (...)*


A skall if it be new, yet is it hard to be cured.

Si sit antiqua aut nunquam, aut cum labor magno, and in Tinea antiqua*
longissimo tempore; quoniam mala complexio venit ad tantam adaequationem, quod
quasi non accipit curationem, and ideo si curetur raro ibi pili nascuntur and
illa pars semper erit debilior.

If the skall be old, it is never cured, or with great labor, and in long
time, because that evil complexion comes to such equality, that it cannot
almost receive curation, and therefore if it be cured, the hair will seldom
grow in that place again, and that part will be always weaker.

De Tumoribus.

TVmores ex flegmate nati sunt vt plurimum indolentes. Tumores a flegmate.


Tumors that proceed of phlegm, are for the most part without grief.

Tumores de atra bile orti semper dolorosi. Tumores de ^tra bile.


Tumors proceeding of melancholy, are always grievous.

Tumores de flaua bile and sanguine nati nunquam dolor destituuntur. Tumore de
flaua bile and sanguine.


Tumors coming of yellow choler and blood, are never without great pain.

Tumor durus circa testes, cum carnis excretione, difficulter Circa testes
tumor durus.
curatur.

A hard tumor about the testicles, with excretion of the flesh, is hard to be
cured.

Tumor ceruicis promittit salutem in angina. Tumor ceruicis.


A tumor in the throat, betokens health in Angina.

Tumores concocti sunt molles, crudi vero duri. Tumore* molles and dun.


Ripe tumors are soft, but unripe are hard.

V.
De Venae sectione.
TEmpus in quo venae sectio vtenda venit a februario Tempus in quo venae sectio
sit vtenda.
incipit, and rursus a septembri, ad septimum eiusdem perdurans.

The time when letting of blood must be used, begins at February, and again
at September, enduring to the seventh day thereof.

Venam saepius incidere in anno non expedit. Saepe in anno venam incidere.
Obstructiones curat.


It is not good to be let blood often in one year.

In obstructionibus curandis, ante omnia venam secare oportet, etiamsi
plenitudo non adsit.

In the curing of obstructions, letting of blood before all other is to be
used, although there be no fulness.

Quouis tempore and hora mittere sanguinem necessitas Quouis tempore and hora
mittere sanguinem.
concedit and iubet.

If necessity do require, Phlebotomie may be used at any time.

Non dierum numerus sed vnicum virium robur considerandum Fit febribus
continui^.
in sectione venae febrium continuarum.

For Phlebotomie in continual Fevers, not the number of days, but only the
strength of the party is to be considered.

A sanguinis missione abstinendum est vbi sanguis bonus A sanguinis missione
vbi abstinendum.
exiguus est.

Abstain from Phlebotomie where there is but a little good blood.

Venae sectio quaecunque and quouis modo facta aequabiliter Totum corpu^
euacuat.
totum corpus euacuat.

Every manner of letting of blood does equally euatuate the whole body.

Nullus paene morbus, in quo non mittatur sanguis. In omni sere morbo valet.


There is almost no disease wherein Phlebotomie may not be used.

Vehemens febris, vbi rubet corpus venaeque tument, sanguinis Febris vehemens.
detractionem requirit.

A vehement Fever where the body is red and the veins do swell, requires
letting of blood.

Si timide scalpellus dimittatur summam cutem lacerat nec venam incidit.

If Phlebotomy be done fearfully, it does but tear the skin and miss the
vein.

Post longam aegritudinem, cauendum a phlebotomia. A phlebotomia cauendu^.


After long sickness beware of bloodletting.

Tempore calidissimo, and frigidissimo, nullo modo fiat Tempore calidissimo and
frigidissimo.
phlebotomia.

In extremity of wether, hot or cold, Phlebotomie ought in no wise to be
used.

Ver and autumnus sunt tempora aptissima phlebotomiae. Tempus in quo m^ttatur.


The Spring and Autumn are most convenient times for bloodletting.

Aere existente pestilentiali, nubiloso vel turbido aut slante Non secetur vena.
vento australi non secetur vena.

When the air is pestilent, clowdie or troubled, or when the South wind
blows, do not let blood.

In aestate octaua hora et hieme meridies eliga^tur in phlebotomia. Hora
phlebotomie ^ligenda.


In Summer take eight of the Clock, and in Winter, noone, for the hour of
Phlebotomie.

Si luna sit in signo habente aspectum malum ad aliquod Cautela.
membrum non fiat phlebotomia de illo membro.

If the Moon be in any sign, having an evil aspect to any member, do not
let blood on that member.

Ante Phlebotomiam bonum est exercitari, moueri, e^igilari Ante phlebotomiam.
vt sanguis sit mobilior.

Before bloudletting, it is good to be exercised, to move, and to watch,
whereby the blood may be more moveable.

Membrum phlebotomandum est frigandum and calefaciendum, Membrum.
cum aqua calida lauandum, vt vena sit apertior and sanguis fluxibilior.

The member that you will let blood must be chaffed and heated with hot water,
that the vein may be more apparent and the blood more fluent.

Si phlebotomandus est valde debilis comedat prius panem ^^ sit debilis.
and bibat vinum stipticum.

If a weak body must be let blood, let him eat bread and drink stiptick
wine before.

In aestate and vere fiat phlebotomia in part dextra, autumno P^^^ qua sanguis
emi^itur.
and hieme, sinistra.

In the Summer and Spring let blood on the right side, and in Autumn and
Winter on the left.

In materia venenosa debet fieri phlebotomia ex eadem Materia venosa.
part.

In venomous matter let blood on the same side.

Qui annos 60 habent, cephalicam non aperiant. Qui annos 60 habent.


At threescore years let not blood in cephalica.

Qui senes sunt and aegroti edant iuscula and bibant vinum Senes and aegroti.
bonum vna vel altera hora ante sectionem.

Old men and sick persons may eat broth and drink Wine one hour or two
before they be let blood.

Qui facile ac saepe sudant, indigent venae sectione. Qui phlebotomia indigent.
Sectio conin^ta.


They that sweat easily and often need bloudletting.

Sectio consueta non sine periculo praetermittitur.

Accustomed bloudletting may not be let pass without danger.

A sectione cibo vtere bono, ac tenui, vino subtili, vitans Post sectionem.
aquam mulsam, ceruisiam, pisces and quae generant malum sanguinem.

After bloudletting use good meat, thin diet, thin wine, eschew
Honiedwater, Ale, Fish, and those things which engender evil blood.

Sectio venarum no^ vrgente necessitate obest potius quam prodest.

Blood letten without need urging thereunto, does more hurt then good.

De Variolis.
SI variolae fuerint paucae and cito apparentes and quod cito Variolae paucae.
maturentur signa sunt bonae crisis.

If the measels be few in quantity, soon appearing, and that they be soon
ripened, are signs of a good crisis.

Si vergant ad colorem violaceum, aut liuidum, aut viridem Ad colorem
violaccum, liuidum, viridem, aut nigru^ vergentes.
aut nigrum, omnes pessimae and mortales.

If they turn to be blew, or swartish, or green, or black color, they are
very evil and deadly.

Si autem appareat sanies foetida mortale. Sanies foetida.


But if stinking matter do appear, it is deadly.

De vulneribus generalis clocutio.
OMnis solutio facta in membro bonae complexionis, de Membri complexio.
facili curatur, sed cum est in corpore male complexionato de difficili curatur.

Every wound that is made in a member of good complexion is easily cured, but
when it is in an evil complexioned body, it is hardly cured.

Vulnera membrorum radicalium cum deperditione substantiae Vulnera me^brorum
radicalium.
nunquam perfect restaurantur, sed sine deperditione substantiae been possunt
vniri in pueritia, in alijs aetatibus vero non, sed fit porus in circuitu.

Wounds in the radical members with loss of substance, are never perfectly
restored: but if they be without loss of substance, they may well be united
in youth, and not in other ages: but that there remains a certain concrete
substance in the place.

Omne vulnus transiens a superficie in superficiem est malum, Vulnus transiens
a superficie ad superficiem.
quia natura non inuenit radicem vnde sumat principium.

Every wound going from one superficially part to another is evil, because
nature has not found out a root from whence she might take her beginning, of
healing.

Si in vulneribus propter nimium fluxum venerit alienatio, A^^enatio. Spasmus.
Syncope.
est malum, and si spasmus vt plurimum moriuntur; and si syncope cum singultu
mors est in ianuis.

If in wounds, by reason of overmuch flux of blood, there chance alienation
of the mind, it is evil; and if a cramp happen, for the most part they dye;
but if there come sownding, with yesking, death is at the door.

Vulnera periculo non vacant dum post septimum diem. ^^ando periculo vacant.


Wounds are not past danger until after the seventh day.

Vulnera a dolor and symptomate non asserta sunt, donec Quando a dolor and
symptomate asserta sunt.
pus concoquitur.

Wounds are not void of grief and accidents, until the matter be digested.

Vulneribus magnis tumor non apparens malum. Tumoria vulneribus magnis. Vulnera
maligna.


No swelling appearing in great wounds, is very evil.

Vulnera sunt maligna si sunt vndiquaque glabra.

Those wounds are malign where the hear falls off round about.

Vulneribus accidit febris die tertio, vel septimo, aut non. Febris quand^
accidit.


To wounds chances a Fever in the third or seventh day, or not at all.

Sanguis in vulneribus congelatus celerime remoueri ooportet, Sanguis congelata.
ne dolor aut putrefactio insequatur.

Blood that is congealed in wounds must be removed with speed, for fear of
pain and putrefaction.

Vulnera in partibus ijs quae assiduo motu aguntur, raro In partibus ijs quae
assiduo motu aguntur.
aut nunquam curantur.

Wounds in those parts which are without rest, will hardly or never receive
curation.

Vulneribus quae incidunt in finibus musculorum maius In finibus musculorum.
imminet periculum quam quibus in medio.

Wounds in the ends of the muscles, are more dangerous, then in the midst.

Quae in medio musculorum contingunt optime cura^tur. In medio musculorum.


Wounds in the midst of the muscles are easy to be cured.

Vulnera symptomatum expertia paruo nixu curantur. Absque symptomatibus.


Wounds void of accidents, are easy to be cured.

Vulnus ad os vsque penetrans, ossis sanationem primum Ossis vulnus*
petit, ante carnem regenerare cupias.

A wound in the bone requires the healing thereof before incarnation of the
flesh.

Vulnera ossium, neruorum, cartilaginum, tendinum, Ossium, neruorum,
cartilaginum, tendinum, panniculorum, venarum, atque arteriarum vi laus. Carnis
vulnera.
panniculorum, venarum atque arteriarum secundum primam intentionem restitui ne
expectes quidem.

Wounds in the bones, sinews, gristles, tendons, pannicles, veins, and
arteries, may not be looked for to be restored according to the first
intention.

Vulnera carnis prima intention restitui possunt.

Wounds in the flesh may be restored by the way of the first intention.

Vulnus cum carnis diuisione citius curatur quam cum substantiae deperditione.

A wound with division of flesh only is sooner cured, then with loss of
substance.

Vulneris principio patiens, tenui ordiendus est dieta, Vulneris principio.
vsque ad diem septimum, praesertim si fuerit calidus plethoricus.

In the beginning of a wound, the Patient must be ordered with a thin diet,
until the seventh day, especially if he have a hot and full body.

Vulnera profunda and magna, nesuito, nam intro materiam Profunda and magna
vulnera.
corruptam and fortasse venenosam includere periculum est.

Stitch not great and deep wounds, for that it is in danger to shut in the
corrupt and peradventure venomous matter.

Vulnus contusum, concauum vel discratum, in osse apostema, Consolidantia (...)
non sunt adhibenda.
punctura in neruo, minime consolidari debent.

A contused hollow wound of distempered, an impostume in the bone, and a prick
in the sinewe, must be kept open.

Vulnus lethale est, acceptum in cerebro, cord, pulmone, Vulnera lethalia.
diaphragmate, ventriculo, iecore, vesica and tenuibus intestinis.

A wound is deadly in the brain, heart, lungs, midriffe, stomach, liver,
bladder, and small guts.

Vulnera capitis, and stomachi and hepatis, aut splenis aut Vulnera quae si
parua sint curari possunt.
renum, aut vesicae, aut matricis, aut intestinorum, si si magna nunquam aut
raro.
sint parua possunt curari, sin magna, nunqua^ aut raro.

Wounds in the head, stomach, liver, spleen, kidneies, bladder, matrice, or
intrels, if they be small may be cured, if they be great, they will hardly or
never be cured.

Cerebri vulnera, scotoniam, lethargiam, apoplexiam and Cerebri vulnera.
tales affectus proferunt.

Wounds in the brain bring giddiness, lethargies, apoplexies, and such like
diseases.

Si cerebrum vulneretur, sanies est crassa, globosa, and medullaris: Signa
cerebri vulnera^^.
spumaque ex ore, vertigo, spasmus, febris, vomitus bilis, stupor and
desipientia sequuntur.

If the brain be wounded, the matter is thick, round, and mareylike: and
foming at the mouth, giddiness, cramps, fevers, vomiting of choler,
astonishment, and dotage do follow.

Cum cerebrum vehementer concutitur, vox amittitur.

When the brain is sore shaken, speech is taken away.

Cerebro corrupto mors post triduum sequitur.

The brain being corrupted, death follows within three days.

Vulnera capitis, cranio valente vel haud multum diminuto, Capitis vulnera
cranio valente.
curatu sunt facilia.

Wounds in the head where cranium is sound or not much diminished, are easy to
be cured.

Nigrities in partibus vulneri adiacentibus, conuulsio Signa mala.
paralisis, ciborum abstinentia corporisque frigiditas, praesagiunt malum and
paene insanabile.

Blacknes in the parts near unto the wound, the crampe, palsy, eschewing of
meat, and universal coldness of the whole body, are evil signs, and almost
incurable.

Concoctio bona, vulneris rubedo, ossis albedo, cum Signa bona.
humiditatis repletione in partibus adiacentibus and ciborum appetitus, bonum
ac sanabile prognosticant.

Good dgestion, redness of the wound, whiteness of the bone, with fullness of
moisture about the parts adjacent, and appetite to meat, does prognosticate
good, and healthfulnesse to the wound.

Cum magnis capitis vulneribus non bonum est versari in plenilunio.

It is not good to be ouerbusy with great wounds in the head in the full of
the moon.

Amigdalae propter vaporosum quendam effectum ijs insitum, Amigdalae.
vulneribus capitis sunt nociuae.

Almonds are hurtful for wounds in the head, by reason of a certain
fu^^osity in them naturally contained.

Vinum vulneribus capitis vel neruosis nisi imminet magna Vinum.
debilitas, malum.

Wine is naught for wounds in the head and sinews, except there be great
weakness.

In carnosis faciei partibus vulnera facilime curantur. Faciei vulnera.


Wounds in the fleshy parts of the face are easy to be cured.

Oculorum vulnera sunt periculosa tum propter ipsum Oculorum vulnera.
visum tum propter cerebri vicinitatem; caeterum si effundantur humores,
sequitur destruction oculi.

Wounds in the eyes are dangerous both in respect of the sight, and also of
the vicinitie of the brain, but if the humors do run out, then follows
destruction of the eye.

Oculi rubei, etiam inflati, internam capitis laesionem Signa partium
internarum laesionis.
significant: quod si bilis, primo, vel secundo, vel tertio die, vel deinceps
vomitio appareat, laesionem internarum partium significat, non cerebri, sed
meningum.

If the eyes be red and swollen, it signifies the inward parts of the head to
be hurt: not the brain, but dura matter is hurt, if choler in the first,
second, or third day, or afterward be vomited.

Vulnera oculorum febres, apostemata, and lippitudines Oculorum vulnera.
adferunt.

Wounds in the eyes bring Fevers, Impostumes, and blearedues.

Aurium vulnera lethargiam and fistulas perducunt. Auriu^ vulnera.


Wounds in the ears bring forgetfulness and fistulaes.

Colli vulnera periculo non vacant: is enim locus est maiorum neruorum.

Wounds in the neck are not free from danger, because it is the place of
great sinews.

Colli vulnera magis ambigui sunt quam faciei. Colli vulnera.


Wounds of the neck are more doubtful than those of the face.

Si neruus in collo incidatur motus perit.

If a sinewe in the neck be cut, some motion perishes.

Vulnera in scapulis periculosa sunt respectu neruorum ab In scapulis vulnera.
nucha, and brachij iuncturarum, musculorumque.

Wounds in the shoulderblades are dangerous, by reason of the sinews coming
from the back, and by reason of the joints and muscles of the arm.

Vulnera magna in scapulis adferunt febres, spasmum, paralisim, apostemata cum
immenso humorum influxu.

Great wounds upon the shoulderblades bring Fevers, Crampes, Palsies,
Impostumes, with great inflowing of humors.

Dorsi vulnera spasmos, febres, and mentis perturbationes Dorsi vulnera.
gignunt.

Wounds in the back bone brings Cramps, Fevers, and perturbation of the
mind.

Vulnus ad spinalem medullam pertingens mortale and incurabile; Ad spinalem
medullam pertingens vulnus.
si vero non perueniat ad medullam, licet sit curabile, timendum tamen est
proper laesionem neruorum orientium ab illa part nuchae; and propter
nocumentum sensus, and motus eorum membrorum, ad quae isti nerui delegantur.

A wound in the spinall marrowe is deadly and incurable; but if it come not to
the marrowe, although it be curable, yet it is to be feared, for hurting of
the sinews, springing from that part of the back: and so for hurting the
sense and motion of the members whereinto these sinews are sent.

Vulnera pulmonum, pthisim, peripneumoniam and fistulas Pulmonum.
procreant.

Wounds in the Lungs bring consumption and inflammation of the Lungs, and
fistulaes.

Pulmones esse vulneratas indicia haec sunt: sanguis rubicundus Signa pulmones
vulneratas esse.
est spumosus, sputum cruentum spumosum, tussis, rumor in gutture, breuis
anhelitus, praesertim si vox pereat, aut cum sono spiritus reddatur, and si
inclinans in vulnus aeger loquatur, and in aliam partem obmutescat.

The signs that the Lungs be wounded are these, viz. red and frothie blood,
bloody and frothie spittle, a cough, noise in the throat, short breath;
especially if the voice do fail, or the breath be delivered with rattling,
also if bending toward the wound the patient speak, but bending himself
otherwise cannot speak.

Diaphragmatis vulnera spasmos, anhelitus difficultatem, Diaphragmatis vulnera.
and acutas febres perducunt.

Wounds in the midriffe bring Cramps, straightnes of breath and sharp Fevers.

Signa diaphragmatis vulnerati, sunt, spiratio magna and Signa diaphragmatis
vulnerati.
frequens, tussis cum sternutatione, alienatio, sputum liuidum, sitis, cibi
fastidium, rigor, and vulnus circa nothas costas.

The signs that Diaphragma is wounded are these, great and thick breathing, a
cough with snorting, alienation of the mind, swartish spittle, thirst,
loathing of meat, stifnes, and the wound being about the false ribs.

Hepatis vulnera inflammationes, apostemata, and sanguineos Hepatis vulnera.
eosque continuos fluxus perducunt.

Wounds in the Liver bring inflammations, Impostumes and continual fluxes of
blood.

Si in part dextra and prope nothas costas vulnus sit and multus Signa
hae^^tis laes^.
sanguis perfluit crassus, iecur laesum esse conijcimus.

If the wound be in the right side and nere unto the false ribs and that
great quantity of thick blood issue out, we conjecture the Liver to be hurt.

Pectoris vulnera non intus penetrantia facile curantur; and Pectoris vulnera.
e contrario contrary.

Wounds of the breast not pearcing into the bulk, are casie of curation: and
contrariwise contrarily.

Cordis vulnera lethalia sunt, quia est effector vitalis spiritus Cordis
vulnera.
and fons arteriarum.

Wounds in the heart are deadly, because it is the maker of vital spirits,
and original of arteries.

Corvulneratum esse indicia haec sunto; sanguis niger effluens, Signa cordis
vulnerati.
extremorum frigiditas, sudores frigidi, syncope, color pallidus ac totae vires
debilitatae.

The signs that the heart is wounded are these, black blood flowing out of
the wound, coldness of the outward parts, cold sweats, sownding, pale color,
and the whole strength decayed.

In intestinis magnis ob externas eorum carnositates vulnera Intestinorum
vulnera.
sanabilia videntur: exiguis autem long periculosiora ac dolorum pleniora,
propter substantiam eorum neruosam.

Wounds in ye great guts by reason of their outward fleshines are easy to
be cured: but far more dangerous are wounds in the small guts, and more
paynfull; because they are of sinewie substance.

Vulnera renum, spasmum, alienationem animi, and mortem Renum vulnera.
inferunt.

Wounds in the Kidneis bring the Crampe, perturbation of the mind and death.

Vesicae vulnus adfert spasmum, vrinae fluxum continuum Vulnera vesicae
mortemque.

Wounds in the bladder bring the Crampe, continual flux of urine and death.

Omne vulnus prope circiterue iuncturam vllam, musculi Iuncturarum vulnus
actionem membri depriuat.
alicuius originem aut insertionem separet necesse est. Musculus est
instrumentum motus voluntarij, ergo omne vulnus instrumenta motus voluntarij
supprimens, actionem membri sequentis depriuare oportet.

Every wound that is made near or about any joint does of necessity separate
either the rising or insertion of some muscle. A muscle is the instrument of
voluntary moving: Therefore every wound that suppresseth the instruments of
voluntary moving must needs deprive the action of the member following.

Iuncturarum vulnera periculosa, quoniam neruis, tendonibus, Iuncturarum
vulnera quare periculosa sunt.
and ligamentis vinciuntur, membranisque vestiuntur.

Wounds in the joints be dangerous, because they be enwrapped with Sinews,
Tendons, Ligaments and Pannicles.

Iuncturarum vulnera sequuntur febres, spasmi, and membri deprauatio.

Upon wounds in the joints follow Fevers, Cramps and deprauation of the
member.

Vulnera iuncturarum cum neruorum ac tendinum dissectione Vtrum neruus vel
tendo dissectus sit cognolcere.
esse solent, quare si statim aeger totum manum aut maiotem partem manus,
stupidam, grauem, frigidam senserit, neruum laesum esse verisimile est; quod si
sine magna inflatione sit, and neque flectere neque extendere possit, tendo
illius partis dissectus est.

Wounds in the joints do chance with the cutting of the sinews and tendons:
wherefore if the party feel his whole hand or a great part thereof to be
without sense, heavy and cold, it is a true sign that the sinewe is hurt:
but if the hand be without any great swelling, and yet can neither be bowed,
nor extended, then is the tendon of that part cut.

Fibrarum transuersa diuisio musculi officium impedit. Fibrarum vulnus.


Overthwart cutting of the fibers impaireth the office of the muscle.

Solutio continuitatis in neruo si est incisio aut punctura, Neruorum vulnera.
spasmum and alienationem, and mortem inducit, nisi diligenti^sime succurratur,
and si omnino incidatur, no^ est periculum, nisi quia membrum suppositum caret
motu aut sensu, aut vtroque, secundum diuersitatem neruorum.

A wound in the sinew either by incision or pricking, brings a crampe,
alienation of the mind and death, if it be not diligently helped; but if it be
clean cut asunder, it is no danger at all, save only that the member is
deprived of moving or feeling, or both, according to the diversities of
sinews.

Vulnus ad neruos recurrentes pertingens, rancedinem Ad neruos recurrdntes
vulnus pertingens.
inducit.

A wound in the recurrent nerves brings hoarsenesse.

Vulnera secundum longitudinem neruorum, non tam Vulnus neruorum secundum
longitudinem.
periculosa sunt, quam si transuersim diuidantur.

Wounds that are made after the length of the sinews, are not so dangerous,
as when they are cut overthwart.

Laesio neruorum per contusionem, magis periculosa, qua^ Neruorum contusio.
per incisionem, quia non tam facile digestio inducitur.

Hurt of sinews that comes by contusion, is more dangerous then by meision,
by reason that digestion can not be so soon brought to pass.

Vulnera neruorum per desiccantia curantur. Curatio.


Wounds in the sinews are cured by desiccatiue medicines.

Vulnera neruorum per contusionem digerentibus curantur. Curatio.


Wounds in the sinews made by contusion, are to be helped by dispersing
medicines.

Punctio neruorum, incisione periculosior. Punctio neruorum.


Wounds in the sinews made by pricking weapons, are more dangerous than by
incision.

Vulnera neruorum si humores collectos expirare non valent, in periculo
apostematum spasmique sunt.

Wounds in the sinews that cannot breathe out the humors collected, are in
danger of impostumes and Cramps.

Neruorum vulnus si in superiori part corporis inciderit, Neruorum in
superiori part vulnus.
iuncturas colli, pectusque cum iuncturis adiacentibus vnge.

If the sinews in the upper parts be wounded, it is good to anoint the
vertebres of the neck, and the breast, with the joints about the wounded part.

Si autem in inferiori part euenit, lumborum vertebrae, In inferiori part
neruorum vulnus.
os sacrum, inguen, iuncturae, partesque adiacentes inungantur.

But if the wound of the sinews chance in the nether parts, anoint the
vertebres of the loyues, os sacrum, flancks, joints, and other parts adjacent.

Euaporantia vulneribus neruorum magis conueniunt Medicamenta vulneribus
neruorum conuenientissima.
quam repercutientia.

Euaporatiue medicines are more convenient for wounds in the sinews, then
repercussiues.

Principio vulnerum neruorum nec conglutinantia, nec incarnantia expediunt,
donec omni periculo vacant.

Wounds in the sinews at the beginning require neither conglutinatiues, nor
incarnatiues, until they be past all danger.

Si in punctione neruorum venerit apostematio nocent desiccantia, resoluentia
tamen, and mollificantia, cum attractione familiari maxim conueniunt.

If in pricking of sinews there happen impostumation, desiccative medicines
are hurtful, but resolutiues, and mollificatiues, with familiar attraction,
are most convenient.

Mollificantia and maturantia in omni punctione neruorum periculosa sunt.

Mollificatiue and maturatiue medicines are dangerous in all pricks of the
sinews.

Medicamina neruis vulneratis adhibita subtilia and liquida cum attractione
familiari esse debent, non solum vt virtus eorum celeriter ad partem affectam
adueniat, verum etia^ vt materiam co^tentam sine dolor trahat.

Medicines applied to wounded sinews, must be subtle and liquid with familiar
attraction, not only that their virtue may more speedely come to the affected
part, but also, that they may draw without pain the matter fixed in the
grieved part.

Medicamina neruis vulneratis actu calide applicentur.

Medicines applied to wounded sinews, ought to be actually hot.

Nerui tendinesque per vulnera nudati, celerrime carni amiciri debent, cum
medicamentis temperaturae bonae potius calidis quam frigidis.

Sinews and tendons lying bare by wounds, ought speedily to be covered with
flesh, by medicines of good temperature, and rather hot then cold.

Nerui iuuenibus sunt sine periculo suendi, adultis non Nerui iuuenum suendi
sunt.
item.

Young men's sinews may be stitched without danger, but in old persons not so.

Si in osse sit vulnus tendinesque digitorum exteriores secantur, In osse
vulnus.
digiti tamen postquam extendi possunt.

If there be a wound in the bone, and the exterior tendons of the fingers be
cut, yet the fingers may after wards be extended.

Si os sit vulneratum interiori part digitorum vbi tendines diuidantur,
nunquam digiti postquam extendi queant.

If the bone be wounded in the inside of the fingers where the tendons are
divided, the fingers never after can be stretched forth.

Parts omnes ex sanguine generatae restaurationem cito admittunt.

Those parts that are engendered of blood, are soon restored.

Flegmatici and melancholici carnes comedant and vinum Flegmatici and
melancholici vulnerati.
bibant initio vulneris.

Flegmatike and melancholic persons may eat flesh, and drink wine in the
beginning of a wound.

Rusticis quam delicatis vulnera citius curantur.

Wounds in strong and rusticall bodies, are sooner cured, than in tender
bodies.

Sagitta vel globulus venenatus per ingentem dolorem, Sagitta vel globulo
venenato.
tumorem and nigredinem cognoscuntur.

Arrows and bullets that are venomous are known by great pain, swelling, and
blackness that follow in their wounds.

De Vlceribus.
Any vlcera concaua, aetate confecta, aegre vel nunquam Any vlcera.
curantur.

Hollow ulcers in the fundament in an aged party, are hardly or never cuted.

Vlcera in corpore hydropico, leproso and rheumatico peraegre In corpore
hydropico vlcera.
vel nunquam curantur.

Ulcers in a dropsey, leprous, and rheumatike body, are hardly or never cured.

Cruribus antiquata vlcera cum simul contracta duritie In carnibus vlcera.
difficilis sunt curationis.

Ulcers in the legs of continuance, with hardness about the affected part, are
hard of curation.

Capitis vlcera nunc di^ nata aegre curantur. Capitis vlcera.


Ulcers in the head, of continuance, are hard to be cured.

Capitis vlcera serpentia difficile emendantur.

Creeping ulcers in the head are hard to be cured.

Vlcera in corpore humorum corruptela referto aegre curantur. In corpore
conupta vlcera.


Ulcers in a body full of corrupt humors are hard of curation.

Vlcera in corporibus teneris facile curantur. In corporibus teneris vlcera.


Ulcers in young bodies are easy to be cured.

Corporibus macilentis quam in obesis vlcera facilius curantur. In corperibus
macilentis vlcera.


Ulcers in lean bodies be easier to be cured then in those that be fat.

Materia caerulei vel liuidi coloris difficultatem curationis Materia caerulei
vel liuidi coloris.
plane comminatur.

Matter that is blew or swartish in color, does plainly declare difficulty
of curation.

Materia citrina lixiuio absimilis, parit in vicinis partibus Materia citrina.
erosiones, and curationis difficultatem.

Yellow matter like unto lee, brings erosions to the parts round about, and
hardness of curation.

Pus grossum and in fundo hoerens prius abstergendum ante Pus grossum.
aggrediatur cura.

Gross matter cleaving to the bottom, ought first to be cleansed, before
healing be gone in hand withal.

Pus si sit album and crassum, bonum, si subcruentum and foetidum, Pus album
and crassum subcruentum and foetidum.
malum.

If the matter be white, it is good, but if it be bloody and stiucking, it is
evil.

Ossis scalprata caries, vlcus tunc, and non ante sanabitur. Ossis caries.


The putrefaction of the bone being taken away, the ulcer will then be cured,
but not before.

Caro nigra in osse aegrotante, malum. Caro nigra.


Black flesh when the bone is crasy, is evil.

Corpore phlegmatico vlcera albescunt, sic sanies grossa, In corpore
phlegmatico vlcera.
viscosa and subalbida.

Ulcers in a phlegmatike body are white, and the Matter is gross, flymy and
whitish.

Corpus calidum and siccum, erit vlcus rubrum in circuitu Corporibus calidis
and sic^^s ^l^era.
non absque dolor and inflamatione, preterquam quod color materiae ad
citrinitatem, rubedinem, flauitatem vel viriditatem tender.

Ulcers in a hot and dry body, will be red in the Circuit, not without pain
and inflammation; and besides that, the color of the Matter will be citrine,
red, yellow, or green.

Melancholici habent vlcera fusci coloris, corpus macerum Melancholicis vlcera.
and exiccatum, tum sanies nigrescens, densa, instar cineris and coeni
mistionis.

Melancholic persons have ulcers black in color, a lean and dry body, and
the Matter is thick waxing black, like unto the mixing of ashes and dirt.

Membro in affecto sanguis non debitam habens proportionem, Sanguis debitam non
habens proportionem.
curationem impedit, si maxim redundat, naturalem prorsus suffocabit calorem,
and ad membrum solitos accessus nutrimenti prohibebit.

In the affected member, if the blood have not his due proportion, it does
hinder the cure; if it do greatly abound, it will altogether suffocate
natural heat, and prohibit the wonted coming thereto of nourishment.

Cauernosa inguinis vlcera aegrevel nunquam curantur. Inguinis vlcera.
Iuncturarum vlcera.


Hallow ulcers in the flancke are hardly or never cured.

Vlcera in iuncturis perdurantia, nunquam sine ossis vel iuncturae iactura
curantur.

Ulcers in the joints of continuance are never cured without the ieopardie of
some bone or joint.

Omnis humorum acuitas vlcera pruritu affligit. Humorum acuitas.


All sharpness of humors afflicts ulcers with ^ching.

Vlcera in collo vesicae si diutius permanserint aegerrime In collo vesicae
vlcus.
aut nunquam curantur.

Ulcers in the neck of the bladder of long continuance, are hardly or never
cured.

Vlcera ad medullam vsque putrescentia difficulter aut Ad medullam vlcera
putrescentia.
nunquam curantur.

Ulcers that putrefie to the marrow of the bone, are hardly or never cured.

Vlcera in extrema part manuum ac pedum inueterata, Manuum aut pedum vl. era.
difficilis sunt curationis.

Ulcers that be of any continuance either in the back of the hand, or top of
the foot, are hard of curation.

In naso vlcera raro absque incommodo curantur. In ^aso (...)


Ulcers in the nose are seldom cured without a disco^moditie.

In naribus vlcera, os vel cartilaginem penetrantia, aegre In (...) vlcera
curantur.

Ulcers in the nostrils pearcing either the bone or gristle, are hard to be
cured.

Vlcera neruis vicinantia saepenumero spasmum inducu^t. Neruis vi^^nantia.


Ulcers yt are near ye sinews, do oftentimes bring ye crampe.

Sanies foetida mala est and signum corruptionis quae maturationi Sanies ^oetida
contraria est, indicatque aegrotum caliditatis naturalis esse destitutum.

Stinking Matter is evil, and a sign of putrefaction, which is contrary to
ripening, and shows the patient to be destitute of natural heat.

Ex humorib, calidis cu^ aquositate and ebullitione fit virus. Virus.


Virus is made of hot humors, with watrishnes and boiling.

Sordes vero ex superfluitate humorum frigidorum and Sordes.
grossitie eorum.

Filthy matter is engendered by the superflui^ie and grossenes of cold humors.

Vlcera subito exicantia and citra causam manifestam, malum, Vlcera subito^
exiccantia.
atque nigrescentia mortem adferunt.

Ulcers drying up suddenly without any manifest cause, signify evil, and if
they wax black, it is a sign of death.

Iniectiones fistulosis vlceribus conuenientes mediocriter Fistulosis vlceribus
iniectiones conuenientes.
desiccare debent.

Iniectio^s agreeing to fistulated ulcers, ought to dry meanly.

Vlceribus sufficienter mundificatis, erit sanies pulchra and Vlcera
sufficienter mundificata.
alba sine omni faetore.

In ulcers sufficiently cleansed, there will be fair and white Matter, without
stincke.

Qui habent vlcera concaua, cibis magni nutrimenti vescantur, Vlcera concaua.
vt bonum sanguinem generent.

Let them that have hollow ulcers, eat meat of great nourtshment to engender
good blood.

Vertebrae si corrumpuntur, fuge curam. Vertebrarum corruption.


If the vertebres grow defiled, sh^m meddling with the cure.

Vlcus varicosum tam cum vlceratione, quam sine vlceratione Vlcus varicosum.
confirmatum, non sine periculo curatur.

A various ulcer, whether with vlceration, or without vlceration, being once
confirmed, can not be cured without danger.

Cura paliatiua in vlcere varicoso maxim prodest: nam Cura paliatiua maxim
prodest.
meatus innaturalis, quo diutius aliquid e corpore emanare consueuit, obturari
non potest, sine timore.

In a various ulcer, a paliatiue cure is most convenient: for an unnatural
issue, whereby nature is wo^t long time to empty from the body, can not be
stopped without danger.

Curatio varicum non vlceratorum, per incisiouem non sine ingenti periculo
efficitur, propter sluxum sanguinis inde promanantem.

To cure swollen veins not vlcerated, by incision, is very dangerous, by
reason of the flux of blood which will ensue.

Varices optime curantur per fontanellam cum rupturio Varicum curatio optima.
vel igne sub genu per quatuor digitos, in part exteriori, qua materia
purgetur.

The best way to cure swollen veins, is to make an issue either with an
actual or potentiall camery, four fingers under the outside of the knee,
whereby the matter may be purged out.

Vtrum vlcus sit facilis vel difficilis curationis quatuordecini conditiones.
PRima est sigura vlceris, nam vlcus rotundum difficulter 1. Figura vlceris.
curatur, longum vero faciliter.

The first is the figure of the ulcer, for a round ulcer is hard to be cured,
but a long easy.

Secunda est simplicitas vel compositio: nam simplex vlcus 2. Simplicitas vel
compositio.
faciliter curatur, compositum difficulter.

The second is the simplicity or composition: for a simple ulcer is easy to be
cured, but a compound, hard.

Tertia est cum deperditione partis membri organici vlcus, 3. Deperditione
partis membri organici.
and tale difficulter curatur.

The third is an ulcer with the loss of the part of the organick member, and
such a one is hard to be cured.

Quarta est vlcus cum duritie, and tale difficulter curatur. 4. Vlcus cum
du^itie.


The fourth is an ulcer with hardness, and that is hard to be cured.

Quinta est deperditio substantiae vel eius non deperditio, 5. Deperditio
substantiae.
nam vlcus cum deperditione substantiae cum difficultate curatur.

The fifth is an ulcer with loss of substance, or which out loss of substance,
for an ulcer with loss of substance, is hard to be cured.

Sexta quando vlcus est in membro exangui, tale enim 6. Vlcus in membro exangui.
difficulter curatur: contrarium accidit si membrum non sit exangue.

The sixth is when the ulcer is in a member without blood, and such a one is
hard to be cured, but if the member be endued with blood, it is easy.

Septima est nobilitas membri aut eius ignobilitas: nam 7. Membri nobilitas aut
ignobilitas.
fi vlcus in aliquo membro nobili sit, eius curatio est difficilis aut
impossibilis, secus autem accidit in membro ignobili.

The seventh is the nobility or ignobility of the member, for if ye ulcer be
in any noble member, it is hard or impossible to be cured, but if it be in a
base member it is easy to be cured.

Octaua est si vlcus fuerit in me^bro subtili vt in panniculis, 8. In membro
subtili vel grosso.
vesica, etc. tale enim difficulter curatur, si vero fuerit in me^bro grosso
faciliter, si in mediocri, mediocriter.

The eight is if the ulcer be in a subtle member, as the pannicles, bladder,
etc. and such a one is hard to be cured, but if it be in a gross member it is
easy, if in a mean member, meanly.

Nona est motus membri and ipsius quies, nam motus 9. Membri motus and quies.
membri vlcerati impossibilitatem and difficultatem facit, vt patet in pulmone,
arterijs, and diaphragmate, quies vero facilitatem facit curationis.

The ninth is the moving and rest of the member, for the moving of the member
makes the cure hard and impossible, as it happens in the lungs, arteries, and
midriffe, but rest makes the cure easy.

Decima est incessus superfluitatum super membrum vlceratum, 10. Incessus
superfluitatum super membrum vlceratum.
nam earum incessus difficultatem operatur, vt patet in ventrieulo, intestinis,
vesica, matrice, virga, etc.

The tenth is the course of superfluities upon the vlcerated member, which
causes hardness of curation, as it chances in ye ventricle, entrayles,
bladder, matrice, yard, and such like.

Vndecima est quando corpus est repletum multis superfluitatibus, 11. Corpus
multis superfluitatibus repletum.
vt sunt corpora cachochimica, in talibus enim vlcera sunt difficilis
curationis, contrarium accidit corporibus mundis.

The xi. is when the body is replenished with many superfluities, as the bodies
full of evil juice; for ulcers in such bodies are hard of curation, but in
clean bodies contrary.

Duodecima est quando non possunt debitae vlceribus 12.
medicinae appropriari.

The twelfth is when as due medicines can not be applied to the ulcers.

Decimatertia est situs membri in alta vel infima part 13. Situs membri.
corporis, nam vlcera in membris superioribus faciliter curantur, quae vero
sunt in inferioribus difficulter.

The xiii. is the situation of the member in a high or low part of the body,
for ulcers in the superior members are easy to be cured, but in the inferior
hard.

Decimaquarta est profundita(...)ceris, nam vlcus profundum 14. Vlceris
profunditas.
cum difficultate curatur, non profundum vero faciliter.

The xiiii. is the deapth of the ulcer, for a deep ulcer is hard to be cured,
but that that is not deep, is easy to be cured.

Vlcera virulentia ab humore bi^ioso ^as^untur, and ad acuitatem per pituitam
salsam perueniunt, quibus inui^em permixtis accidit adustio, and tun^
virulentia.

Viculent ulcers proceed of a choleric humor, and come to sharpnes by reason
of salt phlegm, which mixing with the choler, causes adustion, and then
virulencie.

Sorditiei duae sunt causae, propria and dependens, causa propria est quaedam
in carne malignitas and vocatur proprietas occulta, causa dependens est humorum
improborum essentia, carnem depascens and erodens cum ad coniunctam aduenit vt
per bilem cum flegmate salso permixtam.

There be two causes of filthy Matter, as a proper, and a depending, the
proper, is a certain malignitie in the flesh, which is called a hidden
property: the cause depending, is evil humors, which eat or corrode the flesh
when they come to the coniunct, as by choler mixed with saite phlegm.

Varicum causae sunt, lienis opilatio, hepatis imbecilitas, ciborum
melancholicorum nimius vsus, longa statio, and onerum aggrauatio.

The causes of varices are, stopping of the spleen, weakness of the liver,
much use of melancholy meats, long standing, and bearing of great burdens.

Vlcus cacoethes nisi valido remedio non cedit.

That kind of ulcer called cacoethes, yields not but to a strong and most
forceable medicine.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ALopecia ex morbo Gallico. 130 Anodinum cataplasma. 15 Aphorisms. 133 Apozema
Arcai. 10 Aqua Fallopii. 14 Aqua pro oculis. 64 Aqua Cicatrizans pro oculis. 81
Aqua pro pustulis faciei 123 Aqua ad serpiginem and impetiginem faciei. 124
Aqua ad vlcera cicatrizanda. 130 Apostumes and their beginnings. 133 Arcaus
Balm for wounds. ibid.
B
Balm for wounds. 46 Balm devised by Ambr. Parrey. 50 Balm of Andernacus
ibid. Balmes distilled. 51 Balm devised by M. Keble. 52 Balm of Arcaus. 79
Blood and the judgment thereof. 172 Bolognini restrictiuum. 17 Bronchocele.
142 Burning with Gunpowder. 2. 59. 62
C
Cancer in the breast and other parts. 142 Cataplasme to cease pain. 6
Cataplasma Anodinum. 15 Cataplasma Fallopii. 22 Cataplasme for inflammations. 55
Cataplasmes for bruses and ceasing of pain. 56 Cataplasme for a Gangraena. 59
Cataplasme for windy tumors. 70 Cataplasme to suppurate impostumes. 82
Cataplasme to cease pain. 129 Cataplasme for a schi^^hous tumor. ibid. Causes
of Morbus Gallicus 100 Cautions to be observed to escape Morbus Gallicus. 111
Cerotum resolutiuum. 7^ Cerotum mundificatiuum. 74 Cerote for Morbus Gallicus.
126 Cerote for pain in the joints. 127 Cicatrizing water for Ulcers. 81
Choler in Morbo Gallico. 119 Clister to draw back pain of the head. 129
Corrosiue powder. 8 Corrosiue powder strong. 14 Collirium for ulcers in the
yard. 130 Cure of two Gentlemen grievously burnt with Gunpowder. 1 Cure of a
Merchant of London wounded with Gunshot. 5 Cure of Andrewe Fones hurt with
Gunshot. 8 Cure of a Soldier that was wounded with gunshot, which turned to a
Fistula. 12 Cure of Henry Rhodes of diverse wounds, made by the breaking of a
piece. 17 Cure of Henry Battey hurt by the breaking of a Dagge. 20 Cure of a
Soldier shot into the leg which turned to a Gangrena. 21 Cure of one that cut
his own throat. 49 Cure of Morbus Gallious. 103
D
Defensiues. 7. 9. 17. 26. 49. 22 Defensatiuum Emplustrum. 41 Declaration of
the tree of signs. 117 Decoction of Gu^icum. 124 Digestiu* to preserve a
wounded part. 9 Digestiues. 19. 30 Digestive used co^tused wounds. 35 Digestive
to remove escares. 78 Dislocations. 144 Doubts discussed concerning Morbus
Gallicus. 112
E
Electuary to confirm the cure, and prevent the coming again of Morbus
Gallicus. 123 Electuary purging for Morbus Gallicus. 128 Emplastrum nigrum. 24
Emplastrum de Peto. 30 Emplastrum defensatiuum. 41 Emplastrum Paracelsi. 52
Emplastrum Stipticum. 53 Emplastrum resoluendum. 54 Emplastrum consoliditiuum.
ibid. Emplast. to be used for a dry stitch 55 Emplast. to keep open issues.
ibid. Emplast. Epispatices. 60 Emplast. meliloti. 73 Emplast. Aromatizatum
Keb^^. 72 Emplast. mucilaginum album. ibid. Emplast. for inveterate ulcers. 74
Emplast. to resolve nodes. 75 Emplast. for hard swellings in Women's breasts. 76
Emplast. Arcaei for wounds in the head. 79 Emplast Betony for the same. ibid.
Emplast. Vigonis ad Idem. 80 E^^^pelas. 218
F
Fistulaes. 149 Flos v^g^entorum. 69 Fomentation for the ripening of a Bubo.
128 Fractures in general. 150 Fume for drying of Ulcers. 128
G
Gangraena. 154 Gargarisme. 18 Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth. 125
H
Hemorrhagia. 155 Hemrhoydes. 156 Hernia. 157
I
Iniectio mundificatiua. 11 Iniection of Tagaltius. 15 Iniection for hollow
ulcers. 59 Iniection to dry up ulcers. 139
L
Liniment for windy tumors. 71 Liniment to cease pain. 74 Linime^t for wounds
in the head. 80 Lixiuium Ambrose Parey. 21 Lixiuium for a Gangraena. 60
Lixiuium to take away warts. 71 Londrad^es oil for gunshot. 35 Lues Venerea.
159
M
Maturatiue plaster. 60 Measels and the judgments thereof. 179 Medicine for
the pin and web in the eyes. 72 Medicines, and how to Minister them. 167
Mucilage plaster white. 73 Mundisicatiues. 7. 55 Mundificatiuum optimu^
Vigonis. 24 Mundificatiuum vnguentum. 30 Mundificatiuum Francisci Rasis. 38.
Mundificatiue for hollow and plain ulcers. 66 Mundificatiuum lipsium. 70
O
Observations for wounds in the belly. 39 Observations for purging wounded
persons. 85 Observations to be notified in the opening of Apostumes. 139 Oedema
and the determination. 169 Oleum Catellorum. 36 Oleum Londrad^. 35 Omentum
wounded, and the cure thereof. 42 Opthalmia, the times and the preceedings. 170
Order of taking of a mortified member. 25 Oil most excellent for all
inflammations to cause sleep, and cease pain in the Gout. 75 Oil for
conuulsions proceeding of wounds in the nerves. 76 Oil necessary for
conuulsions. 77 Ointment for pustules in the face ex Morbo Gallico. 124
P
Phlebotomy and the use thereof. 176 Pills to purge in Morbo Gallico. 129
Powder to take away proud flesh. 68 Potio^ purging for Morbo Gallico. 126
Powder to take away wartes about Praeputium. 71 Praecipitate white. 123 Puluis
corosiuus fortis. 14 Puluis restrictiue. 27 Puluis sine Pari. 69 Pus and the
judgment. 193
R
Rasuis plaster to be keep open issues. 55 Remedies good for burning with
powder. 4 Resolutiue cerote. 73 Restrictiue powder. 57. 27
S
Signs of choler in Morbo Galiico. 119 Signs of phlegm and melancholy in the
same. 120 Sinews stitched. 191 Sparadrap plaster. 6^ Sparadrap
mollificatiuum. ibid. Spiced plaster: M. Keble. 72
T
Tinea or skales in the head. 175 Turbith Minerale. 122 Tumors and the
difference according to the humor. 176
V
Ulcers and their judgments. 192 Ulcers varicous. 196 Ulcers filthy. 200
Unguent for burning with powder. 3. 4. 59 62 Unguent de Peto. 12 Vnguentum
mundisicatiuum. ibid. 81 Unguent. de minio. 20 Unguent. Aegyptiacum. 21
Unguent. Tetraphamacon. 23 Unguent. Ceraseos paruum. 24 Unguent.
mundificatiuum. 30 Unguent. Desiccatiuum. 32 Unguent. to be used with tent or
flamula. 34 Unguent. consolidatiuum. 49 Unguent. incarnatiuum. 61 Unguent. for
inflammations. 62 Unguent. Neruorum. 63 Unguent Apii. 65 Unguent. Populeon. 66
Vng. mundisicatiuum magistrale. 67 Unguent mollificatiuum. ibid. Unguent.
Sanatiuum. 68 Unguent. infrigidans Galeni. 70 Unguent. Resinae. ibid. Unguent.
for the cramp. 77 Unguent. for the Hemrhoyds. 73 Unguent. Nutritum. 78 Unguent.
incarnatiuu^ regis Angliae. 81 Unguent. Viride. 82 Unguent. pro Morbo Gallico.
125. 127 Unguent. to open a Bubo. 128 Unguent. for Scabbe and itch. 130
W
Wounds and the judgments thereof, in particular members. 182 Wounds in the
joints. 188 Wounds in the Sinews. 189
FINIS.

