Mundanum Speculum, OR, THE WORLDLINGS LOOKING GLASS.

Wherein he may clearly see what a woeful bargain he makes if he lose his
soul for the gain of the World.

A Work needful and necessary for this careless age, wherein many neglect
the means of their Salvation.

Preached and now published by EDMUND COBBES Minister of the Word of God.

LVKE 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. LONDON, Printed for Phillip
Water house, and are to be sold at his Shop at the s^gne of St. Paul's Head in
Canon street near London Stone. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Reverend, and judicious Divines RICHARD CLERK
Doctor of DIVINITY one of the learned Translators of the Bible, and now
Preacher of Christ Church Canterbury: and Daniel Featly Doctor of Divinity,
and Rector of Lambeth, The sweet comforts of grace, and plenty of peace here,
and the blessedness of immortality hereafter.
RIGHT Worshipful, and Reverend Divines, I am not ignorant how dangerous a
thing it is to present any work to the curious eyes of the world, or to speak
any thing unpolished in open audience; such is the delicacie of men's ears, as
experience teaches; and so censorious are the tongues of the envious, that
they are ready to condemn before they understand, and to judge of men and
their actions, not as they are indeed, but according to their own preiudicate
opinions. I know and must needs confess, that it were good reason, nothing
should come before your presence, but that which were most perfect, and
excellent; How may I then (which am neither sound PHILOSOPHER, eloquent Orator,
good Poet, nor learned Divine) presume to present to your judicious
considerations this mean and illiterate Treatise, entitled, The Worldlings
Looking-glass, whose rudeness, both for matter and method, is far unfit to
wear the liueries of your names; yet Commasculaui frontem pudoris limits
transilire, I have put courage into my bashful nature, and have so far
presumed upon your courtesies, as that you will pardon my presumption in
venturing so far upon your manifold favors, as to defend my poor pains by
your patronage. And the rather, because the subject is of so great importance,
and so not unworthy your best considerations*

Touching my own insufficiency to handle a point of so great moment, I have the
wise Heathen ready to plead for me, Not who Non quis, sed quid dicit attendit^*
Sen.
is the speaker, but what he says ought to be regarded. Yet I could wish, I
could act the Rhetoritians part, docendo, delecta^do, flectendo, in teaching,
delighting, and persuading: yet seeing the first is a work of necessity, and
the latter of victory and delight* I shall rejoice if I can perform that which
is necessary, leaving the rest to those which excel therein, because our words
must rather Non delectent verba vestra, sed prosint. Seneca. Melius est
vt^^tell^g^nt populi, quam vt commendent grammatici. Amb.
bring profit, then delight. Therefore it is a sure rule which the Father
gives, that it is better so to speak, that the meanest may conceive, then for
to gain the learneds commendation; because in grave and Divine sentences many
times it proves true: That while men add an eloquent Dum nameru^ addatur,
pondus detrahatur.
form of words; they detract from the substance of the matter. But the best
affected Verum magis amant in verbis, quam verba. Aug.
do rather look to the truth delivered, then to the curiosity of the manner
of delivery.

Concerning this present discourse, let it condemn or commend it self, for
great words cannot better it, nor disabling speeces much impair the worth of
it; gold is tried by the touch, and good books by the worth; the wise are not
so skillful in the one, but judgment makes them as capable of the other. But
how ever it be, it is the first Budd that grew in my garden; and if it give
not that fragrant smell, that others more full grown do; yet I doubt not but that
it may give some small sent, if the diligent Reader come not like Dinah, rather
to feed his fancy by gazing on the lines, then to gain by the matter. And
though Elijah and Elisha 2 Kin. 2. 12
be the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof, yet I doubt not but the
footmen may do some service in the battle: And Apollos without offense may
water where Paul has planted. And though I am not able to hold way with such
strong and able laborers as you are, nor worthy to be accounted in the number
of good workmen; yet I doubt not but that by Gods assistance I may some way
advance his glory, and benefit his Church.

The consideration hereof has made me not to regard the nipping checks, and
scornful speeches of Momus, and Zoilus, and all the rabble of censorious
detractors, which will like of nothing but that which is framed in their own
brains, knowing no other way to grace themselves, then by their taunting
tongues, which they employ to disgrace others; and as they are careless to do
any good themselves; so they are ready to discourage those which are careful
and willing to employ their talents to their masters profit: like the envious
Jews, who would not build Ezra 4. 4.
the Temple of the Lord themselves, nor were willing that any other should; but
when the godly did begin to employ themselves in the work, they scoffed, Neh.
4. 2.
mocked, and discouraged them, fearing belike that GOD might have too much
glory: yet for all this, the godly were not discouraged, but for all their
reproaches ceased not till they had finished the Work of the Lord, whose
practice shall teach me not to be discouraged, but with the strength of my
GOD to arm my self with patience to endure the censures of all men. For as in
all good actions, Difficile im^ impossible est placere omnibus, nec ^an^a
vn^t^u^^, qu^* ta sententi^rum diuersi^as est. Hieron.
so especially in publishing of books it is hard to please all men: for there
is not less variety in men's countenances, then there is their judgments; and
therefore nothing can be so warily spoken, but envious Nihil tam circumspect^
dici potest, quod non rapiatur ab improbis vel in al^quam calumniam vel in
ansam peccandi, vt vix tutum sit quicquid recte monere. Era^. ad Vol.
men may find one thing or other to cauil at, if they be disposed to deprave;
though perhaps if they were put to amend, they would show more criticisme then
ability; yet for all this they Optima queque malant ^ontemnere quam discere.
P^^n.
think it better to despise those things which are good, then to learn them.
But as the scope and aim of all my actions shall be to please God, and
discharge my own conscience; so I will not trouble my self to please such men's
humors; for if I should, I fear I might spend my time to as little purpose as
he did that would fashion Plutarch.
a Coat for the Moon: Neither do I intend in this present discourse by
adulation to praise your Worships, nor my self by ostentation, nor my work by
admiration: the first I leave, lest my words should impair your worth; the
second I conceal, because I find nothing in my self that deserves praise;
and the last I refrain, for if my labor can but gain your favorable
acceptance; and that you will be pleased so far to countenance it, as that it
may appear to the world under your names, I have that which I desire: and then,

Non ronchos metuam, non vani scommata vulgi,

Censores treticos, grammaticasue tribus.

No gleering scorns I Will fear, nor spiteful gibes,

Nor crabbed Critics, nor Grammarian tribes.

And thus craving pardon for my boldness, with a thankful acknowledgement of
your many undeserved favors extended toward me, I commend you, and yours to
the protection of the Almighty, and this present Discourse to your favorable
censures, and my self to your service and command, resting always bound in
duty, and ever devoted in love,

From my study at Low Layton in Essex. January 1. 1630. Edmund Cobbes

To the godly, and well affected Reader.
BELOVED, the chiefest care of every man in this life should be how he may
glorify God, and save his soul; and there is great reason it should be so;
for as he is the fountain from whence all good things flow, so he is the end
Romans 11. 36. Ps. 148. 13 Isa. 42. 8. 48. 11.
unto which all things tend; and as his glory is most excellent, and dear unto
himself, as being the end of all his works of Creation, of Election, and
redemption; Pro. 16. 4. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6 Tit. 2. 11.
so also of continual preservation of man's life. Therefore the Angels, those
John 11. 4.
glorious Creatures, out of their zeal to their Creator, are swift winged
Heralds to diuulge his glory, and are restless in giving honor Isa. 6. 3.
and praise unto him, whose practice the Saints in all ages Reu. 14. 7. 4. 8.
have imitated in glorifying their Creator; and in all Romans 4. 20.
their actions have still aimed at his glory; extolling him in 1 Cor. 6. 20 1
Pet. 4 11. Ier. 13. 16. Psa. 116. 5.
his greatness, goodness, and mercy; whose example and practice teaches us,
as to aim at the glory of our Creator in the first place; so in the second
place our principal care should be to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2. 12.
and to give all diligence to make our calling and election 2 Pet. 1. 10
sure; and the rather because our souls are so precious, Ps. 49. 8: Eccl. 12.
7.
being the gifts of God, which being lost could not be redeemed without an 1
Pet. 1. 18 19. Luke 13. 24 1 Co. 9. 24. John 6. 27. 1 Pet. 4. 18
infinite price; and the benefit of this price could not be obtained without
great pains and labor on our part; because of the difficulty, and the many
enemies that seek to deprive us of our salvation; in which respect, that man
which is careless of his own salvation, is also mindlesse of Gods glory, and
so by these means he fails, and comes short of the end for which he was
created.

If this must be the care of every godly man, then sure our age abounds with
many careless and negligent men, which in stead of honoring God, and seeking
the salvation of their souls, their chiefest care and diligence is to honor
and advance themselves in this world, as appears by their practice and
proiects, which is all for pleasures and profits, Isa. 22. 13. Hab. 1. 15.
in these things they rejoice, and are glad; greedily seeking after them, that
they may spend them upon their Iam. 4. 3.
lusts; making themselves merry while their time lasts. Luke 12. 19 1 Cor. 15.
32.
These men, as they dishonor God in seeking for their Eccl. 8. 15.
portion in this life, as thinking these tra^sitory things are the utmost
choice of Gods reward, as they are of their hopes; so they cozen themselves, as
the rich fool did, Luke 12. 21
who laid up treasures in the world, and was not rich toward God; so also they
1 Timothy 6. 10.
pierce themselves through with many sorrows, by seeking content in that which
yields none, and desiring to hold that which has no stay, till at last they fall
into temptation, and snares, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction, and perdition. 1 Timothy 6. 9
The consideration hereof has moved me (the meanest of the sons of Leui)
out of love to your salvation, to exhort you to seek the Lord while he may be
found. For I fear that many of us are so lulled asleep in the cradle of
security, as that neither the golden Isay. 58. 1.
Bells of Aaron, the thundering trumpet of Isajah, the well tuned Cimbals of
David, nor yet the sweet harmony of the Evangelists can as yet awake us out of
our sinful security, and move us to turn to the Lord by true and unfeigned
repentance, that he may have mercy upon our souls: yet for as much as times
and seasons are in Gods hands, and John 3. 8.
that his Spirit blows where he lists; I have therefore in the strength of my
God presumed to present unto your consideration The Worldlings Looking-glass,
wherein he may clearly see and behold the world, and all worldly things to be
vain and uncertain, loving none but those which are enemies to Christ; and
many Romans 8. 7.
times deceiving them also of their hope and expectation; saucing their
pleasures with gall and wormwood. For worldly prosperity proves dangerous
snares to bring men to destruction; for when it fawneth most, then it hunteth
most eagerly after our salvation, unless we take the better heed. Then what is
a man profited if he gain the whole world, if he lose his soul?

The life of man is short, Job 14. 1.
and passes away like a shadow, and that which worldlings enjoy, they buy at
hard rates; paying full dear for their momentany pleasures, which many times
prove full of misery, and vexation of spirit.

But yet alas, though we see the deceitfulness of the world, and the misery of
it; yet we are content to be deceived thereby, and so to fall at noone days
when our eyes are open. We use to laugh at little Children which run up and
down after a feather, or some vain toy, till they fall down and take harm;
and then we pity their folly: But when we see man, which should have reason
to guide him, to toil so eagerly after these transitory things, which at last
will deceive him, and steal away his heart from godliness; how should we
lament his misery?

Let the consideration hereof move us all to consider what a pearl we are
like to lose for the gaining of these deceitful vanities, that so at the last
we may be persuaded to labor for the salvation of our souls. For is it not
better to serve God, and to work out our own salvation here, that we may be
blessed hereafter; then for the love of this base world to be tormented for
ever and ever? Is it not better to want these sinful pleasures, then for
enjoying of them, to be turned into Hell? For what Gal. 6. 8.
shall we reap of the flesh, but corruption? And what shall we gain of the
Devil for all our service, but eternal torments? And what shall Psalm. 37. 35.
we gain of the world but speedy forgetfulness?

Seeing then the love of the world is so vain and deceitful, let us then
labor for heaven and heavenly things, and take no thought Romans 13. 14
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; minding not so much this present
world, as that which is to come; for this is temporary and must have an end,
but that is eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 8.
and will abide for ever. This must be done, Col. 3. 1, 2.
that thereby we may approve our sanctification; for here we live by faith, 2
Cor. 5. 7.
and therefore our conversation Phil. 3. 20.
must be suitable. This will bring us present ease, Heb. 6. 19. Ioh. 16. 22.
for our hope is certain, and cannot deceive us. This is the only way to be
approved Romans 14. 18.
of God, and to gain a good report among men. This will bring a sure reward at
last; God himself has pronounced, that it shall go well with the just, Isay
3. 10.
for their end shall be everlasting Romans 6. 22.
life: For the ground of their hope is founded upon 2 Timothy 1. 12. Tit. 1. 2.
Heb. 6. 18.
his power that cannot fail, and on his promise that cannot lie, and upon his
Justice that will not forget Heb. 6. 10.
to reward. This, as it will bring comfort when worldlings are at their wits 2
Cor. 4. 8.
ends, so also it yields an honorable employment in the mean time, while we
exercise our selves in heavenly Col. 3. 2.
things. For the things Phil. 3. 8.
of this life, as they are base, so they are shameful, and the end of them is
death. Then what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and lose his
soul?

Spare no pains then for to gain thy salvation, abandon and cast away all
pleasures and delights, till thou art persuaded thy name is written in heaven.
We see Luke 10. 20
worldly men will toil and labor to gain riches, Honor, and preferments;
hope of gain will make Rain and windy weather seem fair and pleasant. For
shame then let not worldlings diligence condemn ours, for how shall we
escape, if we neglect so Heb. 2* 3.
great salvation? Christ has done more for us, and shall we do nothing for
our selves? we shall lose nothing at the end, but gain exceedingly; then it
shall not repent us that we have sown in tears, when we see we shall reap
in joy. As we desire to be members of the new Jerusalem hereafter, let us now
labor to have the assurance sealed up to our souls* by denying the world, and
all worldly things. For the glory of the world is but like a blazing Star,
which terrifies the mind, by presaging ruin; and the pleasures of the world
like candide Wormwood, which deceiues the taste, and imbitters the stomach.

Thus far Christian Reader, for thy sake I have diued into the world, and all
worldly things; if I have said any thing in this ensuing discourse, which may
yield thee any profit, give God the glory, and me thy friendly censure, and
help I^uate me orationib^^ vestris, vt s^mper possim loqui, quae op^rt^t and
opere i^plere quae loqui. Bernard. in Cant.
me with thy prayers, that I may speak those things I ought, and practice my
self what I speak. But if in any place I have erred, then I pray correct it
gently, or pass it over with silence; or in a friendly manner admonish me
thereof, and then I have of thee as much as I desire; and then I shall be
encouraged to set Pen to Paper again, and publish another Treatise upon the
Parable of the Unclean Spirit recorded by the Evangelist, Matthew. 12. 43. Luke
11. 24. in which if God grant life, and opportunity I will show;

1. The manner, and the measure of Satan's departure from the soul of man's and
then how he demeaneth himself when he is gone.

2. His diligence to gain his former possession, with the reasons that induce
him thereunto.

3. When he has regained possession, how strongly he fortifies himself to
prevent, expulsion.

Lastly, the miserable estate of those which he repossesses; how, and wherein
their end is worse then their beginning. As also compose a Table for the
reading, understanding, and remembering of the Scriptures, and how to reconcile
such places as seem to contradict one another; and to prescribe rules to know
when the Scriptures are to be taken figuratively, and when literally, with the
reasons why. And to set down the time when such famous men lived as are
mentioned in Scriptures; with many other occurrences, both profitable and
delightful. All which I shall be willing Cum lectoris nomen feras, ne
lictoris nomen geras.
to perform, if in this discourse thou will perform the part of a Reader;
that is, to

Suspend thy judgment, and censure not in haste:
Before thou judge the first, first read the last.
But alas, there are many now adays that can spy a moate in another eye,
that had need to have a Beam pulled from their own. some there are so curious
in their conceits, as that they can easier find two faults in another man's
work, then know how to mend one. If thou be of that mind, (friendly Reader) I
do not intend to make thee my Judge. My end is not to gain popular applause,
but to discharge my Conscience, and to do my Country good.

Then accept his will, who meaning plain,
Does neither write for praise nor hope of gain.
And though it be not so curiously set forth as perhaps thou expectest, be
content to accept of this answer; If it be not so punctual as it should, yet
it is as I could; for,

They that are learned, and have the gift,
May make of matters what they will:
But he that has no other shift,
Must go the plain way to the Mill.
When the material Temple was to be built, every man could not bring gold,
and silver; so in this spiritual building, every one has not the skill of
caruing and working curiously; yet if I by bringing baser metals, or by working
plainly, may help thee in thy spiritual building, it shall abundantly
comfort me. Come not then to carpe with Momus, nor to disdain with Zoilus, nor
to sooth with Zantippus; if thou do, I shall care as little for thy censure,
as I do for thy self. Therefore, Cum tua non aedas ne carpas munera lector:
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel aede tua.
Since that thy works thou do conceal,
Good Reader carpe not mine:
Leave off to reprehend our works,
Or else go publish thine.


And though there is no end in making books, seeing much reading brings
wearisomnesse to the flesh, Eccles. 12. 12.

Yet this we do, and pleasure take in toil,
Although we do but plow the barren soil.
And thus having been ouerbold in presuming upon your patience I will here
end, and commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to
build you up further, and give you an inheritance among Act. 20. 32.
them which are sanctified. And rest,

Yours always in the Lord, EDMUND COBBES.

THE WORLDLINGS LOOKING-GLASS, Wherein he may clearly see what a woeful
bargain he makes, if he lose his soul for the gain of the world.
Matthew. 16. 26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
THE time of our blessed Saviors passion being at hand, he tells and
forewarnes his Disciples of it, that thereby he might confirm and strengthen
them against the scandal of his Cross; But yet for all this they dream of an
earthly Kingdom, and that our Savior should restore them to their ancient
liberties, which in time past their fathers enjoyed, in the time of David, and
Solomon, and other Kings of Israel; but our Savior to put them out of this
conceit, tells them plainly elsewhere, that his Kingdom is not of this world:
and therefore they are not to expect any earthly pomp and state by him, for
Verse. 21
he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things of the Elders, and chief
Priests, and Scribes, and be killed, etc. Peter who loved him dearly, and so
was more forward to manifest his love then the rest, takes him aside, thinking
he had spoke unadvisedly, that would die when he might live, and began to
rebuke him, saying: Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee.
q. d. Thou art the promised Seed of the Woman, in whom all the Nations of the
world shall be blessed, thou art an innocent man, and therefore ought not
to die; thy life is very profitable unto all men, by feeding their bodies,
curing their diseases, teaching and instructing them in the ways of godliness,
therefore thou oughtst rather restore the kingdom to Israel, and to free us
out of our captivity. But alas, Peter, thy counsel is carnal, thou
understands only the things that belong to thy own ease and quietness, but
not the things which are of God, I was sent to seek and to save the lost sheep
of the house of Israel, and am that escape goat, which Leu. 16. 10.
must bear the iniquities of the people, and that Lamb which must take away
the sins of the world, and by my death and suffering must offer my self as a
sacrifice for the redemption of the world; and so by death overcome him which
has the power of death; therefore Peter, get thee behind me with thy deuillish
counsel, thou art an offense, to me, and an adversary to my fathers will, which
has appointed and set me apart to reconcile the world unto him: therefore if
thou will be my Disciple indeed, as thou professest thy self to be, imitate
thou me in my obedience to my Fathers Will; and learn thou thy duty which now I
teach thee, and which I will have all my Disciples to learn* If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me;
Teaching all those which will give up their names unto him, what must be their
practice, and whereto they must trust; they must renounce their own wit,
policy, and affection, and be content to endure crosses, losses, and much
affliction, which they must bear cheerfully, and follow their Captain Christ
Jesus in well doing, though they have never so many pullers back, and
hindrances in the way: yet they must imitate the Philistines 1 Samuel 6.
Kine, which bare the Ark of GOD, though they were milche, and had their
Calves at home, yet without any turning to the right hand or left, they kept on
their way to Bethshemesh: So the Disciples of Christ, which have given up their
names unto him, and do bear the Arc of his law upon their shoulders, though
they have many allurements of the world, the flesh and the Devil, to draw them
back; which are as dear unto them as the calves were unto the Kine; yet for
all this they must keep on their course in the pathe of a holy life and
conversation without turning either to the right hand or left, until they come
to Bethshemesh, the house of the Sun: for he that puts his hand to the Plough,
and afterward looks back, makes himself unfit for the Kingdom of God:
Therefore our blessed Savior plainly tells his Disciples what their profession
would cost them, and what they should look for; that is, to be hated of all
men for his sake, and to endure all manner of crosses, and be content to bear
them patiently, and wear them as a crown upon their heads: and to carry death
always before them as a seal upon their fingers.

Now because the heart of man is full of doubts, and out of self-love is
ready to call the truth of God in question; our blessed Savior is careful to
fence his doctrine against all doubts, and to prevent all scruples which carnal
men can make against the truth thereof, as thinking it very harsh to flesh and
blood. Therefore in the 25 and 26 verses he answers a secret objection, which
some obiectour might reply upon him, in these or the like words; That so he
should lose at least the worlds goods, and perhaps his life too. To the one
Christ answers in the verse preceding my Text, that to lose life, was the way
to find it, meaning eternal life, q. d. for the worst that Tyrants can do, is
but to send them to heaven, and the desire to save life by refusing the cross,
was the way indeed to lose it, to wit, eternal life. And to the other he
answers in the words of my Text, that the gain of the world is nothing if it
be compared with the souls loss, which he lays down in an hypotheticall
proposition question wise; For what is a man profited if he shall gain the
whole world if he lose his soul? Which categorically turned is, he that winnes
even a whole world, but loses his own soul for it, gains not; which is
confirmed by the latter part of the verse, that there is nothing worth the
soul, nothing equivalent to it, which he propounds questionwise also, because
in this form a proposition has most life and power to work upon the heart,
and conscience of the hearer. For what thing is there of greater moment then
the soul? and what thing more difficult the^ to weane it from the love of the
world? Therefore by this vehement speech, our Savior lays strong battery to
the hearts of worldlings to make them sound a retreat from the eager pursuit
of these terrene things.

Thus I have made the occasion and manner of Christ's speech the pathway leading
to my text, in which I pray observe these two maine points.

1. The worlds vanity and inability. 2. The excellency of the soul.
These two points by GODS grace shall be the subject of my ensuing discourse,
and from the^ to deduce this note of observation: That it is a point of
Observation.
the greatest folly, to adventure the loss of the soul for the gain of the
whole world. The ground of this truth is plain.

Because the world, and the Ground or Reason.
best things which are in it, are but mere vanities and fooleries in respect
of our heavenly inheritance. Though they may make a fair show to them which
are blinded with their false conceits and glory, and esteem which they have
among worldly men: yet if we look upon them in the glass of Gods Word, we
shall find the world in his chief beauty and pomp to be but as a glorious
hypocrite, fair in show and false in truth, promising much, and performing
nothing; if therefore it were opened with the sharp knife of truth, it would
be found both vain and deceitful; for all that is in the world either it is
already past, or else it is present, or else it is to come: That which is past,
is not now, and so we can have no profit by it; And that which is to come is
uncertain whether we shall live to enjoy it or no; and that which is present is
fickle and unstable, and will stand by us but a while, no longer at furthest
then our lives last, and in that space our comfort and joy in it may be
disturbed by sickness, crosses, losses, or many other accidents: which made
David affirm; that man Psa. 39. 6.
in his best estate is altogether vanity, and that he walks as a shadow,
and disquieteth himself in vain; therefore he compares worldly prosperity to
a dream, Psa. 73. 20.
which delights a man while he sleeps, but when he awaketh, vanishes
away, and leaves nothing behind but sorrow and discontent, because their joys
and hopes are disappointed: Intimating unto us that the glory and splendour of
worldly things are but in show only, and not solid and substantial, in truth.
Therefore Solomon which had not only most 2 Chronicles. 9. 22.
wisdom and judgment, rightly to value them, and more experience of them then
any man, because he abounded more in 1 King. 3. 13.
worldly prosperity then any man that ever lived: for he 1 King. 4. 21.
reigned over all Kingdoms from the River unto the Land of the Philistines,
and unto the border of Egypt: they brought presents and served Solomon all the
days of his life: Silver in 2 Chon. 9. 27.
his days was esteemed but as stones, his household provision for one day was
thirty measures of fine flower, and threescore measures of meal, which
according to the least account, is two hundred thirty two quarters; ten fat
Oxen, and twenty 1 King. 4. 22, 23.
Oxen out of the pastures, and one hundred sheep, besides Hearts, and Robucks,
and Fallow Dear, and fatted Foul. He had forty thousand stalles of Horses
for his Charets, and twelve thousand horsemen, his pleasures were answerable to
his wealth, for he had seven hundred 1 Kin. 11. 3
Wives Princes, and three hundred Concubines; he had stately houses, and
pleasant gardens, and he lived in health, peace, and prosperity, he was
loved, feared, and admired of his subjects for his wisdom justice, for which
he was a terror to his enemies: yet for all this, see what verdict he passes
Eccles. 1. 2.
upon al these prosperities; Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of
vanities, all is vanity. Eee. 2. 11.
And afterward he concludes, that they are not only vanity, but vexation of
spirit.

That we may the better discrie the vanities of this world, and their
insufficiency to profit us, we will take a view of those things which worldly
men do so admire, which though they be manifold in nature, yet we will bring
them like dispersed members, and couch them under these heads; Jupiter,
Saturn, Venus, or Riches, Honor and Pleasure; these wander over the world
while the blessed Son of righteousness has no room in the world of
darkness; these are now of so religious account, as the golden Calfe of Israel
was once, that men sacrifice to the^, and say in their hearts, These are thy
gods. We will see if there be any hidden happiness in them, which may so
far move us, as for the delight of them to adventure the loss of our souls.

We will begin with riches, which all men do so dote upon, and for which they
will take such pains, and endure such misery, aduenturing their lives,
healths, liberties, and many times stretch their consciences, thinking him
only a happy man which has his cofers full with Dives, his barnes stretching
Luke 16. 19 Luke 12. 18 1 King 4. Dan. 5.
and strouting with the worldling, his stables full with Solomon, his tables
full with Belshazzar, his grounds full of Cattle with Job, and his purse full of
silver with Croesus. What is there in riches? Is there any wisdom, holiness,
mercy, peace and truth? what can they do for us? can they keep off Gods
judgments, preserve our bodies from sickness, and keep our souls from Hell?
if they could, then it were great reason we should toil and labor for them,
but alas, they are unable and insufficient to do us good in any of these
particulars. If riches could purchase salvation, then rich men were the only
happy men; they will spare for no cost: the hypocrite Micah 6. 6, 7.
will part with his burnt offerings, Calves of a year old, thousands of Rams,
and ten thousand rivers of Oil, he will part with any thing though never so
dear to him; he will give his first borne for his transgression, and the
fruit of his body for the sin of his soul.

But o man, it will not be, no Psalm. 49. 7.
man can give a price unto God, so precious is the redemption of the soul.
Rich men die, and go to Hell, so shall all the people that forget God: neither
Gold or Silver could redeem 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
us, but it is the blood of Christ that clenses us from sin.

2. As riches are unable to redeem one soul, so they are unable to help and
deliver us in our greatest extremities; therefore the Prophet calls them vain
things which cannot profit, 1 Samuel 12. 21.
for they are vain, they cannot free us from danger, nor deliver us when we
are fallen into any extremity: nay they be so far from aiding sinful men
against the hand of God, as that they be many times weapons in his hands to
plague them with the strokes of his judgments. And they cease when misery
comes. And as they cannot help us themselves, so they utterly deprive us of
our help we should have in God: because trusting in them for deliverance, we
either not at all, or in a cold and faint manner, pray unto him for help and
deliverance, doubting whether he will help us or no, seeing we have in our
prosperity put such trust and confidence in our riches, and trusted in them
more then in our Creator: and never craved help from him so long as our Corn,
Wine, and Oil abounded. Psalm. 4.
Therefore in our greatest need we may justly fear, Iud. 10. 14.
that God should send us packing Isa. 47. 17.
to crave help of our Idols, as he did his own people in their miseries.

Thus the Wise man tells us, That he that trusts in riches Pro. 11. 28.
shall fall. See the truth of this in Pharaoh that proud King, that would wage
war with the King of nations, and thought with his strong Chariots to bid
defiance to Heaven; but all his riches, strength, and power were unable to
keep off the Frogs, Flies, Lice, and other plagues Exodus ^^.
from him and his subjects, but these weak Creatures did so confound him, that
he was forced to confess that he had sinned against heaven, and compeld to
call for a sacrifice to that God which before he had despised.

By which we may see that there is no privilege in the Kings chair. If they
sin with a high hand against God, then his hand shall fall upon them to their
destruction, for it must be his grace that must season their Thrones, or else
they stand in very slippery places, exposed to the judgments of God, as we
may see in Belshazzer, in the top of his glory, while he was profaning the
Lords sacred Vessels unto his own lusts; and consecrating them to the service
of his gods, even as it were to despite the Lord of heaven toh is face; which
knew how to be avenged of him, and to make good his own cause, therefore he
sent the palm of a hand to Dan. 5.
write his doom, and the same night was this proud King slain. The rich man's
full barnes could not bail his body one night from Hell; and Dives riches Luke
16.
could not purchase him one drop of water to cool his tongue. Herod that
proud King, thought by his vexing the Lords people to advance himself, but all
his stately robes, and praise of the people could not Act. 12.
keep off Gods judgments, but he was eaten up of Worms. For Zeph. 1. 14, 18.
neither silver nor gold shall be able to deliver in the day of the Lords
wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured with the fire of his jealousy: and
in that day the strong man shall cry bitterly: Reu. 6. 15.
the righteous shall see it and fear, and laugh at them saying, behold the man
that took not God for his strength, but trusted in the multitude Ps. 52. 7, 8.
of his riches, and strengthened himself in his substance.

3. As riches are unable to keep off Gods judgments, so also they are unable
to give contentment. They are of no satisfying nature, but Pecunia aqua salsa
est, sitim prouocans, non sedans. Psa. 59. 15.
are like sharp liquor which does not satisfy the belly, but provoke the
appepetite to covet after meat, and so to grudge if they be not satisfied. An
example hereof we may see in Ahab King over the Lords 1 King. 21. 34.
own people: his whole Kingdom could not give him content, but he was sick
till he had Naboths Vineyard. The large He that continually wants, how can he
be rich.
Kingdom of Ahashuerosh, the favor of the King, and the reverence of his
subjects could not give Haman content, though he were advanced above the
Princes, and honored with the riches Esther 5.
of the Kingdom: yet all this did him no good so long as Mordecay the Jew
would not reverence him.

hereof may some say? I answer, that the principal cause hereof is this: God
in his judgments blinds their eyes, because worldlings love his gifts more
then himself that gave them: therefore he depriues them of content, which do
not love them according to his Word. Therefore the Preacher says, He Eccl. 5.
10.
that loves silver shall not be satisfied therewith. Covetousness may bring
riches, but not rest; They may empty other, but not fill themselves, like
Pharaohs lean Kine, which devoured the fat, and were never the fatter
themselves. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit, Et minus hunc
optat qui non habet. Iuven. Sat. 14.
The Po^t knew this by natures light, As the heap is the greater, so the
appetite is sharper. And another, The more we have, the more we do desire.
And, who possesses least, does least desire.

2. Love unto riches are insatiable, not through any necessity which we have
of them, but through our unnatural greediness, and delight in them, which
carries men forward like the plant by inclination, or like the beast by his
appetite, never reflecting his reason upon himself, or to consider the use of
worldly things, how they may profit himself and further his own salvation.
Hence it comes to pass, that wise men deceive themselves, and come far
short of the rich man, Luke 12. Who in the fullness of his wealth was able to
say, Soul take thy rest, thou have goods enough, eat, drink, and be merry.

If we would have this aguish thirst quenched, it must not be by drinking of
these intoxicated waters, which will rather increase our appetite, then allay our
thirst: but by purging out of our hearts the choler of worldly concupiscences,
and by planting in our hearts the fear of God, which will make us content with
our portions. Else if our hearts be not seasoned with grace, every man in his
state, and condition of calling, is, and will be full of discontent; The poor
man which has toiled and labored all the day, when he comes home finding his
commons mean, and homely, does envy the rich man's full table, and soft rest.
The rich man he is not content with his estate, but wishes he had less
wealth, and more health. The Bachilor that leads a single life, is weary of
his solitariness, and thinks the estate of wedlock the only happy
condition, but being married, he grows weary of his choice, and unable to
endure the troubles of that estate; if he want children, he is as impatient as
ever Rachel was; And if he have any, he is not contented, because they are
unruly or troublesome, and that which would be another paradise, is unto him
a hell and torment. Which made the Poet in his time to complain of men's
inconstancy.

The lazy Ox does wish he were Optat ephipia bos piger, optat arare caballus.
Hor.

An horse, on back to bear;
And so the horse does wish he were
An Ox, the soil to tear.
Then what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and lise his soul.

4. As they cannot give content, so they cannot keep off poverty: riches have
wings, and fly away, when we have most need of them, and when they should do
us most good. This was well known unto the Prophet, and therefore he calls them
deceitful vanity. Psalm. 31. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 17.
And the Apostle, uncertain riches. Yet how many are there which gape after
this uncertain Mammon, which is so full of deceit, like the Selucian birds which
Aues Seleucides nunquam conspiciuntur nisi cum praesidi^ illarum indigetur.
fly away when they might best pleasure us. If any will question this truth,
we may for confirmation produce seventy Kings upon their oath. And
Adonibezeck that great Conqueror to be their Compurgatour: A Iud. 1. 6, 7.
lively example hereof we may see in King Zedekiah, which was 2. King. 25.
forsaken of his riches, honor, and friends, his Children were slain before
his face, his eyes put out, and himself bound in Chains, and afterward
miserably ended his days in prison. Look upon Job, yesterday the richest man
in the East, and to day not worth a groat. Quicquid habes body, cras te
fortasse relinquet.
They come and go as the ebbing; and flowing of the Sea, taking wings, and
leaving us naked at their pleasure. Job has pronounced, that the triumphing of
the wicked in worldly things is but short, and the joy of an hypocrite but for
a moment, though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach Job
20. 5, 6, 7.
unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever, and they that have seen him
shall say, where is he? Then why do you lay out your silver and not for bread,
you labor without being satisfied? Riches may be taken from us by casualties
of fire, inundation of water, robbery of thieves, negligence of servants,
suretiship for friends, or by many other accidents. They are many times a bait
to entice others to surprise us. The stateliness of Jerusalem Q^ae vero
ex^r^nsecu^ ed alium transf^rri possunt. Tull.
was such an eyesore to the King of Babell, that he could not be quiet til he
was master of it. They are many times occasions whereby slanderers and
oppressors take advantage against us, to ensnare and entrap us. Naboths
Vineyard first moved Iezabel to produce false witnesses against him, and at
last to take away his life; Then what is a man profited if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?

But suppose Riches would be faithful, and stand to us, even to the last gasp
of our breath, yet they can do us no good either for our bodies, or our
souls. They cannot profit our bodies, because they cannot prevent diseases,
nor cure them if they overtake us, nor give us any comfort or patience to
endure them. It is not the Velvet slipper that can cure the Gout, nor a Crown
of Pearl that helps the Migram, appoplexie, Chollicke, or the like: Stately
houses, soft beds, rich furniture, costly tables, all these cannot prevent the
least sickness whatsoever. But they are so far from helping us, as that they
are the cause many times of weakening the strength, and of impairing the health,
which comes to pass; 1, Because riches many times make men wanton, and
ouer-tender of their bodies, by using them to too much daintines, which in a
while custom makes them so necessary, that they cannot want them, without the
impairing of their health. Now being deprived of their riches, they cannot
nourish their bodies in such manner as before they have done.

2. A second cause may be, because riches fill both head and heart, with cares
to preserve them, and fears least we lose them. Hence the Wise man is bold to
say, That the revenue Prou. 15. 6.
of the wicked is trouble; not troublesome in the concrete, but trouble it
self in the abstract. And Job says, That he Job 15. 20, 24.
trauelleth in pain all his days, which will not suffer him to sleep and
take his rest. Without which his health cannot long endure, so says the
Preacher, The abundance Eccl. 5. 12.
of riches will not suffer him to sleep. And the Son of Sirach tells us, That
the waking after Ecclus. 31. 1, 2.
riches does pine away the body, and the care thereof drives away sleep.
Whereupon the Poet was bold to pass his censure:

What ever wants changeable rest, Quod caret altorna requie durabile non est.

Must needs decay when it is at best.
3. Riches prepare the seeds and simples for all sickness through idleness,
which is the effect they produce. And so for want of stirring and action,
evil, corrupt, and noisome humors increase and abound, whereby they have no
stomach or appetite to their meat, though they have full tables and variety
of dishes; And so for want of apperite they can eat nothing; and if they do,
it is against their stomaches, which nourishes many filthy humors which
causes diseases, which the poorer sort are free enough from. By which it
appears, that riches do neither preserve health, nor cure diseases when they
are come. But rather it may be said, That the Hals of the Morborum domicilium
est diuitum Aula.
rich are the harbors where diseases dwell. For as worms soonest breed in
soft and tender wood, and Cankers fret soonest the trees that are fullest of
sap, so sickness most easily breeds in those bodies which are made tender
with ease and wantonness, therefore being forced to fly to the Physician upon
every small occasion, many times they make their lives to become a prey unto
them.

5. As riches cannot keep off poverty, so they cannot pacify a troubled
conscience, or secure us from the malice of Satan: but when GOD sets either of
them a work, they will not fear the awful Scepter, nor a heap of Gold, nor
a silken garment. As may be seen in Saul, Judas and Antiochus; But when God
awakes their sleepie consciences, these sweet morsels will be ready to choke
them; And then they shall cast their Ezekiel. 7. 19
silver in the streets, their silver and Gold shall not be able to deliver
them in the day of the wrath of the Lord, they shall not satisfy their souls,
nor fill their bowels, because it is the stumbling block of their iniquity.

6. As they cannot pacify a troubled Conscience, so these terrene things,
cannot make those merry and cheereful, which enjoy them. The truth of this we
have before seen in Ahab, and Haman, who were so vexed because they could not
have what they would, that the one went sick to bed, and the other so filled
with discontent, that he was ready to ear out his own heart, because things
did not sort according to his desire.

7. As they cannot in any degree profit our bodies, so they are less able to
profit our souls. They cannot enrich them with spiritual graces* They cannot
purchase Christ, and procure for us the rich Robes of his righteousness, or
purchase us an obedience answerable to the Law; They cannot furnish us with
faith, hope, and repentance; They cannot reconcile us to God, for he accepts
not the person Job 34, 19.
of Princes, and regards not the rich more then the poor, for they be all the
work of his hands. GOD does not respect men for their goods, but for their
Godliness. For better is the poor that walks Pro. 28. 6.
in his uprightness, then he that peruerteth his ways though he be rich.
They cannot put courage in us to stand resolutely for Christ, and for his cause
against Satan and his servants: but rather they make us cold in the
performance of holy duties, of which we shall have more occasion to speak of in
due place.

8. As riches cannot profit us in our souls, so they cannot profit us in the
course of our life, they cannot keep off old age, the forerunner of death,
neither can they make us careful to prepare our hearts for God at our death,
and so to submit our will unto Gods Will; Neither can they appease Gods anger,
restrain the Devils power, but when we are panting and gasping upon our sick
beds, all the world will not bribe Death, but he will tell us he has a
warrant from GOD to attach us without bail or mainprice. For it is appointed
for Heb. 9.
all men once to die. Which statute being enacted in heaven all the world is
not able to reuerse. What comfort then shall rich worldlings find in their bags
of Luke 12. 15
Gold, seeing their life consists not in their riches. Then what shall it profit
them to have their barnes full, when as their souls shall be taken from them?
what good will their money do them when the Devils are ready to attache them,
then shall they lament, and say, they have spent their strength in vain. For
what hope has the hypocrite though Job. 27. 8. Quicquid vita dedit tollit cum
vita recedit
he has heaped up riches, when God takes away his soul? How miserable then
will the case of rich worldlings be, when as they shall find, that they have
heaped up the wrath of GOD with their riches, and that now as they came naked
into the world, so they must return. Eccl. 5. 14, 15.
Then what profits it a man that he has labored for the wind? How much
would a man then give for a good Conscience, and to have his peace made up with
God? how would he prefer a dram of grace before a bag of Gold, and would be
content to part with his Coffers and Treasures to have a share among the
inheritance of the Saints? for the rich men shall leave Ier. 17. 11.
their inheritance in the midst of their days, and their end shall be as a
fool.

But suppose riches could sweeten death and make it less painful to us, yet
what good can it do us when we are laid in the Grave, then they cannot
preserve our bodies from corruption; no, then there will be no difference
between the King and the Beggar. For one heap of dust is not better then
another in the dark Chambers of death. For as nature makes no difference
between one man and another, in the birth, so neither does it distinguish them
after their death, open the graves, and stately monuments, and we shall see
Kings, and Princes, and great men turned to dust as well as poor men.

Finally, the riches of the world cannot stand us in stead at the day of
judgment, for at that day the Lord the just judge, Psalm. 62. 12. Romans 2. 6.
will reward every man according to his works; he will not respect rich men
according to the honor which they have with men, but according to the honor
which they have Solae virtutes faciunt beatum. Macrob.
done to him, and comfort to his poor members; he will not esteem men for
their wealth, but according how they have used it to his glory, and the good of
their brethren; Then they that P^o. 21. 21.
have followed after righteousness, and mercy, shall find life,
righteousness and glory. But those which in their life have been contentious,
proud, and envious, and have not obeyed the truth: Tribulation and anguish
shall be upon every soul, and the riches Romans 2. 8.
which they have had, shall witness against them, because they have not used
them to glorify their Creator. Thus by Gods Iam. 5. 3.
mercy we have traced the rich man through the whole course of his life, and
death; we have laid him down in his grave, and have summoned him up to
judgment, and have found out the inabilitie of riches, to profit him in life,
death, and day of judgment, in all which we have seen the truth of this
point, That a man is not profited if he gain the whole world and lose his
soul.

But* alas riches are so far from profiting us, as that they are the cause
of much evil to soul and body, For they that will be rich fall into
temptations, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
and into many dangerous lusts. The love of money made Balaam adventure to make
a long Numb. 24.
journey to go to curse the people of God. For hope of reward Dalilah was
al^ured to betray Sampson her beloved husband. Hope of preferment will make
Doeg flatter Saul and speak evil of David the beloved of the 1 Samuel 22. 10. 2 Samuel 15. 2.
Lord. And Absolon will seek his Fathers life to gain his Kingdom. If Ioab
may but get the chief Captainship, he 2 Samuel 10.
will make no scruple to kill Amasa. And Abimelech will embrue his hands in the
blood of Iud. 9. 2.
threescore and ten of his brethren to make himself way to the Crown. The love
of money made Judas sell his Lord and God for thirty pieces, the price of a
slave; by which means he brought the blood of Christ upon his soul, that it
had been good for him if he had never been borne. The love of gain so tipped
the tongue of Demetrius that he became a subtle Orator to plead for Idolatry.
The love of money made Gehazie run after Naaman with a lie in his mouth, 1 King.
21.
and so for a little money and change of raiment to sell Gods honor, and his
masters credit. The love of Naboths Vineyard made Ahab purchase a place of
pleasure with the price of the blood of his subject, which procured the bane of
him and his family. The Babylonish garment, and los. 7. 21.
wedge of Gold made Achan expose himself and all the host to the judgment of
God. The love of money will make men cruel and unnatural: Cruel to Mic. 2. 2.
covet fields, and to take them by force. Unnatural, that many do not spare
the lives of their own parents, as may be seen in Absolon, his will was
good, but the Lord disappointed him. The Turks as Histories report, do many
times imbrue their hands with the blood of the Parents which begat them. And
cruel Nero ripped up his mothers belly to gaze upon the place where he lay in
her womb. Many times the love of Filius an^e d^cm, patrios inqui^t in annos.
Ovid. Met. lib. 1. I say 3. 1^. Zep. 3. 3. Amos 8. 6.
their fathers goods makes them sick of their lives, and wish the^ fair laid
in their graves. The love of money makes men grind the face of the poor, and
to buy them for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes. The love of money
is the cause of whoredom and adultery, making men and women to embrace strange
flesh, and so Pro. 2. 17.
forget the Covenant of their God. The greedy desire which Shimei had to bring
back his servants, 1 Kin. 2. 44.
made him adventure his life. The love of money and hope of reward made Ziba to
2 Samuel 16. 3.
slander and falsely accuse Mephilosheth his Masters son of treason. Money
made the soldiers Mat. 28. 12
to report a lie, when they watched the Lords sepulcher. The love of money
makes a man a thief to himself, defrauding his belly and back of
necessaries, to increase his wealth; now he that is a thief to himself, for
whom will he spare? he cares and carketh for his riches, as if they were his
own: but he reapeth no benefit by them, as if they were another man's. And
though he have riches in abundance, yet he has such a beggarly mind, that he
is still poor to himself. The love of a wise, yoke of Oxen, Luke 14. 18, 19.
and a Farm, were forcible means to keep off those which were bid to the
marriage feast. We may, and ought in duty to love our wives well, yet we must
take heed, they do not hinder our love to Christ, and that they do not make
us careless to perform holy duties: we may buy Farms, Oxen, Merchandice,
and perform all other actions agreeable to our callings, so that we do not
neglect our souls health. What is there in the world which a man will not do
for money, and preferment, and yet when he has it, it will do him little or
no good. Rather then Esau will want pottage, he will sell away his birthright.
And in the Famine of Samaria men and women would part with any thing for food
to preserve their lives: their gold and silver for asses dung, and other
unwholesome things. Then, what is a man profited if he gain the whole world,
and lose his soul. But yet alas, they are so far from profiting us, as that
they hinder us in the service of God, and rob us of many graces of his
spirit; we will therefore for our instruction herein, search into the
particulars.

1. They make us sluggish, lazy and untoward in the performance of holy duties,
and to err from the faith, and at last to 1 Timothy 6. 10
forget GOD. This the Lord knew well, therefore he gave his people a caveat,
to beware lest they should forget him when Deuteronomy. 8. 10
they were full. But they unmindful of his watch word, When they were fat,
kicked, and forsook Deu. 32. 1^
God which made them, and lightly esteemed the rock of their salvation. But
according to their pasture Hos. 13. 6.
so were they filled, and their hearts were exalted, therefore have they
forgotten me says the Lord. And are not there many among us, as unthankful
for the Lords mercies, which he has bestowed upon them, which can open their
mouths wide to crave for riches, and to prey upon the things of the world, but
when they should give GOD thanks for his mercies, sunt multi lapides, their
tongues are as dead as stones. Such are Pondus iners and intilis tellus. As
ungrateful as hard rocks, which yield no fruit; Cages of unclean birds,
which being crammed with Gods plenty, die in their fatness, and yield forth no
notes of Gods praise. O foolish Deuteronomy. 32.
and unwise people, do you so requite the Lord? Has he opened unto you the
Chabinets of his blessings, and do ye like desperate wretches abuse them to
your lusts, and his dishonor; and like Traitors fight against him with his own
weapons?

2. Riches are forcible means to draw away our hearts from GOD, and to place
them upon these sordid trumperies, that we can spare no time to hear, read,
pray: to meditate upon his mercies, to praise him; upon his judgments, to fear
him; For where Mat. 6. 21.
our treasure is, there is our heart also: And so by this means we nourish a
serpent in our bosoms, which will gnaw our Consciences, grieve the good Spirit
of God, hinder our salvation, and so make us to fear any thing more then the
loss Arridet mundus vt saeuiat, blanditur vt fallat, illicit vt occi^at,
extollit vt deprimat.
of our souls.

3. Riches deceive us in our hope and expectation, persuading us help in time
of need, and to do great matters for us, yet when we expect most from them,
then they will deceive us. Did not Achan think that the wedge of Gold would
have advanced him to preferment, when as indeed it was the ruin of him and his
family. Then why Isay 55.
do you lay out your silver, and not for bread, and labor without being
satisfied? Weigh up therefore your Anchors, hoyse up your sails, for these
things will prove your ruin, For he that trusts in riches shall fall.

4. Riches rob us of our faith, which is the life of the Hab. 2. 4. Heb. 10.
37
righteous: yet for all this the worldling will trust God no longer then his
Corn; Wine, and Psalm. 4. 7.
Oil abounds. But will place his confidence in the wedge of Gold, and say in
effect to this glorious Mammon, Thou art my hope, and confidence, the stay of
my life, and staff of my age. Now that we may not do these muck-wormes wrong,
we will examine their practices, and I doubt not but we shall easily draw this
confession, out of their own mouths. Do we not see how vigilant they are
over them, to preserve them, scarce daring to trust themselves with them. How
niggardly in using them, that they would be as willing to part with their
right eye, as with a penny to any good use: what does this argue, but that they
think there is some inherent happiness in them.

5. Riches are a great enemy to humility. For have we not seen many in a
mean estate to be courteous, meek, and gentle, but being advanced, they swell
with pride against their inferiors, and envy against their superiors, and
disdain against their equals, and contemn those which are better then
themselves, as churlish Nabal did 1 Samuel 15.
David.

6. Riches cool our zeal; In times past we see many so zealous for GOD while
they were in a mean estate, that they could not endure to hear him
dishonored, his Sabbaths profaned, his name taken in vain, but they would
have taken his honor into their protection, and would have pleaded his cause
against the mighty in the Land, and so would have preferred his glory before
their own ease, liberty, peace, and prosperity: but now being full fed with
the things of this life, thought they have begun the work of God with great
zeal; it happens by their turning back to the world, they dishonor him,
hinder the godly, and discourage them in their good entendments, and so lose
all their labor before they bring it to any perfection; because they shake off
that zeal, wherewith in former times they were comforted, and their brethren
edified; But now like cowards they are ashamed of their former preciseness,
therefore they betake them to the world again, like those which repent them of
their former bargain. Such lukewarm Laodiceans never knew what it was to
aim at the glory of God, if they did, they would not retire in such a cowardly
manner.

7. Riches rob us of our charity, in making us censure other men, which out
of an honest heart, and in obedience to Gods Commandments, are careful to
perform holy duties unto him in a due manner, and to mourn and shun the
sinful corruptions of the time, yet because they will not run with us in the
same covetous courses we walk in, we are ready to speak evil of them, and
brand them with names of reproach.

8. Riches deprive us of our Judgment, in making us believe they are good and
excellent, Psalm. 4. 6. permanent and durable, Prou. 27. 24. when as indeed they
are neither good, 1 Timothy 6. 10. But the love of them is the root of all evil:
nor durable, Pro. 23. 5. For they remain not always; neither are they our
own, but lent us to be employed in our Masters service, Luke 16. 12.

9. They deceive us of the means of getting them, which the most think to be
their Pro. 1. 13. Iam. 4. 13. Deuteronomy. 8. 18
own endeauours, When as indeed they are Gods blessing, which gives us power
to get wealth.

10. They deceive us in our practice and resolution, using Pro. 1. 13.
many times unlawful means to get them. Again on the other side, as they
hinder us in in the practice of piety, so also they add fuel to our
corruptions, and make us ready to fall into any kind of sin whatsoever.

If riches then be so unprofitable, and so full of deceit, and so unable to
do us good for ^^r souls and our bodies. Then learn to esteem them not as
they are in outward show full of glory and estimation, but value them according
to the account GOD makes of them, which calls them uncertain shadows, 1 Timothy
6. 19 Psa. 39. 6.
and vain shows, and esteems them as nothing, or as good as nothing, For they
will fly away Pro. 23. 5.
when we have most need of them.

2. Judge them not by present Psalm. 37. 35, 36. Ezekiel. 7. 19
estate, but by trial; see what rich men have found in them, sickness,
terror of conscience, calamities, fears, and great perplexity, when they
should do them most good; and though they have promised much peace to
themselves Pro. 11. 4.
in they enioyment of them, yet we see the are disappointed of their hopes, and
so are forced to spend their days in sorrow and O munde immunde tu multa
promutis; et pau^a reddis, imo sic fallax es, et defectuosus, vt quos hic tu
diuitijs extollas, in fine nudos demittas.
discontent. They are very fitly compared by our Savior unto thorns, for as
thorns do prick and pierce those that touch them, so do riches prick and
pierce the heart of those which rest upon them; and as thorns do stop up the
common paths, and hinder the growth of corn: so do riches stop up the way to
the kingdom of heaven; and as thorns hinder the growth of corn, so riches
hinder the spiritual growth of grace, that it cannot thrive in such thorny
ground: which made our Savior say, A rich man can hardly be saved.

Leave off therefore, o thou rich man, and do not think that the abundance of
these worldly things can make thee happy. They purchase not a crown to
dignifie thee, but thorns to choke thee; for can that make a man happy, which
makes him hateful to his Creator? which does not better him in the maine
things wherein the excellency of a Christian consists? Which make him never the
better to Godward, or himself, nor of more account in the godlies estimation?
Therefore brethren as you love your souls, take heed how you set your
affections upon these worldly things, you may have them in your hands as
stewards to distribute them to good uses, but not to treasure them up in your
hearts. Psalm. 62. 2.


Q. But may some say, Ifriches are so unable to profit us, Whether Riches are
of any use.
and are so dangerous in their use, then what are they good for? are they of no
worth? may not rich men be saved as well as other? if they may not, then we
were best cast away our riches? Unto which I answer, that such is the malice
of Satan, that he is ready to bring us from one extreme unto another, and
so eatch the simple, either by adoring riches on the right hand, or casting
them down by their abuse on the left, thereby making unstable Christians to
hate, and despise the gifts of God, as unlawful to be used; by which means
he has deluded many, insomuch that they have not only condemned the use of
riches, and persuaded others to do the like, but have chosen and embraced
voluntary poverty, as we may read in histories. Crates a wise heathen, and
Philosopher at Thebes, finding his riches did hinder him in his study at
Athens, cast a great part of it into the Sea, saying, I will drown Ego merga^
te p^ius. quam tu mergas me. Hieron. ad Paulmum.
thee, rather then thou should drown me; whose practice S. Hierome in one
of his Epistles seems to approve, debasing riches and extolling poverty, in
whose steps the Papists at this day tread, thinking it to be the only way to
please God, which made many of the Champions of their Church to set their wits
Bellar de monach. c. 7. and 39. Rhem. annot. in Mat. 19. ver 9.
upon the nail to support and uphold their vow of voluntary poverty: equalling
their votaries to the Seraphins, and if it were possible, to advance them above
the throne of the Angels. But we are to know, that riches in themselves are
the good blessings of God, and may be used and possessed of the godly unto
very good purposes, although they be abused by the wicked unto their perdition,
For the fault (says S. Gregory) Greg. mor. l. 9. c. 28. Crimen non est in
rebus sed in vsu age^^is.
is not in themselves, but in them that use them. Which saying does sort well
with that of the Scripture, Unto the clean all things are clean. And S.
Ambrose Dis^ant non in facultatibus crimen haerere, sed in ijs qui vti nesciunt
in Luc. 9.
says, The fault is not in riches, but in the ignorance of them that have
them, not using them aright; Therefore let no man reject riches, because some
abuse them to sin. For riches and wealth to a good man are very comfortable,
and good blessings, by reason he has great means to do good, but to a bad
man they are the cause of much evil, because they minister more matter to his
sinful desire. A man may warm him by a fire, yet not burn himself in it; so
a rich man may moderately use his riches, and yet not hedge up his way to
happiness: take away the abuse, and the use of them is very good. It is not
riches that Christ and Paul condemn, but the inordinate love of them. They are
called in Scripture not only gifts, but benefits and rewards, which God Deuteronomy.
2. 8.
promised to bestow upon them that serve him. Therefore it is said, God gave
Job his wealth, Job 1. 21. c. 42. 10.
and the Israelites their Corn, Wine, and oil, and multiplied Hos. 2. 8.
their silver and gold: hence they are called by the wisest of men, the
blessings of the Lord, and promised Pro. 10. 22.
that they shall be in his house that fears the Lord. Ps. 112. 1, 3.
And he has bestowed this blessing upon many of his Children, as upon
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Solomon, that they might be the better enabled to
perform holy duties. Therefore we may lawfully pray for them, if we propose
right ends to glorify God with them, and benefit his Church, (yet we must
submit our wills unto Gods Will) and that we may so live, that we may not be
chargeable to others, but provide for our selves and Children, according to our
several places and conditions, for if there be any that provides no^ 1 Timothy
5. 8.
for his own, especially for those of his own house, such an one is worse
then an Infidel, and has denied the faith. As we must do good unto all, so
especially to Gal. 6. 10.
them that are most near and dear unto us; Joseph sent meat to Genesis 43. 34
all his Brethren, both according to the flesh, and according to the faith, but
Beniamins Mess was five times as much as the rest of his brethren, because he
loved him best: so the care that we should show to our own family should be
five times greater then for any body else, for whom should a man love better
then his wife and Children. When the famine was in Samaria, the women cried 2
Kin. 6. 35.
unto the King with their Children in their arms, saying, Help O King, else
we perish for want of bread. Now every man in his own family is a King, whose
office is not only to make laws, but also to provide necessaries for his
subjects, that they may live in peace and quietness. Therefore when want
comes into the family, whither shall the Wife go, but to her Husband, and
the children, but to their father? Now if husbands be careless to provide for
their Wives, Fathers for their Children, what a lamentable cry will it be when
they are in want? when the Wife shall cry, Husband give us bread, or else we
die? and Children cry, and say, Father give us bread, or else we starve? Now
in this case what will the careless Husband say to his dear Wife? or the
improuident Father to his poor Children? he cannot say perhaps as the King
said to the woman of Samaria, Seeing the 2 Kin. 6. 27.
Lord does not help, how can I? when as the fault is in himself, which has
pulled this misery upon himself by his own indiscretion, and idle carriage in
the course of his calling. The good huswife is described by her carfulness,
not only to provide necessaries for her husband and Children, but also for the
maintenance of her whole family which depended upon Pro. 31. 15.
her; and this care of necessaries must not only be for time present, but also
for the time to come. For parents are bound to provide, and to lay up for their
2 Cor. 12. 14.
Children. Therefore Salomo^ describing a godly man, says, He shall Pro. 13. 22.
give an inheritance to his childrens children. Therefore as it is the duty of
a good man to take care for his own: so also that he may be able to relieve
the poor; for it is a more blessed thing to Act. 20. 35.
give then to receive: And our blessed Lord teaches us to pray for our daily
bread; now what we desire in our prayers we may labor for in our practice:
and as we must seek the Kingdom of GOD in the first place, so in the second
place we may lawfully seek for the things of this world, that we may be able
to Romans 13. 7.
give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and tribute to whom tribute
belongs, and be able to bring up our Children in learding, whereby they may
become serviceable to the Church and Common wealth. In these respects we may
desire riches, if God see them good for us, that we may honor him with them,
and become serviceable to his Church; and if he do bless us with riches, we
are to esteem them as pledges of his love, and to manifest our thankfulness
by obedience to his Commandments, by walking humbly in our lives and
conuersations, both toward GOD and men. For riches are good, and the blessings
of God. Therefore woe unto them that make them the instruments of damnation unto
themselves, by not using them to his glory, which gave them, but by abusing
them to serve their own lusts: as the Israelites of old, Which sat down 1
Cor. 10. 7 Ex. 32. 6.
to eat and drink, and rose up again to play. But howsoever though they are
good in themselves, as they are the blessings of God, yet we must take heed we
do not ouer-value them in our judgment, and gripe them hard and close in our
hands, they are thorns; and thorns, are dangerous if they be not carefully
handled, therefore let us account them good servants, but bad masters, no
better then dross and dung in respect of Christ: for unless God bless and
sanctify them to us, they will do us little good.

Let us therefore thrust them out from harboring in our hearts, and make them
servants to follow and obey us, and not lords to rule over us. And if we want
their company, not to use any unlawful means for the obtaining of them; but
still to esteem them base in comparison of grace, and the means of our
salvation, and to be content rather to lose the^ then the least degree of
grace. Money is but as drugs, and as a lenatiue oyntme^t to mitigate and
assuage the swellings and diseases of the body; they cannot remove the
Carbuncle or disease, they may mitigate the pain a while, but the root
remains still; so though they are good blessings, yet they are not absolutely
good, they are but the blessings of Gods left hand, and common: as well the
blessings of Esau, as Jacob, no man can know love or hatred by them, and are
more freely bestowed upon the wicked, then upon the godly. Esau flourished in
state and honor, with four hundred seruingmen at his heels, when Jacob was
feign to creep and crouch to him with terms of honor in his mouth to gain
his favor. Pharaoh in Majesty and honor dominered over Gods people, while
Moses and Aaron the beloved of the Lord, are humble petitioners unto him, for
the peoples liberty. The Scribes and Pharisees like great Rabbis sat in
Moses Chair, when Christ and his Disciples, are scorned and contemned as base
persons; and when Christ had not a place to put his head in, then Herod had his
palace, and places of delight. Esau and Ismael spent their time in pleasures,
while Isaac and Jacob spend their time in painful labors. Dives was clothed
in purple, and fared deliciously every day, when Lazarus the beloved of the
Lord was pinched with hunger, and pained with soars. Riches are such unto a
man, as a man is unto himself, a good man is not the worse for Diuiti^ sunt vt
illius animus est qui ea possides, qui been vtiscit ea bona sunt illi, qui non
recte vtitur mala. Ter. in Heaut. Diuiti^ dantur benis vt ne putentur mal^,
malis ne put^ntur bona, multis ne putentur magna. Aug. in Hag. Ille qui non
habet, ne^ ambiat: qui habet non superbiat. Aug. in Psalm. 62.
the want of them, nor a wicked man the better for the enjoying of them, as
rich men are not to be esteemed less in the favor of GOD for their riches, if
they use them well, so godly poor men are not to be despised for their
poverty. GOD therefore, as a wise disposer of them, gives them to the godly,
lest they might be thought evil things, he gives them to the wicked also, lest
they might be thought good things, he gives them unto many, lest they should
be thought great blessings; therefore he that has not these worldly
blessings, let him not couetously gapeafter them, and he that has them, let
him not be proud of them; For what is a man profited if he gain the whole
world, and lose his soul.

it was to Achan, Judas, or the like; For he that gets riches, Ier. 17. 11.
and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end
shall be a fool. If thou have got thy riches squarely and with a good
Conscience, take heed they be not as a logge in thy way to hinder thee of thy
happiness, for we cannot serve God and riches; He will not suffer 1 Samuel 3. 2.
one Altar to serve for himself and Dagon too, though the Philistines used
great labor to bring it to pass; So God will not endure to have the Idol of
Mammon, which worldlings adore, to lodge in that heart which he has reserved
for himself, and which does so much dishonor him in his truth, mercy, and
providence, and does so much mischief unto his children, for while it
delights the eyes, and Occulos delectat, aures demulcet, sed mentem inquinat.
Amb. de Cain and Abel cap. 5.
tickleth the ears, it makes an incision into the soul. We may, as I said
before, in some measure be careful for the things of this life, but we must
take heed we be not ouer-careful, which many times is accompanied with distrust
in Gods providence; as if times, seasons, and means were not in his hands, and
as if he were not able to give success to our labors, unless we torment
and vex our selves, and neglect his service to take care of our own. But of
this we shall have fitter occasion to speak of in another place.

of a love which they bear to Hunc ^abe beatum, non quem vulgus voc^t, sed cui
omne bonum in animo est. Seneca.
this base earth, do so magnify it, as to account wicked men happy, though
they be branded with as many vicious qualities, as ever was Commodus, Nero,
Caligula, and Heliogabolus; For money will make a stigmaticall Thraso, fex
populi, the very scumme of the people, to be esteemed, though he have nothing
to commend him but his Coin, which perhaps his father or himself has got with
bribery, usury, or other unlawful practices: by which means he has leaped
to preferment, and so by his golden cover he hides a mass of ill and stinking
humors. Which made a lewd fellow once say, If my Father were a ha^gman, and my
mother a Harlot, and my self no better, yet if I have money, I am liked well
enough, and am never branded with their misdeedes; for there is no vice that
wealth does not smother: If a rich man be as proud as Tarquin, as cruel as
Nero, as churlish as Nabal, and Timon, and as covetous as Dives, yet all these
vices are covered with a golden mantle. So that Auri sacra fames quid non? What
cannot Gold bring to pass? It can dimne the sight, put spirit into a Coward,
and gain estimation of the world. If proud Herod do but make an Oration in
his fine Robes, the people will admire him, and think he is a god. The rude
multitude look at nothing but the outward picture, which makes them many times
err in their judgment, and extol an ignorant ass for his gay coat, and
Crowns in his Purse, whereby it comes to pass that great places are possessed
of men of slender judgment, which have not one dram of worthiness to
commend them, but wealth and worldly fame: though such be advanced by the
courtesy of wise men, and simplicity of fools, yet let them not flatter
themselves, for they are not more honorable in the sight of God, which judges
not according to the outward appeara^ce, nor any whit the more esteemed of the
godly. So on the contrary, such is the blind worlds judgment, that if a man
be as prudent as Cato, as just as Manlius, and as magnanimous as Scipio, never
so honest, wise, temperate, and never so beautified with virtue, yet Non facile
emergunt, quorum virtutibus obslat res angusta domi. Sub sordido pallio latet
aliquando sapientia.
if he be a poor man, though he have great wisdom, and many excellent parts,
Si res angusta domi, if Coin be wanting, he is despised and rejected, and if
he have neither coin nor friends, he is like to have co^d entertainment, and
no more regarded then an unwelcome guest, for

Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere for as,
If empty handed thou appear,
No welcome ghest thou can be here.
Money is the sinews, blood, and soul of a man, for unless the purse be
well linde with crowns, neither Science, Art, nor honesty is available to
advance to dignity: So that a man is never thought wise and learned unless he
be rich, and though he speak well, and to the purpose, yet as the Poet says;
Rara tenui facundia pa^no, A Satyr 7. Dum pauper loquitur, tunc barbarus esse
videtur
poor man's speech is seldom pleasant, and wisdom under a patched coat
seldom Canonical: But let these poor worms know, though they be despised of
the world, yet there is a GOD that judges the earth, and will come quickly and
bring his reward with him, to give unto every one as Reu. 12. 12
his works shall be. Therefore let not this neglect of respect dismay the
virtuous and weldeseruing, though they have no regard in the world, yet
wisdom shall be justified of her Children, and their own work shall praise
them, yea their very enemies shall be forced to acknowledge their virtues.
Though the Jews did labor by all means to bury the glory of our Savior, and
the virtues of his Disciples under disgrace, yet for all this their enemies
were forced to acknowledge their innocence, and justify them against the faces
of their enemies: Therefore we read that Metellus Macedonicus praised Scipio
for his virtues, and wept for him at his death, though he were his mortal foe;
for no man, though he be never so envious can take that from him which virtue
has merited, If in this life only 1 Cor, 15. 19.
we had our hope, we were of all men most miserable. But let the poor despised
comfort themselves, though they sow in tears, yet they shall reap in joy: For
man's felicity is not in riches, they are gotten with pain, kept with care, and
lost with grief; Then what is a man profited if he gain the whole world?

This base esteem of the godly poor does shake the feeble Conscience of many
weak ones, when they behold diverse good men stored with many good parts, yet
in regard of their poverty are made the scorn of the world: Let such know,
man's happiness does not consist in this world, but in the world to come, where
they shall shine as the Stars in the firmament, whereas those which have had
their portion in this life shall be turned into hell.

Psalm. 32. 1. 1 Timothy 6. 6
that is, For the free pardon of our sins in Christ, And to be truly godly,
which is the chiefest gain. The righteousness of Phil. 3. 9.
Christ, which is the portion of the Saints, A holy conversation Phil. 2. 15.
and a good Conscience in all things, which is a pledge of the true joy we
shall have in heaven; 2 Cor. 1. 12
For all other joys are vain, which have not grace for the foundation. Labor
then to have GOD reconciled unto thee; And to be at one with him: And if thou
fear him thou shall want nothing that is good. Would thou have riches? then
fear the Lord, and Psalm. 112. 3.
then wealth shall be in thy house. Would thou have true gain? Christ shall
be unto thee in life Phil. 1. 2.
and death advantage. Desire thou salvation? It is he that shall Mat. 1. 21.
save his people from their sins. The comforts of the world may leave the
ungodly, But the consolations John 16. 21
of the godly are as wels of living water, their joys shall never be taken
from them. And they Ps. 119. 165
that love the Lord shall have great prosperity; For the Lord takes delight
Psalm. 35. 27.
in the prosperity of his servants. This should teach us then to prize grace
and the fear of the Lord according to their due worth, They are better then
Gold Psa. 19. 10.
yea then the fine Gold.

If outward things in their lawful use be so base and unable to do us good,
how filthy and vile are they in their sinful abuse? And how excellent then is
the Lord Jesus? And how ought we to prize his love to us, that when Gold and
silver could do us no good, then he bought us for a price, even the 1 Cor. 6.
20
greatest price that any one could pay? For what can be more costly then
blood? or what Isay 53. Romans 5. 10.
more dear then life? Yet when we were his enemies he powered out his blood to
reconcile us to God. How ought we then to love, fear and obey him? For it is
not the riches of Craesus, the triumphs of Caesar, the conquest of Alexander,
nor any worldly pomp can profit us, and make us happy. Though some among the
Romans, and some among the Grecians were so advanced to outward felicity,
that their Painters did picture them with Towns and cities gliding into
Plutarch.
their nets while they were asleep, as Plutarch reports; Yet what are these
without Christ? they cannot be reduced to any of the beatitudes. The fairest
colors are not seen in the dark, and without light have no pleasant show; So
are the most specious blessings of the world: take away CHRIST the light of the
world, and where is their glory and comfort? They are but dross and dung Phil.
3. 8.
without him, full of obscurity and dishonor. Labor I say to get thee an
inheritance among the Saints, and the comfort of Gods Spirit, and to let the
Word of GOD dwell plentiously in thee. This is the true riches, this wealth is
permanent, and will be a comfort unto us in our troubles, sickness, and hour
of death, when rich worldlings will be at their wits end. If God bless us with
riches, let us pray for wisdom to use them aright. Pray first for goodness,
and then in the second place for goods: Else they will not become good unto us,
until grace season them and they be sanctified unto us; And then use them for
necessity, as men do knaves and thieves, which they know will be ready to
cozen, or steal away something from them: So let us watch over our riches,
lest they steal away our hearts from godliness; dull and dead our affections
unto holy and religious duties; or hinder us in our spiritual voyage to the
Land of Canaan, or split our earthly vessels, upon the craggie Rocks of
presumption, or carnal security. Thus if we watch over our hearts, our riches
shall not be our ruin.

The consideration hereof should teach the Children God, as to be content with
their own portion, so not to envy the prosperity of the wicked, because God
gives them a larger allowance; shall our eye be evil because his is good? If
we have food and raiment, let us 1 Timothy* 6. 8
be therewith content; And if God give us store of these earthly things, take
we heed we do not set our hearts upon them. Then we shall be willing to
leave them when God calls for them* and when they take wings and fly away, we
shall look after them with a quiet mind, as Job 31. 25. 1. 21. Blessed is
that poverty which unites our hearts to God.
Job did, because he did not set his heart upon his riches when his substance
was great: therefore he was not grieved when they were taken away; but in his
greatest losses praises the Lord, having learned patience, and contentedness,
as well when he wanted, as when he abounded. If God have given us the comforts
of his Spirit, and the assurance of salvation; then let us learn to be dieted
by him, which knows how ready we are to surfeit upon these unwholesome viands,
which produce such obnoxious humors; And let us know that what we want in
earth, shall be supplied in heaven: The Lord will not suffer us to want those
things, which in his wisdom he knows to be fit for us. Therefore David says,
Nothing is wanting to them Ps. 34. 9. 10
that fear him, for the Lord forsakes not his Saints, they shall be
preserved for evermore. Therefore psa. 37. 28.
let us labor to be content with any estate which God has chalked out for us
by his providence.

But alas, what a lamentable thing it is to see many which profess themselves
the Children of God, to be so worldly minded, that if things go not according
to their mind, they will be ready to call the truth of Gods providence in
question, as appears by their distrustful 2 Kin. 6. 33.
speeches* as if they were borne for no other end, then to be bond-slaues to
the world. And so by cumbering their minds with the cares thereof, which are
in their own nature so heavy a load, that they hinder them in the pursuit of
blessedness. What a burden of torments does the covetous desire bring with it!
a disease like to the dropsy, the more it has the more it would; Always
thirsty, as the Serpent Dipsas, which will never be satisfied till it burst.
If a covetous man might have his desire, and Mydas Aurum cuncta pr^ecor fiant,
quae c^rpore tangam. Palin. in Tau.
wish were now to be obtained; the covetous man would have the devil and all;
and thus by this means he would wrap himself in all misery, by neglecting his
souls health.

Brethren, what, were you borne to be drudges to the world, and so to spend
your days in servitude? No, no, you were born to be the Lords free men, and to
serve him with joy and gladness, and not to be slaves to your riches. Solomon
levied tribute upon bondmen and Vassailes, and not upon the Israelites the
Lords own people. So let the world leuy her bond-seruice upon the spiritual
Amorites Hittites, I mean upon earth-wormes, Usurers, and the like; Let them
be her drudges, and not the true Israel of God, which have him for their
Shepherd which will take Psalm. 23. 5.
care they shall want nothing. Therefore let us cast our care upon God, and
make our request known unto him, which is able to help us, and will not fail
us, nor sorsake us: If God feed the Ravens, shall we think he will let us and
our children want? And if we do want any necessary thing, then let us examine
our hearts what may be the cause; have we served God as we ought, and depended
upon his providence? if we have failed in any part, how shall we think that he
will take care of us? Let us repent for our negligence herein, and humble our
souls under the hand of God, and be content to endure hardness and scarcity,
because we have sinned against our Maker, and have valued these trifles above
the glory of God, and our own salvation. Learn we then to be content with
our estates and conditions, and to praise God; and if he give us nothing but
bread, or feed us with scarcity, yet let us know he deals more freely with
us, then he has done with many (which have better deserved them then we)
that have eat the bread of care, and quenched their thirst with the water of
affliction; Let us remember Exiguum natura desiderat.
nature is content with a little. Food and Raiment was as much as Jacob
desired, and Agur craved Genesis 28. 20. Pro. 30. 1 Timothy 6. 8.
but food convenient, which if God grant us, we ought to be content, and not to
seek after great things here, seeing we must leave them when we die: And if the
body be not dieted with moderation it will prove a stubborn servant to the
soul, making it fit for nothing but thorny cogitations, which are the greatest
enemies to grace, or good exercises. The wise heathen could teach us
moderations in these Si ad naturam viuis, nunquam eris pauper, si ad opinionem,
nunquam diue^ Epist. 161. What the wise heathen thought of riches.
things. Seneca that Christian Ethnic, as Erasmus styles him, has a witty
saying of Epicurus, If thou live (says he) according to nature, thou shall
never be poor; but if according to opinion, thou shall never be rich. They
feared lest these earthly things would steal away their hearts from their
studies in Philosophy, therefore they despised these base and mundane trifles.
Annacreon having a huge mass of money sent him by Policrates, could never rest
till he was rid of it again: therefore he sent it back again, saying, That
he never lived in such fear as he did while he had the money in his house.
Diogenes refused all, and craved nothing but the benefit of the Sun which
Alexander Quintus Curtius in the life of Alexander.
kept from him, by standing between him and it. And when news was brought
unto Zeno and certain other, that their Ships, Goods, and Merchandise were
lost, they rejoiced, because it was a cause to make them apply themselves to
their studies, which yielded them far greater content. Philoxenes having
purchased a farm, whereby he might live the better at ease, quitted it
again, and returned to Athens, saying, These goods shall not lose me, but I
them. Therefore Seneca writing to a friend of his, said, that if he had not
lost his riches, it might be, they might have lost him: Which made Aristides,
Curious, and many other to live in poor conditions. If heathen men by natures
light learned such contentment, what a shame is it for us which have the word
of God for our light, yet to be so carking and caring for the things of this
life? For if Gold and Silver, were sent us, we should hardly find a man that
would send it back again, for, Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum

respuit aurum; We count him a fool that despises money when it is offered
him. But if we would consider, that all things we have, we hold them from God,
as borrowed goods; Then we would be content to let him have them again
without grief, and give him thanks for the time we have had them, lest we
should be convicted of ingratitude. But alas, the lack of experience, not
knowing how to apply our selves to our present estate causes us to wrap our
selves in a number of passions and torments. We must therefore strive to know
the truth of Gods providence that we may not be dismaide if God do deprive us
of these earthly blessings. It is written of Antiochus, that when the Romans
had gotten from him, the greatest part of his Kingdom, he did not murmr and
repine as many of us would have done, but said he was much beholding to them
that had eased him of so much care. Philip King of Macedon, upon a time being
fallen upon the sands, and seeing the mark and print of his body, said, Lord
what a little plat of the world is nature contented with, and yet we covet the
world? What a shame is it for us, that the heathen should condemn our greedy
desires? What would they have done and said, if they might have had as much
means and opportunities as we have, to get knowledge, and to know what the
Lord required at our hands? Let us repent of our former repining, and let us
return unto the Lord with all our hearts; and be content to be governed by him
in all things, for there can be no true comfort in any thing in this world; for
else it may hap unto us, as it did unto Dinah, who while she wandered to feed
her fancies upon the daughters of a strange Country, she lost her Virginity
among the sons of the country: so while we seek to fill our minds with the
profits of the world, we may lose our sincerity, 1 Timothy 1. 19.
and make shipwreck of a good conscience, and so be forced to go away as
Thamar out of her brother Ammons Chamber, with her garment rent: So those
worldlings which sometimes with Demas, followed Paul, but now embrace the
world; are forced many times to go away with their garments rent, and torn.
And no marvel, for if they will venture through the thorns and bushes of
worldly cares to get worldly promotion, it is no marvel if their zeal be
abated and quenched, their courage for the performance of holy things cooled,
their faith blasted, their knowledge withered, their humility defaced, and the
whole grament of piety rent in pieces. For if with Siserah we look for any
rest in Iaels tent, we shall be sure to be made fast; so if we look for any
sound comfort in the world, we shall be sure to speed as ill as Siserah did;
and it is a thousand to one but our sincerity and piety will be nailed to the
earth before we be aware. And so by longing after the pottage of the world we
lose our birthright as Esau did. Therefore seeing Gods love or hatred is not
known by the having or want of these outward things, therefore let us desire
the Lord to weane our hearts from the things of the world, and to give us quiet
minds and thankful hearts. But Lord, though we are full of impatience, and
doubting of thy Providence, Mercy, and Goodness, and so ready to forget what
thou have done for us all our days, yet we pray thee forget not thy self, but
continue a God still to do us good, and if want come, then to keep our faith
firm and strong in thy Providence; if sickness, and adversity come, keep our
patience entire; if riches and preferment come, keep our zeal vnquenced.
Remember we pray thee, whereof we be made, from the earth we come, on the
earth we live, delighting in earthly things, and at last unto the earth we
shall return again.

Therefore, seeing heavenly things cannot come from so vile a matter, and our
earthly nature cannot be changed but by thy heavenly Spirit, we pray thee
rouse up our dead affections, and make us to place our hearts only upon thee,
give us grace to use and employ our riches to thy honor, and to purchase unto
our selves the means of grace with them, that so we passing the time of our
pilgrimage in thy fear, we may die in thy favor, rest in thy peace, and rise
again by thy power, which grant unto us for the Lord Jesus sake. And thus much
for the first point propounded, riches, and their insufficiency to profit us
for our souls and our bodies in life and in death: The second follows, which
is Honors and Preferments. Tul. in Tus^. quest.


Honor, according as the wise heathens define it, is a union of the praises of
good men which judge of virtue without partiality; What is Honor if it be not
sanctified, but thraldom and bondage; the beginning of danger, and the
occasion of death? and so turns to the ruin of many: How many are there which
have striued to enter in at the gate of Honor, which have been trod under
foot, as the Mi^e in the street? Those which gape after honor may fitly be
compared to those which climb Nut trees, some break their necks with
climbing: and other their teeth with cracking. Did not 2. Sam. 18. 9.
Absolon by climbing so high, make his own hair his halter; and Haman by his
ambitious Esth. 7. 9.
thoughts raise himself fifty cubits high upon a stately gallows which he had
prepared for Mordechai? Act. 12.
and when Herod thought to deifie himself, he was quickly brought under by the
base worms. And do we not see many break their teeth with cracking these Nuts?
Did not Achan think to advance himself by the accursed things? but he was
deceived, it was his ruin: for he lost both the wedge of gold, and life too.
And have we not heard of many in our times, which by their climbing have got
fearful falls: And the Amos 8. 12
moon of their hopes has been eclipsed at the full, and the sun of their
preferments has gone down at noone? Which shows how slippery great men's
places are, and how full of dangers on every side. Though promotion come only
from the Lord, yet many times through our corrupt nature it does more hurt then
good: unless our hearts be seasoned with grace and the fear of the Lord.
Brethren, mistake me not, I do not condemn honor, which in it self is good,
lawful, and laudable, and may moderately be desired of Christians. Therefore
lest we may lose our selves in this labyrinth Honors are of two sorts,
we will make a distinction between that honor which is lawful, and commendable,
and that which 1. Laudable. 2. Worldly, and Wicked.
is worldly and wicked. Lawful honor is that which does not only consist in
the witness, which God and our own conscience gives to our pious endeauours,
but also in the account which the godly have for their virtuous and godly
carriage both to GOD and man. This honor may also shine in private Christians,
in their mean estates, and conditions of life; as well as in public persons,
in whose hands is authority and rule, and other dignities and preferments.

2. Worldly honor is that which is gained by the applause of the rude
ignorant, and wavering multitude, joined with worldly preferment, procured by
cunning devices, making the show of virtue to stand for the substance, or at
leastwise ambitiously to affect those things (which in their own nature are
good and may be desired) to serve their turn, and to hide their hypocrisy
with. The former kind of honor is very lawful, and may be desired by the
godly, but the other is to be contemned and despised. The lawfulness of that
honor, and the moderate desire thereof may appear by warrant from sacred
Scripture.

1. Because it is the gift of God, which raises up the poor out of the dust,
and lifts up 1 Samuel 2. 8.
the beggars from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them
inherit the seat of glory, as Hannah speaks in her divine song. And David he
says, that riches and honor come from 2 Chronicles. 29. 11.
God. Therefore they must needs be good, seeing they issue and slow from him
which is the fountain of goodness: And as they are good in themselves, so they
serve for good uses; For a godly man in his place, as he protects the godly,
so is he a terror Romans 13. 3.
to the workers of iniquity. Let those therefore which are advanced into place
of authority take heed they stain not their places by the devils malice, and
their own corruptions; but let them approve their actions and conuersations by
the sincerity of their hearts, that they seek not their own ends, but how
they may honor GOD in their places, and benefit his Church, and to strive to
be great in grace, as they are in place, and to shine as lamps in the midst
of the people, by professing and practicing the fruits of Religion in their
lives and conuersations, for the eyes of all men are fixed upon them: if they
prove wandering stars, and do not their duty, they shall greatly dishonor
God, offend the godly, and lead the wicked into much evil. Jobs Children
perished in the house of their elder Brother; so many inferiors perish by the
loose example of their superiors. Let the consideration hereof teach all
Superiors, and Magistrates in Psalm. 101.
their place to walk in vprightnes, that by their examples they may not
embolden their Inferiors to sin, or to settle themselves upon their lees, but
to draw out the sword against the workers of iniquity; hereby they shall
glorify God, and discharge their duties. For the time shall come when they
shall be called to account how they have walked in their places, and how they
have honored God and advanced his Gospel? what a comfort will it be to their
souls, if they can say with good Hezekiah, that they have walked before the
Lord with upright hearts. Let us also teach Parents so to walk before their
children and servants, as that they may be patterns of all goodness for them to
imitate, but of their duty we shall* have more fit occasion to speak in
another place.

Ps. 75. 6. 7.
high. For the world and worldly men cannot bestow the honor of virtue upon
us, and if we would seek it from GOD with hope of obtaining, let us return
all glory from our selves unto him, seeing he has promised to honor them 1 Samuel 2. 30.
which honor him: And if we would have honor from men, Gloria vmbra vertutis
est, etiam inuitos comitatur. Sen. Ep. 79
then let us abound in all good works, and then honor will attend us like a
shadow, though we be unwilling of it. If GOD have ordained us to be great men
on earth, he knows how to advance us; and the only way for us to be advanced
is, to walk lowly in our own eyes, and to make no account of the worlds
preferment, which will deceive us: for what will honor do us good if we make
GOD our enemy to gain it? Let us therefore submit our selves to be guided by
GOD, and content to wait his leisure for our preferment, and if we be descended
from noble parents, which were honorable in the world for their virtues, let
us take heed we do not dishonor them by our profane and wicked life: Were our
Parents mean and contemptible in the world, then let us labor to advance them
by our holy life and virtuous conversation; for it is more honor to be the
founder then the ouerthrower of a noble house; Virtue builds up, but evil
manners ouerturne the best house that ever was: for it is much better to be
virtuous our selves, then to boast of the virtues of our Ancestors. but if we
seek to climb to honor by flattery or other base ways, we deceive our
selves: Many think that if they have the favor of their Prince, they are in a
great good way to advance themselves and their posterity: But alas, if we
trust in the favors of Princes we sleep under a shadow that will quickly be
gone. Haman by Esther 7. 8
trusting too much to the fauout of the King, was deceived of his expectation.

Some think that if they can marry their son or daughter into a rich stock,
they think this is the way to rise to honor, and to keep themselves from the
thunderclaps of adversity, though the stock they match their Children in, be
never so infected, and blasted with vice, and all manner of ungodliness; yet
if rich and mighty, it is well enough; Surely this Ethicall policy were highly
to be commended, if so be our abiding City were here; but seeing all things
here are vain and moment any, short and transitory, what a vain thing is it
to be in love with the flattering smiles of this life, to gain earth, and to
lose heaven? Therefore if we would be truly honorable, we must not place our
trust in Princes, nor in any thing in the world, but in the Lord alone, which
will be faithful unto us in our life, and in our death, according to his
promise 1 Samuel 2. 30.
and wonted manner of dealing; Those that honor me shall be honored, there
is his promise: Now his manner is, not to fail one jot of his promise, but
has made it good in all ages, as we may see in Moses, Aaron; David, Solomon,
Josiah, etc. whose names he honored in their lives, and magnified them after
their death. But those which would not honor him in their lives, as he
branded them in their lives for infamous persons, so they shall be crowned
with everlasting shame and reproach; and in ages to come their name shall
stink. How infamous is Cain for murdering his Brother Abel, Potiphers wife
for her whorish allurements, Pharaoh for his cruelty, Doeg for accusin^ and
killing the Lords Priests, Iezabel for whoredom, and murdering Naboth for his
Vineyard, Judas for betraiyng his Lord and Master? All these with many more do
stink before God and man, and their reproach shall never be blotted out; For
as the memorial of the Pro. 10. 6. Pro. 13. 9.
just shall be blessed, so the name of the wicked shall rot: To show unto us,
that the name of the wicked is no better then carrion, which gives such a
noisome sent, that the passers by stop their noses; the remembrance of their
lives shall be as noisome as the stinking snuff of a Candle; and this is the
just judgment of God upon them, that as they regarded not to glorify him, but
themselves, therefore he gave them up to such vile affections and such filthy
actions, which can breed nothing but a rotten and a filthy name; For they that
dishonor me, says the Lord, I will dishonor.

Thus you have heard how honor in it self is good, the means how to attain
it, and what does hinder and defile it: let the consideration hereof stir up
and put courage in those which are advanced above the people, to be resolute
and zealous for the Lord their God, to maintain his cause against the proud of
the world, and to chase away the workers of iniquity. But alas, how may we
lament the sinfulness of many which being advanced to place, abuse their
authority, (which GOD and the King has given them) to serve their own lusts,
showing themselves patterns of profaneness, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of honors and preferments,
and their insufficiency to profit us. We will now proceed to the third point
propounded, that is, to consider of pleasures and delights, which the profane
Epicures of our age do so much d^ale upon; which vain pleasures, and pleasing
vanities, though they are many in number, yet may they be comprised under these
heads. 1. Pleasures of the flesh, pride in apparel, beauty, vain glory, and
popular applause.

We will begin with the first, which for methods sake we will subdiuide into
these particulars. 1, Pleasures of the body. 2, Belly. 3, Eyes. And 4, Ears.
But first of pleasure in general, and afterward we will descend into the
particulars.

Pleasures are so far from profiting us for our souls, or our bodies, as
that many times through the corruption of our nature (which want wisdom to use
them aright) they are the cause of much hurt to both. But herein I would not
be mistaken, as if I seemed to condemn all pleasures, as unlawful for
Christians to use; but because the carnal world is ready to plead for Baal,
and so through inordinate love of them is ready to prize them, above their
worth; we will therefore diue into them, and for trial bring them to the
touchstone of Gods Word, by which we will discover which are good and lawful,
and how far they may be used of Gods Children, and how they may be abused. To
which end we are to know pleasures are of three kinds. 1, Holy Pleasures are
of three sorts.
and Divine. 2, Temporal and Earthly. 3, Carnal and Sinful.

1, Holy and Divine pleasures are, when we can rejoice in the Lord, and are
glad when we enjoy his gifts and graces of his Spirit here, so as we have a
sense and feeling of those joys, which he has prepared for us in the life to
come; unto these pleasures we are exhorted in Scripture to rejoice in the Lord
always, and again 2 Cor. 10. 17. Phil. 4. 4.
I say rejoice. These heavenly pleasures will make us not only to rejoice in
prosperity, when our Corn, Wine, and Oil abounds, but also in the midst of
our affliction to rejoice continually. 1 These. 5. 16. 1 Samuel 30. 6.
Thus David comforted himself, when the people were ready to stone him, and
the Apostles when they were whipped Act. 5. 41. 16.
and put in prison, for they knew that they were justified by faith, and had
peace with God, therefore they rejoiced in Romans 5. 1.
their tribulation. This is that true pleasure which the Children of God ought
to delight themselves in, as being in it self most excellent, sweet, and
comfortable. But of this pleasure we will speak in a more fit place.

The second kind of pleasures The second sort of pleasures.
are temporal and earthly, which pleasures in their own nature are good, and
in respect of the use of them to us, of an indifferent nature, good to those
which have grace to use them well; but very pernicious to them that abuse them.
Now by these temporal pleasures we are to understand those which consist in
meat, drink and apparel, and all other necessaries for the sustentatio^ of
our natural life. Now these are good in their own natures, as they are the
gifts of God, which he has provided for his Children, in the creation, and
bestowed them upon his servants, as encouragements to move them to walk
cheerfully in the practice of piety. For as that sweet Singer of Israel says,
He has not only Psalm. 104. 1^.
made bread to strengthen man's heart, but also wine to make his heart glad, and
Oil to make his face to shine. He has ordained for his Children, not only
things necessary, but also pleasant and comfortable for their delight and
recreation. Therefore at the Creation God placed Adam in the Garden of Eden,
where all manner of varieties abounded, not only for necessary use, but also
for delight: And our Savior at the marriage at Cana, by miracle gave the
Bridegroom Wine, when as water might have served the turn. These pleasures
well used, are warranted and approved in Scripture as a good and comely thing to
eat, and drink, and take comfort in a man's labors, Eccl. 5. 17.
for this is his portion. And this was the practice of the Church, Act. 2. 46.
to eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart.

If these pleasures were unlawful, what would it avail them that are advanced
into the seat of honor, or to abound with the things of the world, if they
might take no delight or pleasure in them? But these temporal pleasures, if
they be wisely used, may serve to good ends, as motives to stir us up to
laud and praise the Lord, and to enable us the better to serve GOD, else if our
lives were without pleasure, we should faint in the long journey which we are
to make to the Land of Canaan. Therefore a wise heathen D^mo^ritus apu^
Stobaeum.
compares a man's life, which has no pleasure in it, to a long voyage, in
which there is no Innes or places of rest, in which there is much travail, and
no comfort.

There are a third sort of A third sort of pleasures, are pleasures of the body.
pleasures, which are sinful and wicked; and of these not only the abuse, but
the use is unlawful. If Herod take pleasure in incest with his brothers wife,
he must Mark. 6.
be told, it is not lawful for him. If any take pleasure in filthy songs, and
ballads, and use their tongues to ribaldry, and foolish, and filthy speaking;
such must be told, They are bought with a price, and so must glorify Ephesians. 4.
29.
God in their mortal bodies, and must not let corrupt communication Col. 4. 6.
proceed out of their mouths, but their speech must be powdered with salt that
it may minister grace to the hearers. But that we may the better uncase these
pleasures, which are sinful, we will take a view of them, and pursue them by
the Word of GOD. The first sin of pleasure of the body, is that filthy sin of
uncleanness, that crying sin which pollutes our land, and cries to heaven
for vengeance, unless it be prevented by speedy repentance. This sin is
branded under these two heads:

1. The sin of Fornication. 2. The sin of Adultery.
The first being committed between single persons, and the other between
married folks, at least one of the^ married. Both of which are remembered in
Gods Book for great sins, and are very noisome in the common wealth, because
they do expose a whole land to the judgments of GOD; and when men neglect the
punishment of Number. 25. 4
this sin, then God takes it into his own consideration: For Genesis 6. 1.
this sin he brought the flood upon the earth and destroyed all mankind,
saving Noah and his family: For this sin he overthrew Sodom and G^morrah, and
Genesis 20. 3.
the Cities of the plain, because the cry of this sin pierced the ears of
God: This sin consumed almost the Tribe of Iud. 18. and 19.
Benjamin: This sin brought ruin upon the family of Ely: 1 Samuel 2. 22
Kindled a fire in the house of David the man according to 1 Samuel 12. 11.
Gods own heart: This filthy sin spewed out the Canaanites, and Leu. 18. 25
was the cause of the destruction of the Sichemites, because Genesis 34.
their Lords son had committed villainy in Israel: This unlawful pleasure
blindes the understanding, Hos. 4 1^.
and draws away the heart from all goodness. This sin, though some account
it as a trick of youth, yet it is such a crying sin, as was punished Numb.
25.
by the death of many of Gods own people.

Now this sin is to be avoided: First, because GOD has expressly forbidden
it in the seventh Commandment, Thou shall not commit Adultery; Deu. 23. 17
and, that there shall be no Whores of the daughters of Israel. Which made the
Apostle so earnestly to exhort the Corinthians to flee fornication, because God
does 1 Cor. 6. 18. Heb. 12. 16. Ephesians. 5. 3.
so hate it, that he would not have it once named amongst the Saints.
Therefore if we will approve our selves to God, end to be his servants, we
must rather yield obedience to his Commandments, then to our sinful lusts and
pleasures; and the rather, because the living in this sin, is a manifest
sign of Gods hatred: So says the Wise man, The mout^* of a strange woman Pro.
22. 14.
is a deep pit, he whom the Lord hates shall fall therein. This sin is also
to be avoided, and hated, in regard it is a fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19.
which does with a high hand oppose the spirit, and cross the Lord Col. 3. 5.
in his revealed Will, which would have his Children abstain from fornication,
and Th^s. 4. 3. Dul^e venenum, importuna lues, perniciosa p^tio, que h^manum
corpus debilitat, and virilis a^t^ir^bur en^rua.
that every one should possess his vessel in holiness. This sin, as our
learned Countryman Beda calls it, Is a sweet poison, an unseasonable
consumption, a pernicious potion, which disableth man's body, and weakneth the
strength of many courageous men: And therefore must so much the more be striued
against, as manifestly opposing the Majesty of God, and as an enemy to our
salvation, and is as a chain to draw on many other sins; for whoredom is
the cause of murder and revenge: for the fire of lust is so furious, that
nothing will quench it but blood. The truth hereof will appear in Herodias,
who boiled in malice against John the Baptist for speaking against her
filthiness, that she preferres her revenge in cutting off his head Mark 6.
before half Herod's Kingdom. Yea, holy David had his heart stained with this
sin, that to make way to satisfy his lusts, and to preserve his credit, made
no scruple to take away the life of his faithful subject, rather than his
filthy lust should go unsatisfied. Nay, some are so far bewitched by Satan,
that they to satisfy their lusts, hazard the lives of those who depend upon
them.

A lamentable example I have read of one drowned in this sin; one day being
vehemently incensed (by loss and mischief which had betided him) in cruel
manner beat his wife, (who came to seek relief of him for her, and her
Children) in so much that he and his companions had thought he had killed her;
but at last the poor woman recovered her self again, and went home to her
house, and when she came in, her poor children, with tears in their eyes
(being almost famished for hunger) cried, mother give us bread or else we die:
Mam, said the other, and with signs spoke the rest. Alas poor babes, said the
Mother with bitter sighs, where shall I get it? your father has lost his
patience with his wealth, and we our hope with his folly: Alas, what shall
become of me, or who will succor you my children? better it is to dye with
one stroke, then to languish in famine: and being brought to this despair, she
took a knife in her hand, and cut their thoats, and set her self down
purposing to dye in her misery. Her Husband the same evening returned drunk
home, and being more fit to take rest, tha^ to examine these tragedies, cast
himself on his bed, neither dreaming of their losses, nor his wives misery:
she urged on by Satan, that ever watches opportunities, seeing him asleep
that regarded not her sorrow, with the same knife she had killed her children,
she cut his throat, saying boldly, thou shall dye thou negligent man, seeing
thy filthy carriage has been the ruin of me and my Children. Look upon
this you beastly wretches, which prefer your own lusts before the care of wise
and Children. And thus I have laid open the filthiness of this sin, which
excludes out of the 1 Cor. 6. 9
Kingdom of God, and ranks the committers of it among those damned wretches,
which shall be Reu. 22. 15.
shut out of the new Jerusalem.

In the next place we are to speak somewhat of the sin of Adultery, which is
the sin of those which are married, or betrothed. This sin is called
Adulterium, quasi ad alterius torum accessio. This sin of Adultery is either
double or single: double, when both parties are married. Single when one party
is married, and the other single. This sin is also a filthy abominatio^ Ez.
22. 11.
in the sight of the Lord, because they that commit it, violate the ordinance
of GOD, in joining themselves to harlots, and so forsake the guide of Pro. 2.
17.
their youth. Virginity, and chastity are rare things, and so ought to be
esteemed by the godly; then he that spoyleth us of that ornament, is unworthy
of the name of a man, because he does the work of a beast. This sin is an
enemy to God, an enemy to virtue: It Luxuria est inimica Deo, inimica
virtutibus, perdit substantiam, and ad tempus voluptatem diligens, futuram non
sciunt cogitare paupertatem. Aug. de Doct. Christ.
consumes wealth; and loving pleasure for a while, it suffers us not to
think of our future poverty. And as in the first place they sin against GOD,
so also in the second place they sin against their Neighbor, by branding him
with reproachful nicknames, and so like deuillish thieves they sow their
filthy Cockle in another man's ground, and so make another man father their
bastardly brood; and then like ungracious thieves they rob true Children of
their inheritance. Therefore the Lord has ordained, that he that commits
adultery Leu. 20. 10
with another man's wife should die. And by the law they were Deu. 22. 2^
to be stoned to death; and before the law they were to be burnt, as appears
by Iudahs Genesis 38. 24.
censure upon his daughter Thamar. This sin is to be avoided, because it
opposes not only the Law of God, but also the Law of Nations. Cornelius
Tacitus reports, that the Adultresses were stripped naked by their kindred, and
then had their hair cut off, and were beaten with Cudgels through the Town by
their Husbands: This was the Law among the Germans. Now the punishment which
GOD afflicts, is not only poverty, shame, and slavery, their lusts, and
harlots, loathsome diseases, and the like, but he uses to punish this sin by
the law of requital, as they defile other men's wives, so other men defile
their wives. The truth of this was seen in David, who for defiling of Vriahs 1 Samuel 12. 22.
wife, had his own wives abused by his son.



Q. How may I do that, may some say?

A. Labor to see the filthiness of this sin, how hateful it is unto God,
and how dangerous unto our selves, and that it carries with it, not only Gods
curse, but such as live in it and dye in it, shall never enter into Gods
kingdom.

2. We must labor to cleanse our hearts from all filthiness, and all unclean
motions whatsoever, and to set our selves always as in the presence of God,
which knows the very secrets of our hearts; and say with Joseph, when we are
tempted unto this sin, How can we do this and sin against God? If a mortal
man did know our thoughts, or did see us in our uncleanness, we should be
ashamed to commit this sin, because they might disgrace us hereafter; how
much more should we be fearful to commit it before that God which must be our
judge; and our consciences, which must be produced against us as witnesses, and
Satan that will be ready to lay open our sin to the full, to accuse us, to
our eternal confusion before GOD, Angels, and the spirits of just men.

3. If we would be fenced against this sin, we must flee the company and
society of the Harlot, and all those which are wantonly given, lest they do
infect us by their filthy communication, and lewd conversation. To this end the
Wiseman exhorts us to keep far from the Harlots house, and not to Pro. 5. 8.
come near her doors. And if by chance we happen into their company, to flee
away in haste, and not to presume upon our own strength, lest we be foiled,
and so give our honor unto the harlot.

4. Lastly, as we must be diligent in our calling, so we must continually pray
unto God to preserve us from the whorish woman, that so being vigilant in our
calling, we may shun idleness, which is the pathway that leads us to this
sin; as also all wanton songs, unlawful embracings, or the like. This if we
do carefully, the Lord will preserve us from this unclean and filthy sin.

To move us hereunto, let us consider that God in a special manner takes
notice of this sin, and will not leave it unpunished, either in this life, or
in the life to come. If this were duly thought upon, men and women would be
afraid to commit it, though never so secretly, for fear Gods judgments should
overtake them in the very act, as they did Zimry and Cosby. What a filthy thing
is it for a Child of God, a Member of Christ, and a Temple of the holy Ghost,
and redeemed with no less price then the blood of the Son of God, for to
take the same body, and to make it the member of an harlot? S. Gregory
compares this sin to a fiery furnace, the mouth whereof is gluttony, the
flame pride, the sparkles filthy words, the smoke an evil name, the ashes
poverty, the end shame and confusion.

Whordome, besides the infamy of the world, wastes the goods, withers the
body, decays health, shortneth life, and makes a man stink in the sight of
God. See and behold the fearful effects of this sin, the Lord open our eyes
to see the fearfulness of it, that so we may avoid it. And thus much shall
suffice to have spoken of this sinful sin of pleasure; come we now to
speak of the next pleasurable sin, which is the sin of the belly, I mean
the sin of gluttony, which is a disordinate delight in eating, and Gula est
vorax edacitas, naturae finibus non contenta.
drinking, a mortal enemy to temperance by offending both in quantity, time
and manner.

This sin was first brought from Asia unto Rome, where, in process of time,
it came from a servile thing to be the delight of great ones; so that Apicius
a base Cook was not ashamed (after it came in credit) to step into the
Schools and make an Oration in praise of it, which did so encourage the
belly-gods of that age, that Milo Crotoniates would carry his provision with
him, which was no less then an ox, which he bare on his shoulders, and when
his stomach served him, would eat it up at one meal: and Tagon another
belly-god, was so addicted to this sin, that at the Table of Aurelian the
Emperor, he eat a Goat, a Hog, and drunk a tierce of Wine. Though these
monsters in nature be dead, yet I fear me there be many living which make their
belly their god, and glory Phil. 3.
in their shame, as may appear by their banquets, which are sa^c^^ with
surfeits, and exceed nature: Our Fathers were content with bread and water,
which at first nourished man's life; but now neither the fruit of trees, variety
of corn, fishes of the Sea, beasts of the earth, nor fowls of the air can
satisfy our intemperate nature; but as Innocentius says, Spices Lib. de
vanitate huma. condit.
are bought, Fowls are nourished, Cooks hired to please our appetites; some
are stamped, others are strained, and another infused to make confections,
turning the substance into the accident, and nature into Art: which made the
wise heathen, to deride the vanities of our times, say, One Wood suffices Sen.
ep. 8. Vna silua pluribu^ Elephantibus sufficit, homo vero pascitur terra and
mari.
to nourish diverse Elephants, but man feeds both on Sea and Earth. And in
another place he says, Whatsoever bird flies, whatsoever fish swimmeth,
whatsoever beast runs is buried in our body: all which in the truth of
things is both against nature and Art. For both art and nature forbids
contraties to be mixed together, which notwithstanding are done at our full
feasts, which make men like beasts, and fitter to be ranged among them, then
among men. Therefore he tells us, That he was greater, and Maius sum, and ad
maiora natus sum, quam vt fiam mancipium corporis mei. Rom 13. 13. Gal. 5. 21.
borne to greater things, then to become the bondslaue of his body. This
fearful sin damnes as well as the forenamed. Therefore that we may be freed
from this sin also,

1. Consider that by this sinful pampering of thy body Vnus gulosus expendit
in piscibus, vnde viginti pauperes satis haberent de pane. Bern.
thou depriuest many a hungry soul of many a morsel, which would comfort them
very much, and that which thou spendest in variety, would supply their
necessity; so that by this means we defraud our brethren of that which is
their due.

2. By moderation in diet, we shall enjoy a healthful body, Tenuis me^sa
sanitatis matter. Pedum aolores, and capitis grauedines, and cruciatus manuum,
long faebres, and alia multa plura ex crapula and saturitate nasci solent.
Chr. Hom. ^5.
which is to be esteemed above gold, but by ouer-fulnesse is subject to many
diseases, rheumes, obstructions, and pains of the head, eyes, and feet,
numnesse of the hands, Fevers, and the like, pangs of the belly, and many other
diseases, which flow from gluttony. How often may we hear some complain of
their head for sending done rheum the mother of malladies? But the head might
answer, as one says wittily, Be thou sober in pouring Desine fundere, and ego
desinam fluere.
down, and I will be sparing in dropping down. Do not ouerloade me with
excess, and I will distill fewer humors. When the stomach is burdened above
the sphere of its natural heat, and gurmandized with too many delicates one
upon the other before the former be concocted; like a fire beginning to burn
laden with green wood, sends forth many smoaky clouds as it were; so the
stomach being piled with delicates one upon another, se^ds forth many raw
crude fumes, which ascending up into the brain, and being fixed there, by the
coldness thereof, distill down into the body again abundance of rheum, the
source of all diseases, gouts, dropsies, aches, and many other maladies.
Therefore if we will be freed from sickness, let us offer a knife to our
throats, to keep us from intemperancy herein.

3. By a moderate diet we preserve our lives, wherein we may repent and make
up our peace with God, before the grave shut us up in the land of darkness, in
which there shall be no time for us to repent, and to make up our
reconciliation with our Maker, before he come to reward every man according to
his works: But by this filthy excess we rob our selves of this precious
Jewel before our time. Therefore if we would live long, and see many good
days, shun this sin of gluttony. Motives to induce.

1. Consider that this was one of the sins of Sodom, for which GOD destroyed
them with fire and brimstone from heaven; and punished his own Amos 6. 6.
people, because they drank wine in bowls, and so forgot the affliction of the
Church, but sat down to eat, and to drink, and 1 Cor. 10. 7.
rose up again to play.

2. We are commanded to redeem the time, and spend it to the glory of God,
and the good of our souls; but when the body is filled, then the bones defire
to be at rest; and experience shows, then we have little mind to praise God
for his mercies, or to think of the safety of our souls.

3. We are exhorted so to live, as that we may garnish our profession, and
honor GOD by letting our godly conversation be seen among them with whom we
live; but this we cannot do so long as we stuff our bellies with delicates;
so that hereby we deprive God of his due, and our neighbor of our good
example. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of this sin, in the next
place the sin of drunkenness presents it self to our view and consideration.

Drunkenness is Satan's bit Drunkenness. Nihil aliud est ebrietas, quam
voluntaria insania. Sen.
in the mouth of a fool, with which he can turn him to any sin, as the
horse is turned to any stop or pace. Thus he turns about the whole body, the
heart to lust, the hands to picking and stealing, the wit to quarrel, the
strength to murder, the feet, which can scarce stand, are swift to shed blood,
and the mouth to belch out blasphemy against their Maker.

And thus I have showed you what drunkenness is, and that we may the better
avoid it, we will set down the fearfulness of the sin, and that it is
condemned in the high Court of heaven, and in the inferior court of men's
Consciences, as a capital crying sin, against which the Lord of heaven
thunders out his sentence of eternal malediction, against all those that are
guilty of it, be they of never so great quality and esteem in the world,
saying, Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, Isay. 5. 1.
and unto them that continue until night, till the Wine do inflame them. And
again, Woe to Isay. 28. 1.
the drunkards of Ephraim. Which terrible woe that it may not take hold upon
the servants of Christ, he forewarnes them, and aduises them to take heed Luke
21. 34
that their hearts be not oppressed with druke^nes. Thus we see what
entertainment this sin finds at the hands of God, he tells us plainly, that,
Drunkards shall not 1 Cor. 5.
inherit the Kingdom of God. Now let us also see what countenance it has had
of men in all ages.

The Fathers in their time condemned ^brietas est flagitiorum omnium matter,
culparumque materia. Ad sacras virg. Esi blandus demon, dulce venenum Quid
ebri^tate miserabilius? Chrysostom. Ebri^sus cum absorbet Vinum, absorbetur a Vino.
Aug. de paenit.
it; Augustine says, Drunkenness is the mother of all Villainies, the matter
of faults, and the fountain of vice. And in ather place he calls it, An
alluring devil, and a pleasing poison. And another father by asking a question
sets forth the fearfulness of this sin, saying, What is more miserable then
the sin of drunkenness, seeing the living creature by drunkenness is become
as it were dead? Again, When the drunkard deuoureth the Wine, he is devoured
of wine.

This sin is condemned by the wise Heathen by Natures light. Solon ordained
in his law, that if a Prince were found drunk, he should be punished with
death; Then much more a private man. The Indians ordained, that if a women
would adventure to kill the King in the time of his drunkenness, she should
for her reward marry his successor. And Seneca calls drunkenness a voluntary
madness.

Thus we see what verdict GOD and man passes upon this sin of drunkenness.
That we may the better see it in its own colors, we will show how and wherein
the Majesty of GOD is offended by this filthy sin.

1. The drunkard sins against GOD in making of his belly his Idol, nay his
god; so says the Apostle, Whose god is Phil. 3. 19.
his belly; he better loves it, and is more careful to please it, then he is
his God.

2. A drunkard is unfit to serve God; for if the Lord will be worshipped in
spirit and in truth, how far are drunkards from this service which he
requires? Or how unfit for any good exercise? Take him from the pot, and he is
as dead as a door nail; let him go to Church, and he will sleep out the
Sermon, and so wraps himself under that curse of doing the work of the Lord
negligently; exhort him to sobriety, and he will say that is the way to
engender melancholy: examine him of worldly affairs, and he will talk of
that tomorrow, the only means to make him speak of sense, is to tell him that
there is good Wine coming home from Spain or France, and then he will be sure
to prepare him a doublet a quarter wider in the waist then his former, that he
may power the wine down the more freeer into his panch, which gapes like hell
for Wine and strong drink, and then when is belly is full of Wine, and his
head void of wit, then you shall see him in his right cue, belching out oaths
against God, and scoffing at the Magistrate, and Minister, and questioning of
matters of State, too high for his shallow wit to reach unto; so that by this
means he is neither fit to serve God, nor to do any profit unto the common
wealth. For a Drunkard can neither be a good Magistrate, nor a good subject:
for how can he rule others, which cannot rule himself, and as he cannot rule
others, so he cannot obey.

Plutarch makes mention of certain men, who in the midst of their cups reviled
their King Pyrrhus in a very reproachful manner, and being convicted of their
misdemeanor, and brought before the King, they stood mute, having nothing to
say for themselves; at last, seeing they could not deny the fault, nor defend
it, one of them more bold then the rest, stepped forth and confessed truth;
saying, O King it is true we spoke much evil of thee, and should have spoke
much more if our Wine had not failed us. By which we may see that drunkenness
is accompanied with backbiting and slandering.

3. As the Drunkard sins against GOD, and his neighbor, so in especial
manner he sins against the poor, in that by his great expense in drinking,
he has not wherewith to relieve them; for his wealth was not given him to
spend in tippling, but that he should break his bread to the hungry, and power
out his drink to the thirsty.

4. In a special manner he sins against his own family, against his wife
in spending her portion in his drunken excess, against his Children in
depriving them of their patrimony, and of other necessaries, and as he shows
himself a thief abroad in depriving his family of their due, so he plays
the tyrant at home, for either he railes, fights, or swears, when he comes
home, or else he disgorges his unsavory stomach in such a shameful manner,
that he is more fit to lie in a hogs Stye among swine, then among those which
fear God; and so by making himself a slave to his sin, he utterly depriues
himself of all good report among men, and at last poverty like an armed man
arests him; so that as in his youth he would drink nothing but Wine and strong
drink, in his age he shall be forced to drink water, or else perish for
thirst. For so says the Wise man; He that loves Pro. 21 17
Wine and Oil shall not be rich.

And this sin does not only bring poverty, but also infatuates and depriues
the understanding of reason, and common sense, as may be seen in Lot, who
committed incest with his daughters, and yet was not aware of his down-lying,
nor of his vp-rising; so that drunkenness Genesis 19. 35
produces the same operation that deadly poison does, it depriueth of reason,
and exposes to danger.

Cyrus in his Childhood being asked by his Grandfather why he did not drink
Wine at the feast, answered, Because (says he) I took it to be poison: for at
the last feast I observed, that those which drunk of it were deprived of their
understanding.

Also, this sin brings sickness and diseases upon the body, the forerunner
of death; and as the wise Heathen says, Drunkenness requiteth one hours
Ebrietas vnius horae hilarem infamiam, longi temporis taedio pensat. Sen. ep 39.
merry madness with a long time of sorrow.

Thus we have discovered the heinousness and fearfulness of the sin, we
will now set down some effects it produces.

First, it is the cause of thraldom. Secondly, the confusion of honesty.
Thirdly, the complement of vice and voluptuousness. Fourthly, the badge of
folly; we will make good all these by examples. The first is plain in this,
because the root and original of shame and disgrace was in Wine, whereby Noah
became the slave of drunkenness, Genesis 6.
and so was scorned of his own son.

Secondly, it is the confusion of honesty, because whosoever is tainted with
this sin; he is exiled from the company of good men, and is subject to ill
report.

Thirdly, what can there be more filthy then a drunken man, whose mouth
stinkes, body trembles, tongue prates, and discouers all his secrets, many
times to his great disgrace.

The ancient Romans in detestation of this sin of drunkenness painted it
out in this sort. First, they pictured the Image of a boy, next they painted a
horn in his hand, and upon his head they set a crown of glass; they pictured
him a Child, to show that drunkenness makes a man Childish, and unfit for any
employment of weight, they gave him a horn in his hand, to show that he is
always publishing his own secrets, and they crowned him with glass, to show
that he boasts of his riches, when he is but a poor man. Upon which I infer,
that drunkenness is hurtful to all estates, for if a poor man be a
Drunkard; he shall never be rich: If a rich man be a Drunkard, he shall
quickly consume his substance; if he be a young man it will infect his youth,
that there will be little hope of him, and if an old man, then he is past hope.

Therefore you men that are endued with reason, and profess your selves to be
Christians, see the filthiness of this sin, hate it in others, and much more
detest it in your selves. For the Heathen could say by Natures light, There is
nothing Nihil est tam tre^ru^, nihil tam aspe^nandum, nihil homine indignius,
quam ebrietas.
more vile, nothing more to be despised, nothing more unworthy a man, then
drunkenness.

Thus by Gods mercy we have in some measure discovered the filthiness of this
sin; it now remains that we should prescribe some remedy against this
infection. The Antidotes against this poison may be,

1. The consideration of the filthiness of this sin, as hateful unto God,
which will banish drunkards out of his Kingdom.

2. Labor to purge out of thy heart, the desire of Wine, and strong drink, in
which there is excess.

3. Shun the company of drunkards, and Wine-bibbers, Pro. 23. 20.
for they will allure thee by their example, therefore if sinners Pro. 1. 10.
entice thee, do not consent.

4. Have fresh in thy mind, that Gods judgments may overtake thee as they
have done many, therefore repent and be warned by them, and sin no more.

5. Call upon GOD in the name of his Son, and desire him to cleanse thee from
this filthy sin, and be diligent in hearing Gods Word, which is the sword of
the Spirit to kill this filthy sin, and join thy self in company with those
which fear God, which will direct thee how to refrain it by their example.

Thus if we be careful to use those means God has provided, we may by his
blessing get the victory of this filthy sin, but if any will walk on, and
will not be reclamed, then he that is filthy, let him be filthy Reu. 22.
still. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of drunkenness; as also the
pleasures of the belly. Come we now to speak of the pleasures of the body,
and first of the eye and ears, of which but a touch, that we may the better
pass forward to our intended matter.

The pleasures of the eye are such, as are taken in beholding vain objects, as
Stage Plays, Enterludes, Cock-fighting, Beare-baiting, Bull-baiting, and any
other vain delight, whatsoever; we will say something of each, that thereby
we may discover the vanity of these sinful delights.

We will begin with Stage plays.

What profit and content can they bring us, which for the most part tend to the
dishonor of God, and nourishing of vice, with a manifest loss of time, which
we are commanded to redeem, and spend in the service of GOD for our souls
good? but at Stage Plays all the parts of our bodies are employed about
sinful objects, the eye to behold vanity, and filthiness in wanton shows,
and uncomely gestures, by embracing, kissing, or other wanton toying, whereby
young people are stirred up to lust, and have their hearts filled with many
unclean cogitations; with our ears upon the Stage many times we hear the
Preacher derided, the Word of God profaned, and foolish and filthy
communication approved; so that if we will learn to deride, scoff, and flour,
to flatter and dissemble, to sing and talk of bawdry, and other filthiness,
whereby God is dishonored, and good manners corrupted; we may see, and learn
this, and much more at plays. The consideration hereof made that learned
Father to Aug. de Ciuitat. Dei.
say in his time, that Plays were invented by the Devil, and consecrated to
the Heathen gods, to draw us from Christianity to Idolatry, and therefore he
is bold to pronounce, that to give money to Peeuniam ^istrionibus dari, vitium
est im^ane, non virtus.
players is a hateful sin; and another father yielding a reason why it is
unlawful, says, The shameless gestures Histrionum imp^ dentif^i^i gestus,
nibil aliud nisi libidinem moue^t. Lactant.
of Players serve for no other use, but to move the flesh to lust and
uncleanness. Therefore in the Council of Carthage, and Synod of Laodicea, it
was enacted, that no Christian man or woman should resort to Plays, and
Enterludes, where nothing but blasphemy, scurrillity, and other filthiness is
maintained. Therefore those which maintain them, and countenance them with
their presence, do communicate with them in their sins, whereas they should
hate and reprove the unfruitful works of darkness.

The pleasures which men take in these sinful recreations are many, as may
appear by the time they wast and spend in them, sometime turning nights into
days, and so making recreation to be a vocation; if they had but half so
much care for their souls health, we might well say they are good Christians.

Another pleasurable sin which men delight in, is lascivious dancing, which
as it is used, or rather abused by the wantons of our time, it is the gate
leading to whoredom, and an incitement to all uncleanness, and yet (the more
is the pity) many men and women (otherwise well affected) think it an
Ornament to their Children to be skilled in this wanton science, whereby they
may be enticed and allured to all manner of filthiness, which man's nature of
it self is ready to embrace, and needs no allurements; Therefore I conclude,
that all lewd, wanton, and lascivious dancing is not only unlawful, but also
a great means to increase much wantonness, and filthiness: For our feet were
not given us; to trip like Rams, skip like Goats, leap like mad men, but
that being bought with a price we should glorify GOD in our mortal bodies.

Oh but may some say, this is too great preciseness, does not Solomon say,
There is a time to dance? therefore it is not so unlawful as you would make us
believe. Unto which I answer, Solomon does not mean by this place, that there
is any time for a filthy and profane mixed dancing of men and women together;
but that dancing he speaks of, is rejoicing of the heart, in praising GOD, as
may appear by the context, There is a time to mourn, and a time to dance;
that is, as there is a time to mourn for our sins, so there is a time to dance
or rejoice for the unspeakable mercies showed unto us in Jesus Christ, in the
pardoning of our sins. But I would not so be understood, as if I discommended
all dancing; for then I should seem to cross the practice of the Lords people
in ancient 2 Samuel 6.
time, for David danced before the Arc praising God; and when the Israelites
were Exodus 15.
passed over the red Sea, they danced and praised God. Indeed, if our dancing
were like theirs, we might very lawfully dance also: they danced for joy, and
thanksgiving to GOD, but many of us for vain glory, to please our selves; but
that we may put a period to this point, we doubt not but that men and women
may lawfully dance for the recreation, and health of their bodies, and to
express their rejoicing, and cheer the mind, provided, that each sex
modestly and sparingly dance by themselves without any filthy gestures, or
unbeseeming behavior.

The next delight, where men use to please themselves, is in Cock-fighting,
Beare-baiting, Bull-baiting, and the like. Alas, what a misery is this, to
sport our selves to torment and vex the poor Creatures, which are subdued
under vanity for our sins? They were not put under our feet, to that end,
that we should triumph in their misery, and if we wrong them, God, that takes
it as done to himself, will punish it; (for do not we see that men think
themselves wronged in their cattle, and are used to revenge their wrongs, as
David did the wrongs of his servants by Hanun) Now these Creatures are Gods
servants, and in their kind do set forth the glory of God, therefore we are
not to take pleasure to see them rend, and tear, and hurt, and maime one
another; for this is to imitate the Devil, who reioices in the misery of
mankind. Let the consideration hereof move Butchers, and Drouers to use more
mercy toward the poor Creatures, then many of them do. For if we love God,
we must needs love that which he loves and approues, now he loves the
creatures, for in his sight they were very good, and he does not hate the
works of his hands.

And thus we have made a search into pleasures in general, and have examined
them in particular; wherein we have discovered some filthy sinful pleasures,
not worthy to be once heard of among those which profess themselves to be the
children of the most High. And as we have laid open the diseases, so we have
prescribed Antidotes, as preservatives against them, not doubting but the
Christian Reader, by Gods blessing, may reap some benefit; We will now
proceed, and show how these benefits may be used, so that God may have the
honor, and these pleasures may be blessed unto us. Which that they may be so,
we must know that there are three conditions on our part to be observed and
kept.

1. That we labor for the grace of justification, and reconciliation unto God
by faith in Jesus Christ, for till we are at peace with him, we can have no
comfort in our pleasures.

2. If we would have these pleasures lawful and sanctified unto us, we must
take heed we do not ouer-value the^ in our judgment, nor set our hearts and
delights upon them, which are the Lords peculiars, but be content to esteem
them as dross and dung in respect of Christ.

3. We must take heed that these pleasures be moderated, and kept within due
bounds, we must be careful to refer them to a right end, and that is the
glory of GOD, and our own salvation, else if we set our hearts upon them, God
may justly, and yet mercifully afflict us with his heavy hand, and lay upon our
bodies sickness, upon our conscience terror, upon our reputation disgrace,
that thereby he may scrue up our hearts from grouelling upon the earth.
Therefore let us learn wisdom to watch over our pleasures, lest they
incroach upon those times wherein God is to be worshipped, and when we are to
perform holy and religious duties.

Those then offend which profane the Lords day, by spending it about their
own pleasures, though pethaps lawful and warrantable at another time; so also
they offend which pamper their bellies upon this day, whereby they are more fit
to sleep then to perform any holy action. Thus we have showed how pleasures
are good in their own nature, and how they become good unto us; it remains
now to show how they become pul-backs to hinder us in our spiritual race, and
to steal away our hearts from godliness.

The pleasures of this life are the chief baits with which Satan and the
world use to steal away our hearts from God, and the practice of godliness;
for when men become lovers of pleasures, the^ they begin to be careless and
negligent in the pursuit of virtue, and have no mind or heart to any godly
exercise, but are wholly circumuented and carried away with these sinful, and
vain delights, which make the mind dull and careless of good actions; now the
reason why they are so dangerous, are.

1. In regard of their nature, quite opposite to grace, they strive to cherish
and advance that which true piety labors to root out.

2. In regard of our pronenesse to embrace them; for we are for the most part
carnal, and so love and affect those things which please the outward man, and
having once attained them, we do too much delight in them.

Solomon did. And therefore Eccles. 2. 1.
they set their hearts upon the tenters, and stretch them this way, and that
way, for the inuenting of variety to please themselves.

2. All those which suffer themselves to be overtaken with the pleasures and
delights of the world, which appears by the gluing of their hearts unto them,
and that they are loath to part with them, as ever Lots wife Genesis 19. 26
was to leave Sodom. Hereby they dead their hearts from the Isay. 5. 12.
fear of Gods judgments, and Amo^ 6. 6.
from all manner of care, and watchfulness over their ways, Luke 21. 23.
and so leave nothing to themselves Eccle. 2. 11 Pro. 11. 5.
but sorrow, and grief of heart, and late repentance.



1. Because they are great means to make us forget GOD. Let Noah's example teach
us, who when he gave himself liberty to drink wine, forgot himself, and so
was overtaken with drunkenness. Sampson when he gave himself to sleep and
loyter in Dalilahs lap, lost the powerful presence of God, and so was made a
prey to the enemies of his Church. David when he gave himself to ease,
presently he fell into those fearful sins of Adultery and murder. Pleasures
and delights made Solomon forget his God. Let their fearful falls teach us
wisdom Neh. 13. 26
and wathfulnesse.

2. And the rather, because our pleasures are but short, extending at the
utmost but to the end of our lives, in which time they are interrupted many
times by sickness, crosses, fear, grief, etc.

3. Because they are purchased many times at had rates; many times with loss
of Gods favor, at least with loss of time, peace of Conscience, and so men
become lovers of pleasures and not lovers of godliness. Q. How to know whether
we love pleasures.


Ob. How may we know (may some say) whether we love pleasures more then
godliness?

Answ. Try thy heart by these marks.

1. Do thou take more delight in Carding, Dicing, dancing, drinking,
swilling, and hearing filthy songs, then in meditating upon Gods righteous
judgments, hearing him speaking to thee in his Word, and speaking unto him
again by prayer? And are his Sabbaths tedious unto thee, and could thou
wish they were over and past, that thou might wallow in thy pleasures, and
delights? then know that thou art a lover of pleasures more then godliness.

2. Art thou willing to be at any charge for the maintenance of thy sinful
pleasures, in feasting, gaming, or the like, but when the necessity of Gods
Church calls for thy help, to feed the hungry, cloth the naked, then thou
have no heart, but think all is lost which is spent in the practice of piety?
If this be thy practice, and this be thy delight, then I pronounce thou art a
lover of pleasure, and so not a lover of God.

3. Can thou find time to spend in thy vain delights, even to cross GOD in
the course of his providence, by turning nights into days, and days into
nights, in Carding, Dicing, drinking, swilling: but can not spare one hour
to watch with CHRIST for thy souls good? If thus thou do, then know thou
art a lover of pleasure, and can not be a lover of God.

But will you say, what remedy or way can you provide, or prescribe whereby we
may take less delights in pleasures then we have done?

A. 1. Consider how vain Remedies.
they be, and how unable to give content. Let Salomons trial give us an
example, his Orchards, Gardens, buildings, and other delights could not give
him any sound and solid contentment; but he pronounces this censure of them,
and says, that they are vanity, and vexation of spirit. But yet alas, many of
us think to find great matters, even Paradises of delights, where he with all
his wisdom could find nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit.

2. They are full of uncertainty: for we have seen many that have had their
pleasures turned into Gall and Wormwood.

Phil. 3. 3.
the power of his death killing the power of sin, and the efficacy of his
resurrection, quickening us to holiness, and new obedience.

2. Labor so to use pleasures, as that they may preserve our natural health,
and make us more fit to serve GOD with cheerfulness, and as helps to hasten
us in our journey to the Land of CANAAN.

3. Labor to watch over our hearts with diligence, lest our pleasures become
the Devils nets to ensnare our souls through our own corruption; therefore
rush not upon them with unbridled affection, but before we give any
entertainment unto them, consider whether they be lawful and convenient, and
then how they may be used, so that God may have the glory, and our souls Joel
1. 5. Amos 6* 7.
may have the comfort, and be content to leave them willingly, if we find
they hinder us in the works of Gods service.

Thus if our pleasures be guided by these rules, we shall glorify God, and
shall receive a blessing upon our souls: we are now to proceed, and take
notice of another pleasing delight, and that is pride in apparel, and see
whether there be any thing in it that may commend us to God, and profit our
souls.

Vanity in apparel is a thing so much esteemed in this profane age, as that
many place their happiness in it, thinking themselves in best case when they
are brauest, and most esteemed when they have gotten costly apparel, insomuch
that they think no time too much, nor cost too great, which is wasted and
spent in dressing themselves; therefore to maintain them in their bravery,
they are ready to sell religion, and conscience, and to defile their
conversation: which sin that we may not run headlong into, let us in the
fear of GOD learn wisely to esteem of Apparel, not according to men's
opinion, but according to the Word of GOD, and esteem of them by their common
abuse, as trifling vanities, subject to corruption, and badges of sin. But
lest we should reject them as sinful in regard of their abuse; let us
therefore in the first place consider, that there is a good and warrantable use
of costly Apparel, provided always that they be fitted and sorted according
to the place and calling of those that wear them. For as the Lord has made
diverse estates and degrees of men, so he would have every one to apparel
himself according to his degree, that thereby there might be a difference
whereby one might be distinguished from another. Kings, and Lords, and Nobles,
according to their Royal places; Knights and Gentlemen according to their
gentry; and meaner men, according to their quality, and condition of life; it
is lawful for them that are in high places to wear gold, silver, silks, and
Veluets, and other costly apparel: but for other of meaner places, they must
content themselves with meaner apparel, that thereby may show their
inferioritie, and humbleness of mind, in submitting themselves unto the Will
of God, whose pleasure it is that some should rule, and some obey.

As Inferiors offend in going costly in their apparel, and wearing such as is
fit for men of high place and calling; so those which are in high places offend
in wearing mean and contemtible apparel, and so weaken the authority GOD
has put into their hands. Unless it be in some particular cases, as in the
time of fasting and humiliation, and when God by sensible judgments shows,
that he has a controversy with the land Ruth 1. 20.
for the sins of the people. In such cases costly apparel must be laid
aside, and beautiful Joel 2. 16.
names of honor denied.

But I may spare my labor to say much in this licentious age of this point;
because men and women are fallen into such an excess of bravery, whereby all
respect of order and degree is neglected; for whereas Christ restrained
gorgious apparel to Kings Palaces, now it is grown so common, that we may see
it in every house almost; which comes to pass because every one is so far
fallen in love with himself, either for his person, qualities, or apparel,
which are so excellent in their own eyes, that a poor man's wife will be as
fine as a gentleman's, and in all places we shall see pride ruffle in
Rustickes, for every one will be in the fashion how ever they come by it; the
servant can hardly be known from the Master, and the maid from the Mistress,
nor scarce any man's estate can be distinguished by his apparel, but plain
Coridon that has no more wit then to know the price of Satin, and Silks, and
Taffeties, and other toys, to make him foole-fine, cannot longer be content to
hold the Plough, and to be one of those good Common-wealths-men which keep good
hopitality; and spend their wealth moderately, doing good in the places where
they dwell, but being advanced in wealth by the death of his miserable father,
must instantly be dubbed a gentleman, and purchase Arms though it be at a
dear rate, and be a smoaky gallant in his youth, though he beg his bread in
his age, and think he is nobody unless he be out of the fashion, and can
swagger, and brave it out, swear himself into smoke, with pure refined
oaths, and fustian protestations, and take Tobacco with a whiffe, and so lash
out that riotously, which his father got miserly, but he is now a gentleman,
therefore he will not take it as he has done, nor will he be clad any
longer in good cloth, but will creep into acquaintance with Sattens, Veluets,
and Plush, too high and costly for his mean conditions. And country maids
that have but thirty or forty shillings a year, and a few base shifts, must be
trick't and trimmed up like a Maid-Mayrian in a Morris dance; sometime her
Ruffes are pinned up to her ears, and sometime they hang over her shoulders
like a windmill sail fluttering about her ears.

Therefore seeing this contagious Leprosy h^th spread it self over this
glorious Commonwealth, wherein Gentlemen in their attire go like Nobles, and
Yeomen like Gentlemen, and Milke-maides like Gentlewomen, as if their eyes were
so dazelled with pride that they mistook one another apparel for their own;
It were to be wished, that our ancient laws made against this excess were put
in execution, against our pride, which testifies against our faces, and yet for
all this we are not ashamed; but alas, as if we had cast off the fear of the
Lord from before our eyes, we deck our carcasses with such costly and
unbeseeming apparel, which is light for the fashion, and wanton and immodest,
called by the Wife-man the attire of an Pro. 7. 16.
Harlot; and by the Prophet strange Zeph. 1. 8.
raiment, which shows very vain and inconstant minds; our Fathers kept
sheep, now we Genesis 43. 3.
their Children scorn to were the wool, but must ruffle it out in Silks, and
Veluets, and Taffeties, every one adorning himself in bravery, although their
manners be quite out of order. The good chines of Porke, and large pieces of
Beef which was wont to be in great men's houses to relieve the poor, are
turned now to buy chains of Gold, and the alms that were wont to relieve
them, is husbanded now to buy guegawes; the Elephant is admired for carrying a
Castle on his back, but now we may see many fair Gentlemen and Gentlewomen to
wear whole Lordships, and Mannor-houses on their backs without sweating.
Vestium luxus (says Tully) arguit animum parum sobrium.

Alas, Sobriety where shall thou be found where al men affect pomp? the
Plough-man which in times past was content to be clad in russet, must now a
days have his doublet of the fashion, with wide cuts, and his silk Garters to
meet his Sib on Sunday. What would these persons do if their wealth and birth
did answer the pride of their hearts? surely they would outstrip
Nebuchadnezzar the the King of pride; they would be as dainty in their diet,
and costly in their apparel as ever Dives was: how may we lament their folly,
that to maintain their pride, turn their lands into laces, and their
patrimonies into gay Coats, holding it belike

a point of policy to put their Lands into two or three Trunkes of clothes,
that wearing their lands on their backs, they may see their Tenants do them no
waste? but alas, when they would turn back their clothes into lands again,
they are so threadbare and out at the W B. on Math. 6.
Elbowes, that they will not come near the former value, so that at length for
want of better consideration they must march under Sir John Hadlands colors,
among the poor gentlemen of pennilesse bench, and so are forced at last to act
the Est quodam prodie tenus si non datur vltra Hor.
King and beggars part at one time, the King abroad and the beggar at home.

Here I might enter into a large field of matter, but by this which has been
said, we may imagine that all is out of frame.

But vain man, and proud woman, know that by thy pride and excess in apparel
thou offendest God, and make him at variance with the works of his hands:
for the Wiseman tells us that every one that is proud in Pro. 16. 5.
heart is abomination to the Lord. Therefore the Lord by the Prophet denounces
a woe to the Isay 28. 1.
crown of pride.

It must needs be a miserable thing for the Creature to be abhorred of the
Creator. Pride is and has been always the forerunner of destruction; the
consideration hereof should strike amazement into every one of our hearts, when
we consider what thunderbolts God has shot out against this sin, and yet
what little amendment is to be found among us? what loss of precious time is
there among us? yea, among the Children of God in decking and adorning those
carcasses which at last must be Worms meat? how many an hour is there spent
in tricking and trimming of the body upon the LORDS day, which might have been
spent in prayer and meditation? But alas, unless their bodies be trimmed and
decked with costly apparel, and after a curious manner, they will not be seen
at Church. These come to humble themselves in pride, as the oppressor comes,
to ask mercy with cruelty brave Landlords, and Landladies which wear about
them such cruel rents, as rend husband, Wife, and Children all to pieces: such
come to keep holy the Sabbath day with profaneness, to give up their bodies
as a living sacrifice to Romans 12. 1
GOD, by fashioning themselves unto the fashions and colors of the world,
sometime blew, sometime yellow; sometime all body, sometime no body, as if they
liked all fashions saving that which God has given them.

It is a great matter to see the vanity of women in these days, which are so
trimmed and trick't, that you would say they rather wore great forests on
their backs, then modest and civil furniture; and so in striving to be fine
and handsome before men, they become vile in the sight of God, who looks not
upon the outward appearance, 1 Samuel 1. 6 7.
but upon the heart. Thou therefore which spendest the prime of the morning in
pouncing and trimming thy hair, and perhaps in painting thy face, that thereby
thou may seem more lovely and amiable to men; if this be thy aim, that
seek to please men, then art Gal. 1. 10.
thou not the servant of God. If thou had a touch and sense of thy own
uncleanness, and spiritual deformity in the eyes of GOD, thou would take
as much pains to adorn thy inward 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 3.
parts with humility and lowliness of mind, so much set by of God. Women
should array themselves with shamefastness and modesty, and not with broidered
hair, and immodest, and unseemly attires, for our clothes are the fruit of
sin; and shall the thief be proud of his halter? Pull down therefore your
proud looks you wanton Dames, and cast away your filthy and unbeseeming
apparel, which does not honor your bodies, but disgrace them by your
fantastical fashions, and lascivious habits, by laying open your naked
breasts, as alluring baits to filthiness, and so proclaim by your outward
garments your inward pride and filthiness, as if you would have all men take
notice of your vanity and light carriage. Pride and bravery cause wantonness,
and wantonness makes an easy way for lust and uncleanness: Those therefore
which so curiously deck and adorn their bodies with such costly and wanton
attire, set forth their beauty to sale, and so by consequent betray their
chastity to them which bid most, or pleases them best. To this purpose Cyprian
says fitly, Gorgious Ornamentorum and vestium insignia and lenocinia formarum
non nisi prostitutis, and impudicis faeminis congruunt, and nullarum fere
praeciosior cultus, quam quarum pudor vilis est. Cyp. de Hab. virg.
and garish attire, and adulterate beauty become none but harlots, who set
themselves forth to sale, neither do any put on more precious apparel then
they who most basely prize their chastity. By which (as by their immodest
audacious impudency) as they defile their own hearts with pride and
wantonness, so also they entice others with carnal love and fleshly lusts;
and so they bring upon themselves sin and condemnation, though others be not
catched in their snares. For as Hierome says, If any wantonly deck themselves
to provoke others in a wanto^ manner to Si vir vel mulierse adornauerit, vt
vultus hominum adse prouocaret, etsi nullum inde sequatur damnum, iudicium
tamen patietur aeternum; quia venenum attulit, si fuisset qui ^iberit.
gaze upon them, though no hurt follow upon it, yet they shall be liable to
eternal judgment, because they prepared a poison, if there had been any one
who would have tasted it.

But Lucifer the Prince of Pride, has taught the stately Dames of our age a
new lesson, unknown to the godly women mentioned in Scripture, and that is,
that unless they be gallant, they shall not be esteemed and regarded in
places A vain excuse.
where they come.

Unto which I answer, their apparel may purchase them some credit among
ignorant men and women, but wise men Non hac ^rnant corpus, sed mentem
detegunt. Quint.
will not esteem them the more for their vain apparel, though they be never
so plumed with the deceitful feathers of pride.

Beloved, though I be earnest against this sin, bear with me, I touch not
those that be good, and are modest in their apparel, showing the humbleness of
their mind; and I cannot say too much to those which be proud, and haughty, and
vain and foolish in their attire; I appeal to God who knows these things to
be true, and to the world who cannot for shame deny them; and if I have said
nothing but the truth then blame me not, but go and repent you of your former
sins; and seeing the most of us are faulty herein, let us now in truth of
heart turn unto the Lord. And if we would have reverence and respect among
men, let us labor to be virtuous, modest, and discreet, and to put on
humbleness of mind; for pride, and costly apparel are collateral cousins,
and so combined together, that one can hardly be separated from the other
without the destruction of both; therefore the godly wise in all ages have
labored to strive against this stream, and shunned this excess, and have had
special care so to attire themselves, that they might neither offend the
Majesty of God, or well affected Christians in any respect. For the very
Heathen by the light of nature have condemned pride in apparel as a great
evil.

Democrites being demanded wherein the comeliness of man and woman consisted,
answered; In fewness of speech well tempted together, and in virtue and
integrity of life.

Sophocles seeing one in gorgious apparel, said to him, Thou fool, thy
apparel is no ornament to thee, but a manifest show of thy folly.

The wife of Philo the Philosopher being demanded why she did not wear gold,
and silver, and costly garments, said, She thought the virtues of her husband
were sufficient ornaments for her.

What would these wise heathens have said, if they had had the light of Gods
Word? Surely they would have shamed many of us Christians. To conclude this
point, let us know that excess in apparel, is not only a sin in it self,
but also the cause and effect of many other sins.

1. As it is the cause of lust and uncleanness in them that wear gorgious
apparel, so it does animate and encourage others to assault, and lay siege to
their Chastity, with hope of obtaining victory, while the ensigns of pride
are so displayed.

2. It causes men and women to misspend their time, which they waste with
musing how they may be brave, and trying what fashion will become them best, by
which means it comes to pass, that they have little leisure to adorn their
souls with saving grace, as knowledge, faith, and repentance; whereupon it is,
that our gallants are so ignorant in spiritual matters.

3. This excess in apparel causes many men and women to run in debt,
(which is the very bane of a quiet mind) and so become servile slaves, and are
forced to put up many harsh words at the hands of the Pro* 22. 7.
lender.

4. As they torment and discrutiate their minds, and bring desolation upon
their temporal estates, so also they wrap themselves under the judgment of
Isay 2. 11.
God for their bravery.

with the long white Robe of Christ's innocence, so that thy Reu. 3. 18.
filthy nakedness may not appear, that so thou being clothed with the
righteousness of Christ, thou may at the Romans 13. 14.
day of refreshing follow the LAMB wheresoever he Reu. 7. 13. 14.
goes.

Q. Oh but may some say, how shall I weane my heart from this sinful vanity?

Answ. Every mischief is best avoided by opposing against him his contrary, so
the best way to prevent pride, is to arm our selves with humility, and stop
this filthy disease in the beginning; and therefore the Poets counsel in this
case is very good;

Obsta principijs sero medicina p^ratur, Ovid.

Cum mala per longas conualuere moras.
And another very fitly seconds him saying,

Stop the beginnings, and you shall be sure,
All dangerous diseases to help and cure.
Pride sinketh to hell, but humility lifts to heaven; Pride is the first
step to Apostasy, and being opposed to God is the greatest sin in man, for
all other vices are to be taken heed of in sins, but this in good doing, lest
those things which be laudibly done be lost in the desire of praise; follow
Christ who is humble and meek, Ecce habes humilitatis exemplum, superbiae
medicamentum.
in whom thou have an example of humility, and a medicine against pride; Call
to mind thy base metal, from what thou came, what now thou art, and whither
thou must go at length. What is man? an unprofitable Telluris inutile pondus.
Genesis 3. Job. 10. 9.
lump of earth. Man was earth, he is earth, and to earth he shall return
again. What is man? his matter is base Slime and Clay, his nature weak and
feeble, his birth pain and sorrow, his life vain and miserable, his state
slipperie and uncertain, his sins horrible and filthy, and his end grievous
and loathsome. Why swellest thou O man, thou filthy matter, why art thou
inflamed? Thy Prince is humble, and art thou proud? Oh earth. earth, earth,
cast down thy Peacocks feathers, look down whither thou must, and be
ashamed; consider how GOD has severely punished pride, in all ages, and has
rewarded humility.

Let the consideration hereof make us all labor for humility: There remains
another kind of pride, and that is of a man's gifts of nature or grace, but I
intend to speak of that when I come to handle the vanity of men in hunting
after vain glory, and popular applause, unto which place I refer the discreet
Reader. And to put a period to this point of pride in apparel, let all those
which are so curious in decking their bodies with quaint attire, take heed they
do not forget to deck their souls, with the pearls of sobriety, and
humility, and therefore follow not the foolish fashion of the world, and if any
new fangled fashion come up be thou the first to pull it down, so shall thou
show thy self a pattern for modest matrons to imitate. And thus we have done
with pride in apparel.

Do we take delight in beauty, what is beauty if it be separated from
grace, but pleasing vanity? Beauty according Pro. 31. 30.
to Saint Augustines definition, Is a proportional agreement of all
Pulchritudo corporis est congruentia partium, cum quadam coloris suaeuitate,
Aug. ^d Nebr.
the parts of the body, joined with a certain sweetness of color and
countenance. Which in its own nature is good, as being the gift of GOD, which
he has bestowed upon many of his children, as upon Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel,
Naomi, Abigail, Esther, the daughters of Job; but we shall Job 42. 15.
have little need to persuade any to the love of this, seeing all men by
instinct of nature do reverence and respect it; The Poet long ago could say,
Forma corporis Dei munus. Ovid.
that Beauty is the gift of God, yet through the corruption of nature, this
blessing is much abused, and made a snare to entangle many, and therefore we
are to account it among those common blessings which he bestows upon the
wicked as well as upon his own children, as upon Saul, Adoniah, Absol^n, 1 Samuel
9. 2 1 Kin. 1. 6. Pulcritudo corporis bonum Dei donum est: sed propteria id
largitur etiam malis, ne m^gnum bonum videatur bonis. Aug de Ciuit. Dei lib.
15. cap. 22. Pro. 31. 30.
2 Samuel 14. 25. Beauty indeed is the gift of God, but he has bestowed it on
the evil also, lest it might seem to the godly to be of any value; yea, he
has bestowed it on the dumb creatures, as the Peacocke, Swan, yea the Lillies
exceed Solomon in all his royalty; therefore we are not to doat upon it, for
the Wise man says, It is vain and deceitful; and experience shows, that
sickness, care, grief, or the scrach of a pin will deface it, and the Sun
quickly alter it: If it were an absolute blessing, the Sun that glorious
creature would not so soon deface it. Therefore Chrysostom says to the
virtuous in his time, I do not (says Nolo pulcritudinem c^rpo^oris,
honestatem mentis requiro. in Psalm. 50. Hom. 1.
he) so much require the beauty of the body, as the honesty of the mind. But
seeing it is so esteemed, and ouer-valued, let it be the wisdom of the godly
to turn the edge of their love from this deceitful vanity, (which is better
many times to those which see it, then those which have it) to that perfect,
and undeceivable beauty of Pulchrius est pulch^u^ fieri, quam nasci: illud
enim casus hoc studij est. Petrar.
the mind, adorned with the sa^ctifying grace of Gods Spirit, as lowliness of
mind, brotherly kindness, and the bowels of compassion to the poor, these
are perpetual and durable; sickness, and disgrace cannot blemish virtue.

But alas, this carnal beauty is so far from profiting us, or helping us in
the way of godliness, as that many times through the corruption of nature it
proves the bane of the Rara est ade^ concordia form^ atque pudiciti^. Iuuenal
Satyr. 10.
soul, for many times we see beauty and chastity oppose each other, which
comes to pass not through beauty in it self, for many beautiful women have
been, and are chaste and godly Matrons, but the reason is, because their
beauty does expose their chastity to the lust of wicked men, which are allured
by these pleasing objects, Cum periculo magno custoditur quod multis placet.
now that is hardly preserved which is of so many beloved.

Lustful bloods at the show of fair women give wanton sights, or wicked
wishes; Beauty Depredari desiderat, qui thesa^rum public portat.
is like unto a rich treasure, which being carried uncovered by the high ways
side, tempts and entices many to set upon it: thus Dinahs beauty offered
violence to her chastity, Thamars beauty enticed her brother Amnon, and
Bathshebahs beauty allured godly David, and Joseph's beauty enticed his wanton
Mistress. Thus we find that Multos forma fecit adulteros, castu^ ver^ nullum.
Petrarch. de Remed.
beauty has made many adulterers, but never any chaste.

Let the consideration hereof make all beautiful women to walk humbly before
God, and so demean themselves; that they may not allure or entice any.

Saint Ambrose records a story of a beautiful young man, who perceiving his
fair face to be an enchantment to diverse wanton women, slashed and bemangled
his face, lest any more wantons should door on him; this young man had more
regard to the inward beauty of his mind, then the outward beauty of his
body: This man had also care of his outward conversation, that he might so
carry himself as became a Child of GOD.

But alas, what great odds is there between this young man, and the youth of
our age, which hang their hair, heads, ears, and bosom full of nets to
ensnare the wantons of these sinful times, and have their breasts left naked,
that thereby their wantonness may the better be discovered.

Another evil effect of beauty is, that as it makes them forgetful of GOD,
and all good duties, so it puffes them up in pride and conceit of themselves,
that they scorn and despise others, and so neglect their duty which they owe
to their Superiors. Vastie knew that Est. 1. 11, 12
the King was ravished with her beauty, therefore she grew insolent and proud,
and would not come when he sent for her.

Let the consideration hereof teach all virtuous women to adorn their minds
with virtue, and good conversation in all things, that they may be able to
give up their account with joy unto that God which has bought them with a
price, and so has commanded them to glorify him in their mortal bodies.

We are now come to the last branch proposed, and that is vain glory, and
popular applause, which for the most part is engendered out of the feces and
dregs of worldly wisdom: What profit is there in the praise of men? or what
good can they do us if they magnify and extol us for carnal respects, if
all this while we be vile in the eyes of God? What will the praise of men do
us good, when God and our own conscience condemn us? It is not the waxen
wings of men's praises will carry us to heaven; therefore let us labor to honor
God, and to keep faith and a good conscience in all our ways; we are to know,
that wisdom and humane learning is a great gift and blessing of God, which
although it be good in its own nature, yet many times through the corruption
of our nature it is a dangerous enemy to grace, because for the most part it is
joined with pride and vain glory, which robs God of his glory, therefore the
Lord forbids the wise man to glory in his wisdom. Ier. 9. 23.
And denounces a woe against all those which are wise Isay 5. 21.
in their own eyes; which woe and sin that we may not fall into, let us know
that God has not given us worldly wisdom, and humane learning, to the end we
should make sale of them, and set them a sun shining for vain people to gaze
at; but he has given them us, to the end that we should use them to his glory,
and the good of his Church: but such is the pride of our nature, that if one
man excel another in learning, wit, and elocution, presently they swell with
pride, and so forget God and themselves, by not honoring him with his gifts,
and by despising his children, which peradventure have better hearts to
Godward then themselves; we all glory now a days of our knowledge and wisdom,
and think that our selves are the only men, now what may be the reason of
this? Surely this, because in times past the Church had many learners, and but
a few teachers; now the case is altered, we have many teachers, and but a few
learners. In ancient time it was thought there was but seven wise men among the
Greeks, and now we think there be not so many fools among us.

Another reason may be, for want of right choice of good natures, in those
which are to be trained up in learning, for the greater sort many times are
either fantastical, wayward, or wilful, whose wits being strained against
kind, become disordered, contentious, and seditious: for it is a hard thing to
make that straight by art, which was made crooked by nature. When learning and
eloquence is grafted in a wrangling stock, which is stubborn and contentious,
it many times proves very dangerous; for a contentious person having wit and
learning, and a plausible tongue, is able to set whole kingdoms by the ears.

Seeing then that learning may be abused, let Preachers pray for wisdom and
humility, that they may not please men, nor please them selves with their
learning, but that they may honor God, and labor to be profitable
instruments to his Church. But because all men in general hunt after praise,
and he is nobody now adays that cannot soar aloft, therefore Scholars are
forced to stretch their wits, and set them upon the Tenters, to please the
intoxicated multitude; and to beat their brains, and hazard their health, and
many times endanger their souls, to satisfy the curious ears of many
fantastical hearers, which will be pleased with nothing else but novelties:
such take great delight to come to Sermons, but not as Scholars to learn, but
rather as Judges to control, being now grown so curious in their own
conceits, that it is easier for a Cook to please a hundred men's pallates, then
for a Preacher to order one Sermon to please a dozen hearers. Some must needs
know what God did before he made the world; another, who was Melchizedechs
father; another, whether he shall meet his old friends and companions in heaven
which might tell him of his merry conceits; such a one would needs know what he
shall do in heaven before he has learned the way how to come thither; another,
he is content to come to Church to hear his Minister, but alas, he grows
weary quickly, and out of heart, his Minister speaks no Latin, nor Greek,
and so he thinks it is lost time to hear such a homely Sermon. But alas, poor
ignorant soul! if thou were condemned to die, thou would be glad to hear
thy pardon read unto thee in plain English wthout any other curious matter, but
thy Princes hand to ratify it: but now God must se^d thee thy pardon, and set
it forth in such eloquent words as may best please thee, else thou will have
none of it, as if GOD were bound to save thee a condemned slave, and to feed
thy ears with fine speeches. But if these curious and dainty hearers were
examined in the points of salvation, as of faith and repentance, and the
meaning of any of the Commandments, or of the Articles of our Faith, I fear
many of them which carry their heads full high, would be found to be as
grosely ignorant as ever Nicodemus was, and would be as ready to make as
simple an answer as the Disciples of Ephesus Act. 19. 2.
did, when the Apostle asked them if they had received the Holy Ghost, they
told him plainly, that they had not so much as heard whether there be a Holy
Ghost or no^.

What a vain thing is it then to hunt after those things which will do us no
good? How much better were it to be busied in matters of greater importance,
and not to please our selves in such knotty questions which have ensnared
better judgments then our own? Parum placent cae literae, qua ad virtutem non
profuerant. Salust. de Bell. Iurg.


The very Heathen do condemn our vanity herein, who tell us, that, That
learning does us little good which does not help us forward in virtuous
courses.

For what will it avail men to be accounted subtle and acute Logicians to
find out arguments, and to be as able to discourse, and as skillful in
disputation, as the men of Gibeah were in slinging, that they could sling at a
hairs breadth, when as they are not able to find out that good and perfect Will
of God, nor able to confute the subtle sophistry of Satan? what will it
profit men to be plausible Rhetoricia^s to persuade others unto what they
Melius est e duobus impe^fectis, rust^c tatem sanctam habere, quam eloquentiam
peccatricem Hieron.
list, by masking a false cause with a fair gloss, if they have not
sanctified eloquence to persuade and assure themselves of their own salvation?

What will it profit men to be good Grammarians, and to have the knowledge of
all tongues, and to be able to negotiate with strangers of all Kingdoms
without an interpreter, yet for all this not to be able to speak the language
of Canaan? which is gloria in excelsis.

What will it profit men to be skillful in the secrets of numbers, if they want
skill to number Knowledge without virtue, and learning without good living are
like trees without fruit.
their days that they may apply their hearts unto wisdom.

What would it profit men, if they could with Solomon diue into the secrets of
nature, and yield a reason of all things, if they be ignorant of the corruption
of their nature, and of the means how to be freed from it?

Therefore that godly and learned Ex curiositate non solum friuolae, sed etiam
no^iae quaestiones scaturiunt, ex quibus nulla vtilitas elici potest. Calvin.
instit. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Neoterick has well observed, that from this bitter root of cursed curiosity
innumerable questions do bud and blossom in the minds of men, which are not
only frivolous, but very hurtful to them that ask them.

Let hearers then be content with those things which may Pluris est vna gultula
sapient^ae diuinae, quam vastiss. pelagus sapientiae huius mundi. Stella de
contemptu mundi. Dum nug^s tenemus and opinionum riu^los consectemur, ipsum
veritatis foutem amittimus. Hier. epist.
profit them for their souls healths, and not puff them up; for a little
heavenly knowledge is better then all the froathie knowledge of the world, for
while we hunt after trifles, many times the truth slips from us before we are
aware: yet many good DIVINES are herein faulty, which by their too often
quoting Poets and schoolmen cause the people to make little difference between
the pure Word of God, and the authority of man, whose breath is in his
nostrils. Hence it comes to pass that many times they omit that which should
be the sum of a Preacher, to teach the people to fear God and honor the
King: This popular applause and vain glory, many times makes men of weak
judgment to out-goe themselves, and so by thinking to make a show of learning,
they bewray their own ignorance, and so prove as tedious to their hearers, as a
muddy way is to a weary Trauailer; and being nearly touched they appear
nothing else but empty bags, Nomine grammatici, re barbari. Therefore men must
take heed that they meddle not with matters above their understanding, and
look that they use not their mouths to spruce Inkhorne terms, and swelling
words, bumbasted with the flocks of sundry languages; as Cleantes and
Chrysippus did in their painted Rhetoric, which that wise heathen has so
sharply Cicer. de fi^. lib. 4.
rebuked; hereby they show themselves good Nurses for Nugarum matrem, virtutum
Nouercam. Bern.
vanity, but Step-dames for virtue.

But let no man mistake me, as if hereby I seemed to mislike learning; no, I am
so far from condemning it, as that I honor it wheresoever I find it; for
learning in it self is good, and an excellent blessing of God, adorning the
mind with natural gifts, mollifying the roughness of nature, and sitting it
to receive the seeds of knowledge, therefore to neglect it when it may be
had, is to tempt God with an high hand; It is not then the use of learning
Crimen non est in rebus, sed in vsu agentis. Greg. mo^. lib 9. e. 28.
that I speak against, but the abuse, when men labor to set up themselves,
and so seek to rob God of his glory.

an excellent thing, let us pray unto God to sanctify it to us, and then to
make a sanctified use of it, by employing it so that God may be honored, and
the Church edified; for that is true Sa^ientia illa clara est, non quae verbis
volat, sed quae virtutib^s constat. Greg. in mor. Psalm. 11. 10 Ps. 19. 7. Iam.
3. 13. Vera Sapie^tia est thesaurus, quae solum in ag^o scripturarum nascitur.
Hieron. in c
wisdom which does not fly in the wind of words, but consists in the
operation of virtue. Now this true wisdom is to be craved only at the hands
of God, which only gives wisdom to the simple, and this true wisdom is a
treasure which grows only in the field of the Scripture, where the man of God
may be instructed in whatsoever belongs to policy, Civility, and
Christianity, for this life, or for the life to come: If we would know our
Maker, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, we may see them described in the Scripture, in
which is contained a salve for every sore: Then those are much to blame which
leave this pure Many strive rather to speak tunably to the care, then
powerfully to the heart, delighting more ^o (...) p(...), (...) to p(...) their
hea^er^, and ^^ charge their duty before God. Pro. 19. 23.
fountain of running water, and dig unto themselves Cisternes that will hold
no water; such men's maine end is to be admired for their learning, by which
they hope to gain popular applause. Now this ambition many times waits upon
Gods dear Children, which makes them many times sacrifice to their own nets,
and to seek themselves, and not the Lord Jesus, therefore the Lord does often
deprive them of their hopes, and frustrate their expectation, and so brings
down the pride of man, that thereby he may make way for his own glory.

As then the office of a Preacher is a Calling of great reverence, Reu. 2. 8.
God himself dignifying them with the title of Angels, whose tongues he has
consecrated to comfort the dejected, instruct the ignorant, and direct the
simple; Therefore all those which are called to this high calling should not
be green plants, but well seasoned timber, grounded in knowledge and
experience, that they may be able to maintain their Masters cause, and by
sound arguments defend the truth powerfully, and persuade to the love of virtue
pithily, and not to abuse that learning and knowledge God has given them to
iangling and contention, as many of the Separation have done, who having a
great desire to be taken for singular wise men, and zealous professors, and
being puffed up with a vain opinion conceived of themselves, and of their own
knowledge, have labored for to sow contention in the Church, and to displant
good order established, whereby it comes to pass that not only weak
Christians are amazed, but also the hearts of many are alienated from obedience
to lawful authority; These men being further wrapped in devotion then they can
wade through with discretion, yet under the color of zeal for reformation in
the Church, they have disgraced the government, as if Gods Spirit enforced them
to pass the bounds of Christian modesty.

Touching those that carpe at the present estate of Churchdiscipline, it lies
not in the limits of my Text to say much, yet thus much I will say, though many
things may seem to be misliked, as not so precisely good to them that look a
far off with a slight imagination, yet may very well be tolerated in policy
to keep peace and quietness, for it is no sure course to go about to change
laws, and to break down discipline, which is already established (to please
the itching fancies of those humorous Sectaries, which delight in nothing but
innouatio^) lest therewith all comelines and good order be ouerthrown. David's
resolution is Ps. 39. 1, 2.
worn out of date, he said, he would look to his ways, that he did not sin
with his tongue; but now a days men are fallen from David's practice to be busy
bodies to pry and to look into matters of State, and to censure and carpe at
the government of the Church, which was so graciously established by that
virtuous Princess of blessed memory, Queen ELIZABETH, now as glorious a Saint
in heauan as ever shined in this our hemisphere, and since ratified and
confirmed by two learned Kings, upon the examinarion of the learned Clergy,
confirmed by the Peers and Nobility, and subscribed unto by the Commons, by
the powerful authority of that honorable Court of Parliament, and now many
years experience bath taught us to be peaceful and religious, yet for all
this they can see Moates in the Church, but care not for searching their own
hearts, and reforming their crooked manners; and so being puffed up with
singularity they think they are able to instruct the wisdom of the State
without book, when as they cannot learn obedience, their own duty, in all
the books in the world.

Brethren, what mean you to pry into those things which are above your reach,
and cannot be fathomed by your shallow conceits? God be thanked the grave
Senators which sit at the stern, do foresee dangers, and godly, discreetly,
and prouidently prevent them, and so do preserve and protect us in peace and
quietness, and so we may long enjoy our happiness, if our unthankfulness to
God, and undutifulness to our Governors do not hinder it. Therefore seeing
by them we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done Act.
24. 23.
unto this nation by their providence, we ought to acknowledge it with all
thankfulness; wherefore in stead of prying into matters above our reach, let
us remember that the time will shortly come that we shall be called to give
account of our own stewardships; then we shall find that it is better to be
of small learning with humility, then to be profoundly learned with a proud
mind.

There is a second branch which springs from this bitter root of vain glory,
and popular applause; and they are those pragmaticall censurers, and curious
obseruers of other men's lives, and actions, that can mark and observe the
slips and infirmities of their brethren, to disgrace them, but lack an eye to
see their own filthy conversation; but let us remember again that we must
give account of our own Stewardship; and not of others. What, can we spare so
much of our short time to pry into others, and can find so little to ransack
our own hearts? Surely to be curious in scanning other men's lives, and
careless of our own is certainly an argument of an evil mind, and a great
sign of an unsanctified heart; if thou will needs be prying into other men's
conuersations, look into the state of the poor and needy; behold their faces
pale and wan, their clothes ragged and torn; Be thou as Job was, An eye to
the blind, feet to the lame, and a comfort to the needy; this is the way to
gain honor and praise of men, when the loins of the poor shall bless thee;
and the Lord will reward thee Possessa onerant. amata inquinant, amissa
cruciant. Worldly things when we have them they load us, when we love them
they defile us, when we lose them they vex us.
at the day of his appearing.

Thus we have diued into the pleasing delights of the world, and have found
out their insufficiency to profit us in life and death; come we now to
consider of the world in it self.

As all worldly things are vain and insufficient in their use, and unable in
themselves to do us good for our souls and our bodies, so the world it self
is momentany and mutable: momentany in regard of it self, as at the first it
was a confused Chaos, so some shall live to see it pass away as a scroule or
squib in the Air; so also it is mutable in regard of us who are changeable and
subject to alteration. If the world could always continue, yet could not we,
for one generation must pass Eccles. 1. 4. Quod breuiter d^r^t, quis prudens
quaerere curat.
away, and another come in their place. Then what wise man would set up his
rest upon such an uncertain place, so unable to do us good? what is the
world? a vale of misery: a sink of sin: a Court of Satan: a purgatory of
pain: a mother to the wicked: and a Step-dame to the godly; where the proud
are advanced without desert, and the virtuous oppressed without cause? What is
the world? a second hell: full of ambitious desires, wicked wiles, and
deuillish intents, a cruel Serpent, that biteth us with her teeth, scratcheth
us with her nails, and swells us with her poison: much like Laban who made
poor Jacob serve seven years for fair Rachel, and in the end deceived him
with foul Leah. Even so deals the world with us, promising health, wealth,
long life, and in the end deceives us with sickness, poverty, and death.
What is the World? her music is grief, sorrow, shame and pain: her wealth,
misery, nothing is to be looked for in it but troubles following one another as
Jobs messengers; Some are pinched with poverty, and overwhelmed with misery;
some vexed with strife and contention: some tortured with sickness, boyles, and
ulcers; some amazed with crosses, losses, and the like, some one way, some
another way, in so much that if an old man should consider the dangers of his
life from his birth to his grave he might wonder how he could be able to
endure so painful a journey.

What is the world? no place to continue in, all mankind are either strangers,
or straglers; 1 Pet. 2. 11 Heb. 11. 13
the godly they are Strangers and Pilgrims, so the godly have confessed; and
the wicked they are Straglers, howsoever they take their portion in this life,
yet at last they must away Psa 17. 14. Act. 1. 25.
with Judas to their own home.

Then what a vain thing is it to build up Tabernacles of rest here, of whose
favor and love there can be no certainty? for the world it self is subject
to change: look upon the earth, it waxes weak and feeble for age, and
therefore not so fruitful as in times past; look up to the heavens, they are
not free from mutabilitie; the Sun and the Moon have their ecclipses, the
times vary and change one with another, Summer with winter, day with night:
look upon the world, sometime it flourishes and abounds with delights, and
seems to be as the garden of God, as Sodom and her neighbor Cities, and
presently turned into ashes: Look upon the Assyrian and Babylonian Monarchy,
for a time Master of the world, but at last was fain to yield to the Monarchy
of the Medes and Persians, and they at last were forced to stoop to the
Grecians; and they to submit to the Romans. So that we see that the glory of
the Nations was quickly laid in the dust. And have not we lived to see many
in our days which have shined as the Stars, which in a moment have vanished
away like a Comet? have not our eyes beheld, and our ears heard the setting of
as glorious stars as ever shined in the World since the death of Josiah? I
mean the setting of that glorious Princess of everliving memory, Queen
Elizabeth, the Phoenix of her age, whose name shall smell as precious as ever
Mary's ointment in the nostrils of all true hearted English: as also the going
Dum tumu lum cernis, our non mortalia sper^is.
down of the Sun of that prudent, learned, and godly prince King James of
blessed memory, who was in virtue excellent, in glory renowned, in government
politic, removing debate by diligent foresight, filling our hearts with the
fruit of peace; yet for all this, though they Quid valet hic mundus, quid
gloria quidue triumphus. Sic transit gloria mundi.
were great in Gods favor, yet they died. When God does call, Nature must
obey. Alexander that conquered the world, could find no weapon to conquer
death. Man in honor must not continue.

Brethren, what mean you then to set up your rest in such an uncertain place?
What, has Christ redeemed you from the world, and will you be partners with
the devil in possessing it? it will shortly pass away and perish before your
eyes, and yet will you make it your God? What madness is it to repose hope,
and felicity in that which is nothing else but troubles to our bodies, disquietnes
to our minds, inticements of vice to our children, seeds of envy to our
neighbors, the bait of sin, the snare of the soul and the gate of death?
The world is like unto Salomons harlot that lays open her breasts to entice
Travelers and Strangers, the two Dugs whereof are profit and pleasure, with
the first she deals like Hypomanes and Attalanta, who being to run a race
for a kingdom, Hypomanes casting a ball of gold on this side, and that side,
so besotted Attalanta, that for to gain the gold she lost the victory, so does
the world mis-lead the gold desiring Merchant.

With the second the world deals like Cyrces, who alluring Grillus to taste of
her drugs, made him so drunk with the pleasure thereof, as that he neither
remembered the dignity of his person, nor sight of his Country; so deals the
world with the pleasurable worldling. But of this point we have spoken enough:
yet for all this so linckt in league are we with the world, that we can be
content to hazard our salvation for the uncertain inioying of it. If we look
upon the rich Giants of the world, which join house to house, and land to
land, to maintain their proud backs, golden heads, and dainty throats, they
have power to get riches, policy to keep them, and time to possess them, but
they want hearts to use them: they build great and gorgious houses, as if they
should live for ever, and surfeit themselves with dainty diet, as if they
should die to morrow, having less charity to the poor then the Devil, he
desired to have stones turned into bread, but they turn Beef and bread, which
was wont (by the charity of the godly) to feed the poor, these they turn into
stones to raise up their Babel, and into Silks and Veluets to maintain them in
their bravery, and so by this means they have almost brought the Commonwealth
into ruin, for there was never good house kept by Gentlemen since the Tailer
measured their lands by the yard, for now while they strive to advance
themselves on high, they fearfully plunge their souls in misery. But woe to
such fat Bulls of Bashan, without speedy repentance they shall be turned into
hell, and all the people that forget God; then,

Pudeat tanto bona velle caduca. Manil. l. 4.

Oh be ashamed so much your hearts to stay,
On things so frail, that swiftly pass away.
Thus much of the former point propounded, the vanity and insufficiency of the
world, and all worldly things: the second follows, the excellency of the
soul, the love whereof should make us basely to esteem of all worldly things,
and to count them no better then dung in respect of Christ, for Riches as we
have heard are transitory, and will beguile us, Honors are slippery and will
deceive us, and the world is Moath-eaten and wears away, and we our selves are
brittle, and so shall perish; then what is a man profited if he gain the
world, and lose his own soul? In which words we may observe again these
particulars.

1. A comparison of the price with the thing prized; the price is amplified by
the subject matter thereof, which is the soul. 2. By the propinquitie and
propriety, it is his own soul, more worth then all the world, which must
continue when all these transitory things must pass away, and that which shall
eternally rue the bargain; for what is the earth to heaven, and what can the
world profit when the soul is plunged in Hell, where it can neither mitigate
pain, nor purchase redemption?

2. The irrecouerablenesse of the loss; what shall a man give for the exchange
of his soul? There is nothing in the world sufficient; so precious is the
redemption of the soul. The Psalm. 49. 8.
words are expressed by a metaphor borrowed from captive prisoners, supprised
or taken in war, which were wont to be redeemed by money, or else by
exchange of one prisoner for another; but if that cruel Pyrat Satan have
taken us prisoners, we are past hope of recovery, there is no redemption; then
what is a man profited if he gain the world, and lose his own soul.



To this we are exhorted by our Savior, to labor for the John 6. 37. Luke 13.
24
meat that endures for ever, and to strive to enter in at the Mat. 7. 13.
strait Gate. Now, striving we know is an action of labor, teaching us that
it requires great pains and diligence; for many shall seek to enter in, and
shall not be able. And the Apostle exhorts us to give all diligence to make
our calling and Election sure, and he tells us of the benefit that will follow,
If ye do these things, you shall never fall. This has been the practice of
Gods Children, to press toward Phil. 3. 14.
the mark for the high Calling of God in Christ: and this is a mark of trial
for the Saints, if they be risen with Christ to seek Col. 3. 1. Phil. 3. 20.
the things which are above, and to have their conversation in heaven. And
therefore he would have as many as be perfect to be thus verse. 15.
minded. This is also a point of wisdom, which our Savior would have us
learn, to make us friends of the Mammon Luke 16. 9.
of unrighteousness; and promised a reward to him that Reu. 3. 21.
overcomes, he shall sit with him on his Throne, and a Crown of life to
those that continue Reu. 2. 10.
faithful to the death.

Effiie^s ^ qua.


1. In regard of the excellency of the soul, which is seen in the work of
Creation, for therein all the causes did concur for the perfecting of it.

1. The efficient and supreme cause is God himself, which he has reserved to
himself as his Eccle. 12. 7
own Royalty.

2. The Material cause was 2. Materia e^ qua.
not the rude Chaos and base slime of the earth, as was the body made of,
neither was it made of the pure Gold of Ophir, but as if there were nothing
precious enough in heaven and in earth, it is said the Lord breathed it out of
his mouth.

3. The formal cause, it was 3. Forma per quam. Genesis 1. 27. Ephesians. 4. 24.
made after the Image of God, resembling him in Holiness, Wisdom, and
Righteousness.

4. The final cause, that it 4. Finis propter quem. 1 Cor. 6. 19.
might be the temple of God, and an habitation for his Spirit.

2. The excellency of the soul is seen in the work of Redemption, for the
souls sake Christ laid aside his Robes of glory, was made man, and endured
Phil. 2. 7.
so much misery and shame in his life, and so much torment and sorrow at his
death, and all 1 Pet. 1. 18
to redeem the soul with no less price then the Blood of Act. 20. 28
the Son of God.

3. The excellency of the soul appears by Satan's malice, who goes about like
a roaring 1 Pet. 5. 6. Re^. 12. 7.
Lion seeking to devour it, he has not such a spite to our wealth, our
learning, cunning, or credit (though he love none of those things which are
good and comfortable to us) as he has to our souls, and the graces of Gods
Spirit in us. Was it Jobs wealth he so much envied, or did he sift him because
he was a rich man? No, nothing grieved him so much, as to see Job continue in
his uprightness, therefore he labored by all means to cross him in his
estate, and torment him in his body, that he might move him to despair, or
else to blaspheme, that thereby he might destroy his soul; so also he shows
himself an adversary to all Gods Children, crossing Zach. 3. 1.
them in their suites which they make to God, or else defiles their prayers, by
ming ling hypocrisy and vain glory with their best sacrifices.

4. The excellency of the soul is also seen by the ministry of the Angels,
which are ever about the godly men to deliver them from danger, and are about
their beds in sickness, and at the day of death like swift Posts to carry
their souls into Abraham's bosom.

What shall a man give for the exchange of his soul? intimating unto us, that
the world, and worldly things are not able to make recompense and satisfaction
for the loss of the soul.



Impiger extrem^s ^urrit Mercator ad Indos. If riches may be had in India,
Turkey, or any other places, though never so dangerous, yet the greedy
worldling will venture his life rather then he will go without them.

The husbandman, what pains and care will he take, rising early, and going to
bed late for the things of this life, faring hard, and going thin, sparing from
back and belly to advance himself in the world? what tortures, and troubles,
and pains will a sick man endure for to gain health? he will be contented to
have a leg or an arm cut and lanced to preserve and gain health: he will
endure fretting tents, and corroding plasters, and deprive himself of
pleasure, nay many times he will be content the endure the cutting off of his
leg, arm, or other of his members for the preserving of the health of his
body; If Naaman can recover 2 Kin. 5. 17
help for his Leprosy he will spare for no cost.

Oh how careful are men for their bodies and states, but how careless for
their souls! they will be sure to look to their estates, and make them sure
by good advice from their learned Counsel, but for their souls they take
little or no care. Oh how ought we to break out into tears for the
carelessness of our own salvation? what a Childhood and youth have we spent in
ignorance and vanity? and how careless have we been to serve God, and save
our souls? Nay, what enemies have we been to our own salvation? what filthy
and unclean thoughts have we harbored in our hearts? what filthy words have
we uttered with our tongues? how often have we sworn, lied, and blasphemed God,
and taken his name in vain? how often have our hearts disdained and envied not
only our Superiors whom we should have honored, but also scorned and
despised our Inferiors and equals, whom we should have loved and respected as
our selves? how have we spent our days in ignorance of God, and of our own
fearful estate, spending our days in idleness, pride, and all manner of
profaneness, presumption of Gods mercy, and turning his grace into
wantonness, grieuing his Spirit, and wounding our own consciences? how should
the consideration hereof cause us to power forth our souls in godly sorrow
before the Lord, because we have offended our Maker, sinned against our
Redeemer, grieved the Holy Spirit, wronged our Neighbors, and so have deserved
damnation, and to be cast out from the presence of the Lord for ever; and as we
have cause to weep and mourn for our sins, and for that we have neglected
the care of our own salvation; so also we are to mourn and lament to see
others so careless of their salvation; some sell their souls, some carelessly
lose them.

1. Some sell them as Ahab, and as some wrangling and corrupt Lawyers, which
have Linguam venalem, a tongue to be sold, which for a paltrie fee will many
times stretch his conscience by maintaining a false cause, or marring a good,
to the undoing of his Neighbor. (Mistake me not, I speak not of all Lawyers,
for some are conscionable and just in their proceedings) The covetous man has
Animam venalem, a soul to sell for the base thick clay of this world, which
cannot be redeemed with all the world: So the voluptuous man he sels his soul
for pleasure, as Esau did his Birthright, esteeming more the pleasures of
sin, which last but for a season, then the salvation of his soul. The proud
man he sells his soul for advancement, as Alexander the sixth for the
Popedom. GOD he commands us in the first Commandment to have no other Gods
but him alone, yet the proud man will make Honor his god, the covetous man the
wedge of gold his god, the voluptuous man his belly his god; The first of Ph^l.
3. 19. Iohannis de Combis compen. theol. lib. 5. cap. 10.
these as one well says, has his Idol in the Air, the second on the earth,
the third in the water.

2. Some lose their souls, as the carnal Gospellers, who think if they be
not guilty of the crying sins of Sodom, nor Genesis 18. 20 Isa. 1. 18.
of the crimson sins of Israel, nor of the bitter sins of Simon Magus, they
think they are in good case, though their lives abound with ignorance, and
profaneness, and their souls with many infirmities, and their lives with
many deformities, which they take no notice of. Alas poor souls, what good
will it do you at the great day of account, when man cannot justly charge with
crime, when God and your own conscience knows you want the wedding garment of
faith, it is not sufficient to be cleansed from the one, unless ye be
furnished with the other, else being weighed in the Dan. 5. 27.
balance of Gods Justice y^e shall be found too light.

Others lose their souls by trifling away their time, like idle people in the
market, while other are buying they stand gaping after the sinful vanities of
the world, and think if they do as their Neighbors do, and come to Church
although it be for fashions sake, they are in very good case, though all this
while their minds roue and wander after their worldly business, and so for
want of watchfulness, they betray their souls into Satan's hands, and wrap
themselves under that curse of doing the work of the Lord negligently.

Others so live that unless all be saved, it is impossible but they shall be
damned, because they love, like, and continue in their miserable estate of
nature, being so chained in their sins and iniquities, that they cannot stir
one foot to heauenward, yet for all this they do not consider their miserable
state and condition, that they are slaves to sin, for whosoever John* 8. 34.
Ephesians. 2. 3.
commits sin is the servant of sin, and his servants ye are to Romans 6. 16
whom ye obey. Nay, by nature we are the children of wrath, and heirs of hell,
and bound over to the curse of the law, Gal. 3. 10 Deuteronomy. 27. 2, 6.
and so liable to all crosses and calamities, and at our death to be haled by
Satan into Hell; This fearful and miserable condition is far worse then
the bondage of Turks and Barbaria^s, for theirs though it be cruel, yet it
extends but to the body, and cannot hurt the soul; the most that Tyrants can
do, is, but to take away our lives, and deprive us of our liberty: but this
bondage is spiritual, and depriues us of Gods Image in our souls; In the
other there may be possibility of escaping that miserable bondage, either by
fear, force, or favor, or at leastwise our pains may be mittigated; if
not, death will set us free; but in this bondage, as we are unable to set our
selves free, so we are unwilling to be freed, and are the greatest enemies to
our own salvation; for, Satan having got possession of us deals with us as
the Babylonia^s did with Zedekiah, first put out his eyes, and then bound him
in chains; so does Satan, he puts out the eyes of our understanding, and
then binds us with the chains of ignorance, hypocrisy, hardness of heart;
so that to our inability we our selves add unwillingness to come out; and so
by hating to be reformed, we plunge our selves unrecoverably under the wrath of
GOD, pleasing our selves in our ignorance, blindness, and hardness of heart;
and so having lost the harmony of a good Conscience, we use variety of objects
to take away tediousness, and get some Iubal or other to play upon the Organ,
to make us merry with our sins. In this corporal bondage we have a feeling
of our misery, and so sigh and groan under the burden of it; but this bondage
is spiritual, pleasing and delightful to our nature, so that we are so far
from being weary of it, that if any one seek to set us free out of this
slavery, we hate him, scorn him, and deride him; and so put back the means
of salvation from us.

Brethren, what cruelty is this to neglect the means of our souls health,
which was bred and brought up with us, and which has spent and wasted her
self in our service, to minister strength and relief to our bodies, and shall
not we take care to preserve it, and to use all means that it may be saved,
God has shut it up in our breasts, that it may be always in readiness to
supply our wants, and shall we not take care to preserve it from destruction;
our souls are shut up in a dark dungeon which is neither lightsome nor
pleasant, but dark, and dirtie, and full of all manner of uncleanness, and
poluted with our original and actual sins, which made the the Apostle cry
out, O wretched man, who shall deliver me from this Romans 7. 24
body of death.

If our souls had tongues to speak for themselves, they would cry out
against us for our great cruelty, in that we starve them for want of food, and
rob them of heavenly comforts, and scarce allow them a good meal in a whole
year.

Brethren, what food is to the body, such is the Word of God to the soul; now
if by chance we come where any good matter is to be handled, so cruel are
many to their souls, that they choke and dead them by drunkenness,
surfeiting, or other uncleanness, or filthy vanity, so that their souls take
little or no comfort by the Word, Sacrament, or Christian communication. As for
the Sabbath day, which should be spent holy and religiously unto God, we spend
it many of us most profanely, and ungodly; as if we had no part in the
Creation of the world, nor redemption of it by Jesus Christ. For where is the
man that bridles his desires, to sa^ctifie that day as he ought? if God should
now look down from heaven to behold the sons of men upon earth, should he
not find many a Master, and Father, many a Mother, and many a Mistress either
snorting or lazing upon their beds, prating, walking, trimming and smoothing
themselves upon that day, and on that time which they should have spent for
their souls health? And yet alas, so careless are they of their souls that
they think that time is lost which is spent for their good. Should he not
also find many a Child, many a Servant, nay perhaps many a father, many a
master, drinking, swilling, gaming, and peradventure whoring upon this day; or
at leastwise swearing, fighting, or quarelling, or bargaining, or chopping or
changing? But how few among many of us should he find praying, reading, and
meditating upon the Word of God, and his righteous judgments? Men are very
careful for their bodies, but very careless of their souls. But O foolish
people, will you watch and take care to keep your Chickens from the Kite; your
Lambs from the Wolf; your Pigions and Conies from the Vermin; and will you
take no care for your souls? The soul being once lost, it is impossible to
recover it again; other losses may be recovered, but this cannot. If Job lose
his health, wealth, and Children, yet they may be recovered, either by Gods
blessing upon our labors or else by the charity of friends; but if thy soul
be once lost, there is no recovery; thousand of Rams, and ten thousand rivers
of Oil will then do us no good.

Saint Chysostom has well observed, Omnia Deus d^dit duplicia, animam vero
vnam. Chry. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 22. Nullo remedio sarciri, nullo precio
redimi potest. Chrysostom. Hom. 56.
that God in the frame of the body has given man two eyes, two ears, two
hands, two feet, etc. that if one fail the other may supply the want; but he
has given him but one soul, so that if that be lost, there is no supply to
be had, no means can repair it, no price can redeem it, all the world
cannot recompense it; for what would it avail us to have the wisdom and
riches of Solomon, the strength of Sampson, and the beauty of Absolon, and to
enjoy the blessings of the world as long a life as Methushelah lived, if at our
death Genesis 5. 27. Daretur caro Verminibus, anima daemonibus. Isodor. de Summo
bono.
our flesh shall be made a booty for the Worms, and our souls a prey for the
Devil? Oh consider this all you that forget God, and are careless of your
own salvation! GOD has made man a most glorious creature, and therefore all
creatures admire and serve him, the wonder of the world; now as nothing is so
glorious in earth as man, so there is nothing so glorious in man as his soul,
which man himself should admire, and by all means seek the welfare of it;
for this is our glory, our life, save this, and save all; But oh the
carelessness of many, nay the most of us all, for that which should be our
chiefest care, we are less careful! our souls are more worth then all the
world, yet men now so live, as if their souls were of no worth. How justly may
we take up that sad complaint of the Prophet, The Ier. 12. 11.
whole land is made desolate because no man lays it to heart: all manner of
sins do now so abound, pride, hypocrisy, self-love, and cruelty;
profaneness and Atheism have gotten the upper hand, and men do so live,
that they think they have no soul to save; every man spends his days in
pleasure, and following his own delights, as if God had sent us hither for no
other end, but to sport, and play, and follow the lusts of our own hearts.

Brethren, has God created us in his own Image that we should so vilely and
dispitefully deface it? has Christ redeemed us with such a price to save our
souls, and shall we so negligently and wilfully cast them away? the wiseman
says, God has created all things for Pro. 16. 4.
himself: Now if man swerue from the end for which he was created, and serve the
Devil, the world, and his filthy lusts; and being made for heaven, should walk
in the path that leads to hell; this is to degenerate from his nature, and
become worse then the very beasts: for they stand firm in their places
enjoined them by God in their Creation; The Be and the Pismi^e are careful to
do Gods work having no Tutor nor remembrancer; But Man the most excellent of
all Creatures, wallowes in all manner of riot and disorder: the Trees bear
fruit, Flowers send forth sweet odors, herbs their secret virtues, and the
waters post apace to the maine Ocean; but Man is senseless and carlesse to
obey his Maker; the senseless being forced contrary to his inclination to
mount upward, never rests but sinks and descends again until it come to its
proper center, which is the determined place appointed of God; And shall Man
that glorious Creature, created after the Image of God, run from his end, and
delight to do every thing saving that which God has prescribed him to do?
The Frogs, Flies, Lice, and Grasshoppers, being appointed of God to take down
the pride of that stout King, were zealous and diligent to obey their Creator;
And shall Man which has his heart filled with understanding and judgment
being so many ways called upon, and put in mind of his duty; yet shall he
swerue and go awry? shall God rejoice and delight himself in all the
Creatures that he has made, and repent that he has made Man, which is so
careless of such a precious Jewel as he has committed to him? There is
nothing in the world should be so dear unto man as his soul, and yet how
wretched are the most of us, we pass away our souls for trifles; We spit at
Judas who sold his Master, his Lord and God for thirty pieces of silver, but
we sell away heaven for earth; the place of glory and bliss, to purchase hell
the place of torment. Oh consider this, and be ashamed all ye that forget God.
If the soul did die and perish with the body, then there were not so much care
to be taken of it; but seeing the soul is immortal, and must for ever live
with GOD or the Devil; how much care should we take to get it saved? for with
the loss of our souls, we lose GOD the life of our souls, in whose presence
is fullness of Psalm. 16.
joys, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. With the loss of
our souls we lose Christ with all his merits, the presence and protection of
all the Angels, and in stead of enjoying the society of the godly Spirits, we
are plunged into Hell that loathsome prison, that shall never be unlocked; but
shall for ever endure the fierceness of Gods wrath in that everlasting
burning, where shall be weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth; and in
stead of hearing of that blessed sentence of approbation, Come ye blessed of my
Father, etc. the damned wretches shall hear that terrible sentence of
condemnation, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting torments, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Every one of these words shall be pronounced with
such power and authority, that they shall strike those damned wretches even to
the bottom of Hell. Go from me, who have all help and comfort, all power and
might, which all the days of your lives have had care to protect and save you
from dangers, which have nourished your bodies withal manner of delights; but
seeing you have had no care to glorify me, I will now take no further care to
help you, but will glorify my self in your destruction; therefore depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire, where you shall endure torments
remediless, and endless; where you shall cry and rore, but I will not hear
you; where you shall be always burning and frying, and yet never consumed.
You shall seek death, and yet never find it; you shall be tormented Ibi d^lor
permanet, vt affligat, and natura perdurat, vt sentiat, quia vtrumque non
deficit, ne^ poena deficiet. Aug. de Ci^. Dei. l. 19.
with griping hunger, but shall never be satisfied; with intolerable thirst
which shall never be quenched; your Music shall be howling, and weeping of
damned wretches like your selves; but all in vain, you are now accursed,
because you did abuse the titles of Honor which God gave you in your life,
therefore now you shall have the title of curse, you shall be cursed of God,
whose curse is everlasting damnation; you shall be cursed of the blessed
Angels, whose curse shall be the horrors of your conscience; you shall be
cursed of the devils, whose curse shall be the execution of your punishment,
you shall be cursed of the damned wretches, whose curses shall be the
aggrauation of your torments, and you shall be plunged into everlasting fire,
and be Mat. 22. 13
bound hand and foot, from whence you shall never be able to stir nor move,
but shall for ever and ever so long as God is, remain frying and broyling in
everlasting torments, which shall burn so violently, that the damned shall
prize a drop of water above all the world; but they shall not obtain it; For
there the Tormentors are Devils, and will never pity the damneds misery, and
as they will never be weary with tormenting, so the torments shall never be
ended, nor the tormented consumed; and therefore it is a misery of all miseries
to be always dying and never dead. The soul also shall be tormented with the
remembrance of pleasures past, and mercy refused; and now with pains and
torments present, but unavoidable; and of joys lost, but now unrecoverable:
and thus the Worm of your Conscience shall lie gnawing and fretting you, by
bringing to your remembrance the cause Omnes gebennae superat cruciatus carere
bonis, quibus in potestate habuerunt perfrui. Chrysostom.
of your misery, and how easily you might have escaped these torments, but that
you had no grace to use the means; the consideration hereof shall make you
curse God your Creator, and curse his justice, because he punishes you so
cruelly; you shall curse his bounty and liberality, because he so severely
prizes it now at so high a rate, and you shall curse the virtue of Christ's
blood which was able to cleanse thousands from their sins, but now has no
virtue to purge you from your filthiness, and you shall curse the Saints in
heaven, because you shall see them in glory when as your selves are in
torment; and though you yell and cry with the damned rich man for mercy, for
mercy, but alas, the time of mercy then will be past, and Christ the Judge
will not now be entreated; from whose sentence you cannot appeal, the soul
being once lost there is no place left for mercy.

A good Father does bring in a Sinner and his Judge expostulating each with
other;

Sweet Savior (says the Sinner) remember now thy Passion. True (says the
Judge) but yet now there is no place for compassion.

Yet Jesus let me come to thee. No, for in thy life time thou said, depart
from me.

Yet Jesus have thou but one blessing, give me a blessing before I part No,
thou art under the curse, therefore go from me ye cursed.

But Lord, since we are accursed, let us feel no other punishments then thy
curse. No, as you have burned with the fire of lusts, so now you shall burn
with the fire of Hell.

But who is able to endure this Isay. 33. 11.
everlasting burning, therefore sweet Jesus let it not continue long. Yes, as
you would have sinned for ever, so shall this fire last for ever; therefore go
ye cursed into everlasting fire.

But Lord, seeing we must go away with a curse, yet give us some comfortable
companions, which may refresh and comfort us in this flame. No, but as you were
of your father the Devil, so go ye into that flame prepared for him and his
Angels, from whence ye shall never depart till you have paid the uttermost
farthing, which you will never be able to do.

Hell is a great deep without Infernus ab inferendo dictus est.
bottom, out of which there is no redemption. In earthly prisons, and
dungeons, there may be some possibility of escape, as we read of many that were
condemned to die by the tyranny of Gog, and Magog, the Turk, and Pope, and yet
have escaped; but out of hell never any escaped. The party which Mat. 13. 22
intruded himself into the wedding feast, and had not on his wedding garment,
was bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness. If a man were bound
hand and foot with a thousand Cords cross one another, this way, and that way,
as the wit of man might conceive, so to hamper and fetter a man as that he were
never able to stir or move, much less able to loose and set free himself;
were not such a man in a miserable case? but if this man so bound should be
cast into a Well or Pit a thousand mile deep, what hope could such a man have
of ever coming out? So they that are once in Hell shall never come out thence;
for, Between you and us Luke 16. 29
(says Father Abraham) is a great gulf set, so that it is impossible to come
out thence. Now this Gulf is the eternal Decree of God, and it is past the
skill of men, Angels, and devils to give Dan. 12. 2
ease to a tormented soul, or purchase their liberty, for their Worm never
dies, and their Mat. 9. 24. 2 These. 1. 9.
perdition is everlasting, and Saint Jude says, that they shall suffer
eternal fire, and as the Reu. 20. 10.
Mercy of the Lord endures for ever, so does the Justice of the Lord endure
from everlasting to everlasting, world without end.

Ob. Oh but may some say, Is not God unjust to punish mortal man, which has
lived not above 20. 30. 40. 60, or 80. years, and has endured a great deal
of misery in this world; is he not then unjust to punish him eternally in the
world to come?

A. Unto which I answer, Oh man, who art thou that replyest Romans 9. 20.
against God? It is just with the most holy, righteous, and glorious God to
punish man for ever, for these reasons:

1. If we consider the infinite Holiness and Purity of GOD that is offended,
and the intolerable indignity that has been offered to his sacred Majesty,
he may justly punish man with eternal torments.

2. If man should live ever, he would sin ever, and despite, and offer
violence to the sacred Majesty of the Lord, and lade him with his sins, as a
Cart is pressed with Sheaues.

3. It is just with God to punish sinners so long as they continue

sinful, but the damned in hell remain sinful; therefore it is just with God
to punish them with eternal torments; for sin is like Oil, and the Justice
of God like fire; and we see by experience that so long as the Oil lasts, the
fire will burn; so, as long as the damned remain sinful; so long they shall
be tormented, now in hell as we showed before, the damned do continually
blaspheme, and sin against God; therefore their torments shall be endless,
for ever and ever.

Now let the greedy worldling Extrema gaudia sequuntur perpetuae lament^.
tell me what a match he makes, to gain the world, and lose his soul, which
is more worth then ten thousand worlds; and which cannot be ransomed again at
any rate. If gold and silver and the riches of the world could redeem the
soul, then sure the Devil would have made sure work for himself, but alas,
it cannot be obtained; he cannot purchase his redemption, but at last shall be
cast into that fiery lake, and shall be tormented day and night, for ever and
ever.

Brethren, if the torments of Hell be so fearful and so painful as we have
heard, and so impossible to come out of them; the Devil being the Jailer, and
being armed with the purpose and decree of God, that it is impossible to
escape; Those he possessed in our Saviors time, how hard a matter was it to
make him let go his hold, so loath he was to lose those he held captive by
permission? how much more careful will he be now to hold the damned under the
fierceness of Gods wrath for ever? How then may we wonder at the folly and
madness of many of us that so wilfully cast away our souls? What ado have
we to win and persuade men from their wickedness, which is the high way to
lose their souls? Some cast away their souls to satisfy their drunkenness;
some by blasphemous oaths; some by griping and greedy covetousness; some one
way, some another; in so much that God may thunder from heaven against the
deaf sinners of our times, and say as once he did to Israel, Why will ye die?
why will ye cast away your souls? And yet for all this we will not amend:
Christ may lay load upon our Consciences, as once he did upon Judas, and tell
us, that if we lose our souls, it had been better for us we had never been
borne; but for all this neither his Word nor his Judgments can stay us from
walking in those sinful courses which lead to hell; We love the way to hell
better then the way to heaven, and we prefer the pleasures of sin before the
joys of heaven. We are careful for the world, lest we should want, but for
the soul we make no question; for the body we take care, and upon every light
occasion do distrust, and fall to shifts, fearing we shall want: but for our
souls we persuade our selves that all is well with them, albeit they want all
the means of salvation, and we our selves live in our corruption unreformed:
many ways there are to make supply for the body in earthly things, but one way
for heavenly; our labor here may procure us maintenance, and what we want may
be supplied by the Charity of our friends; but no man can redeem his soul:
We may win the world as Alexander did, and yet for all this lose our souls.
Oh consider this all ye that forget GOD, and are careless of your salvation:
we will be at great cost for the assurance of our lands, and for gain we
will travel far, and to be sure of promotion we will endure much toil and
drudgery, and shall we take no pains to be assured of heaven, the gain of
glory, and the salvation of our souls? Naturally we are moved to seek after
those things, by which we may escape loss, and gain some good, but oh the
carelesnes of the most of us for the salvation of our souls! Men study to
become learned, they labor for friends, strive for riches, and seek for
promotion, because the benefit of the^ is much for man's welfare, and the want
of them is held to be very hurtful, without them men are judged but miserable,
yet riches and honor are nothing so available for us here, learning and
friends cannot make them happy that have them, unless they be assured of the
salvation of their souls; but alas, we are like Balaam, we can wish that our
souls may die the death of the righteous, but are unwilling to live their
life; we would with Dives fare delicately every day, and yet with Lazarus look
for heaven at our ending: Thus we pass our days in the sinful vanities of
the world, and are careless of our own salvation, and so spending our days
in pleasure suddenly we sink down into hell.

Oh but may some say, God forbid we should be so careless for our souls as
to lose them for the world, we hope we have more care then so.

Unto whom I answer, if you be so careful as you say you are, what means
that rising up early, and going to bed late? what toyling, and carking and
caring for the world, like the bleating and lowing of the Amalekites sheep and
Oxen? what means that excessive care for the belly and back? these cry so
loud that men may see that the care of the most is for the world, and the least
care is for the soul the most precious Jewel we have. But thou that say
thou art so careful for thy soul, let me ask thee a question or two, and let
thy Conscience answer before God that knows the secrets of thy heart; Do you
feel as great thirst after righteousness, as ever at any time you have felt
after drink to refresh your dry body, or as great a desire after Gods
Kingdom, as the Covetous man has after money? is your principal care night
and day how you may please God? can thou sorrow and mourn more for sin,
and for the loss of Gods favor; then for the loss of any worldly estate?
Can thou put up wrongs and injuries done thee patiently and quietly, and see
Gods hand in them, as David did the cursing of Shimei? If these things thou
do out of a good Conscience, then I say thou art careful for thy soul. But
on the contrary art thou a willing servant of sin, more willing to do what
thy lust leads thee unto, then what God commands? Do thou bestow upon the
world that love, fear, joy, delight, strength, and time which God challenges,
and the godly in all ages have been careful to perform and give unto him,
then where is thy care for thy soul? does thy life and couersation agree
better with the will of the Devil, then with the Will of God, and do thou
take more care and pains to fulfill the Will of the flesh, and Satan, then in
doing what God requires? If thus thou do, for shame never say thou take
care for thy soul, for the devils take as much care as thou do; If the
righteous can hardly be saved, where shall the profane sinners appear? if
they which have set their faces toward heaven all the days of their life,
shall scarce be saved, what shall become of those that have set their faces
against heaven all their life? If we have care of our souls as we ought,
where is our zeal to Godward? where is our reverend fear of his Majesty?
where is our service and obedience we yield unto our Lord and God? where is
our very reason that makes us differ from beasts, which by the instinct of
Nature follow those things which are profitable to them, and shun those
things which are hurtful; yet we having direction from the Word of God, have
no desire of everlasting happiness, nor fear of endless destruction.

Ob. Oh but may some say, I mean to take care for my soul, but as yet I have
no leisure, I have many businesses in hand, and within short space I mean to
put off my trade, and by that time I shall have got money, and then I mean to
betake my self to a religious course of life.

A. But does not God in the first place command thee to seek his Kingdom,
which is the greatest and principal work? and will thou seek that last which
he has commanded to seek first? Thou say thou will serve God when thou
art rich, but how do thou know that thou shall have a heart then to serve
God? have not we seen many rich men have made their riches their god, and so
have withdrawn their hearts from God? Again, no Calling must be a calling
from God, every man can find time to spare out of his Calling to eat, drink,
sleep, and many times to prate, game, and the like, and can thou find time
to fill thy belly, and no time to provide for thy soul?

Oh but may some say, I will repent when I am sick, then will I humble my
self, and seek for my souls health, for sickness will put me in mind of death.

Unto which I answer, suppose thou be never sick, will thou never take care
for thy soul? have we not heard of many that have died suddenly, and so have
had no time to prepare for their souls health? Was not Zimry and Cosby taken
in the very act of sin, and so by the hand of Justice sent to Hell without
any time to repent in? If old Ely had had his repentance to seek, and the
provision for his soul to get when he fell down and his neck was broken, in
what a fearful case had he been? Do we not see many in their sickness to
have died senseless like Nabal, and it is just with GOD, that Soepe morie^s
obliui. scitur sui, qui dum vi^eret oblitus est Dei.
they which have forgotten him in their life, should forget themselves in their
death? Did not the Israeli^es die suddenly with the Quails in their mouths?
and Ananias and Saphira his wife before they were summoned by sickness, or
thought of their souls? and how many are there which are taken away by
senseless diseases, as the Apoplexy, dead Palsy, or other diseases, which
make men unfit to take care for their souls health? Sickness is a time to
live by faith, and not a time to get faith. What a madness and misery were it
for the Soldier to have his Sword and Helmet to seek when the enemy sounds
alarm to the battle? so what a foolish thing is it to have the provision for
our souls to seek when death is ready to get in at the window? But admit that
sickness put them in mind of death, and that they were sure to die to morrow,
yet many would not be the better for it. The Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 32.
tells us of the Epicures of his time, that spoke of dying to morrow; and yet
had no grace to provide for their souls, for thus they say, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall die; which shows that grace is not wrought by
sickness, or fear of death, but by the power of Gods Spirit.

Ob. Oh but then we will send for the Minister, and he shall pray for us.

Answ. Will thou send for them to pray for thee in thy sickness, whom thou
have scorned, despised, and dis-regarded in thy life, and health, as much as
ever Pharaoh did Moses and Aaron? If they could do no good unto thy soul
while thou were in thy health, what can thou think they can do unto thee
now a sick, passionate, and diseased man: do thou think they can work faith
and repentance in thy heart? No, they cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs
of Thistles; if thy heart be ouergrowne with the weeds of sin and
profaneness, they can do thee little good, unless thou show great signs of
repentance, and hatred of all thy former sinful life. Let no man think I
would deprive the distressed of those means God has appointed to confirm
their faith, that is not my meaning.


Ob. Oh but then we will receive the Sacrament, and then no doubt but it shall
go well with us.

Answ. The Sacrament is not a means to beget faith, but to confirm faith,
where it is already begotten; take heed therefore thou do not receive it with
unclean hands, and an unrepentant heart, lest it seal up to thee thy
damnation, and be unto thee as the Sop was unto Judas.

Brethren, mistake me not I pray you, I do not condemn nor disallow for any
that is sick to send for the godly learned Minister, for to receive help and
comfort from him in the time of distress; no, no, that is not my meaning, the
Apostle exhorts those that are sick to call for the Elders of the Church, and
to let them pray Iam. 5. 15, 16.
over them; and he shows the benefit that will follow, The prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven.
And if he repent truly of his sins, the Sacrament shall seal up, and
assure him of Christ and his righteousness, to be imputed unto him for his
salvation* But the thing that I aim at is this, when as I see profane men
contemn and despise the godly faithful Ministers in their life and health; I
fear me they deceive themselves, to think that the Minister can do them any
good by his own power and presence: no, no, he can but declare their remission
of their sins upon their repentance: if then they do truly repent them of
their sins, and resolve from the bottom of their hearts to lead new lives,
let them not doubt but they shall receive much comfort by Gods blessing from
them; for to this end has the Lord given them the tongue of the learned, that
they might know how to minister a word of comfort in due season to a wearied
Conscience.

Therefore Brethren, if you would have comfort by them in your sickness, and
at your death, make much of them, and reverence them in your lives, and let
them be dear and precious unto you, and honor them for their works sake.

But here may some object, and say, What a stir is here for the salvation of
the soul? here is more ado then needs, we may provide for that at our
leisure, and there is no time unfit to repent and turn to the Lord; he is a
God of mercy, he will have mercy upon our souls whenever we repent and
turn to him: did he not show mercy to the Thief at the last gasp? therefore
I doubt not but if I repent in my old age I shall be saved well enough.

To which I answer, that though no time be unfit or too late for repentance
while we are here in this life, yet many times we hear of many which are
taken out of the world before they thought of repentance, and late repentance
proves seldom good, but many times feigned and dissembled like Cain's, Esau's,
and Judas.

If the case be so (dear brethren) then it is a point of wisdom to look
into it, whether it were best policy for us to take the opportunity of time
while it is offered, or else post it off to another time; we see that the men
of the world are wiser in their generation, Fro^te capila^^ p^st est occasio
calua.
let us learn a point of wisdom of them.

Ask the Merchant when it is best time to provide for his Commodities, and he
will tell you, while the Mart lasts. Ask the Husbandman when it is time to sow
his ground, and he will tell you, while the season lasts. The dumb
Creatures, as the Storke, and the Turtle, and the Crane, know their appointed
times, but man will not know when it is time to turn unto GOD, that he may
have mercy upon his soul, and if they do know the time, yet they put it off,
and neglect it, though they be often called, Today if you will hear his voice
barden not your hearts; yet the most of us like drouzy men sleep still in
sin, and answer the Lord as Saint Austine says of himself, saying, Lord I
had not wherewith to answer thee, when thou said unto me, Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life. And thou
demonstrating those things to be true in every point which thou spakest unto
me, I being convinced of the truth, had not any answer at all, but only the
words and speeches of a loytering sluggard, and of a drouzy sleeper. Nil nisi
tantum verba lenta and somnolenta modo, ecce modo, fine paululum, sed modo and
modo non habebat modum, and fine paululum in longum ibat. Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 5.
By and by, and behold anon, and by and by, behold anon, had neither measure
nor moderation: and let me alone held on a long time. So do sinful men with
GOD, they by procrastinating the time, hazard their salvation. Now if by the
Word of God we can convince the careless world in this point for the neglect
of the salvation of their souls, and dissolve this objection, we hope we
shall not unprofitably spend our time; let us therefore in the fear of God set
upon the work.

We all know that the chiefest care of a Christian should be to glorify God,
and save his soul, and to this end we all know, that amendment of our lives
is a work necessarily required, without which no man can be assured of his
salvation; so that here nothing comes into the question, but the time when,
we ought to take care for the salvation of our souls; thou say the time is
to be deferred hereafter, and give a reason for it, because God is a God of
mercy: But we say it is to be done presently, therefore let us see which
opinion is most conformable to the truth. We grant that God is a God of mercy
to the penitent, so he is a God of Justice to the obstinate; and Mercy abused
makes way for his Justice; and though God (says St. Gregory) has promised
pardon to the penitent, yet he has not promised to morrow to a sinner, Times
and seasons (says our Savior) are in Gods hands, then what a folly is it for
us to think that we can dispose of the time to come for our own salvation?
Christ has the Keys of life and death Reu. 1.
committed to him, to open, and shut at his pleasure; then how can we presume
he will open to us the gate of repentance at our pleasures? It is true that
God calls at all hours, yet we must not look he will call us when we list;
therefore let us learn the wisdom which God would have to us learn, that is, to
seek the Lord while he may Is. 55. 6, 7.
be found, and to call upon him while he is near; and to follow that good
counsel of the Wiseman, to make no tarrying to turn to Eccles. 5.
the Lord.

A Father has well observed; that if gold should be offered unto us, none
would be so foolish or negligent as to say, I will not accept of it till to
morrow, or I* will come to you next year for it; but they will take it
presently, and admit of no excuse. But the redemption Redemptio animae
pro^ittitur, nemo festinat. Amb.
of the soul is promised and proffered, and where is the man, or where is the
woman that accepts of it? How truly may that speech of the Father be
applied to our times? Men are greedy, and careful for earthly things, no man
will take time, but will take them when they are offered: but for spiritual
things me^ may think they have too much; or lest peradventure they fear they
may fall from young Saints to become old Ca^endi opportunitas non est omittenda.
devils; But suppose our life might be long, and that we shall have time to
repent in our old age, and make up our reconciliation with our God, which no
man can promise unto himself; what, will it be more easy to do it then,
than now, whilst we have our health, our limbs, our sight, and hearing? no,
no, brethren deceive not your selves, old age is no fit time to begin to repent
in, and to provide for our souls; for then we shall find that sin is
increased with the years of our age, which will make us more unfit to seek
for our souls good; old age is wilful and peevish, and will hardly be
reclamed; and the custom of sin will take away the sense of sin; and if
now it be a hard matter to conquer one or two sins, what will it be to fight
against a hundred? and if it be so hard a matter to break and subdue the
corruption of one or two years sins, how hard will it be to overcome the
sins of Childhood, youth, and middle age? and it is a hard thing to leave that
custom which a man has Cum magn^ dolor relinquitur, quod cum magno amore
possidetur. Bern. de coena Do^.
been inured unto all his days, he will be as loath to part with his sins, as
his sins are to part with him; who will then be persuaded to believe, unless
he be a madd man, that the offense increasing, the pardon may easily be
obtained? The Wiseman Eccles. 10.
tells us, that an old inueterate disease troubles the Physician, and shall
we think that old sins will not be troublesome to get pardoned in old age?
for then sins although they are great and horrible, when as they are come
into Peccata quamu^ magna and horrenda, cum in co^suetudinem tenerint, aut
parna, aut nulla, esse creduntur. Aug. E^ch. cap. 17.
a custom, are thought to be no sins, or at least very little ones: we see
that old men which have trifled away their days in the practice of sin, in
their old age begin to be wilful and perverse, and so hate to be reformed; and
experience shows how hard a thing it is to reclame an old Swearer, an old
Usurer, or an old Lecher: how hard a thing it is to reclame one that is dyed in
grain in his sins, and the lust of their vices are so rooted and fixed in
the bones and marrow Job 20.
of their souls, and so are ready to lie down with them in the grave.

But yet suppose for all this, thou may repent in old age, yet what a deal
of time have thou lost, while thou have lived in thy sins? what a deal of
comfort might thou have had if thou had spent thy time in the practice of
Piety? and what a pattern of virtue might thou have been to young men, and
to have caused them by thy example to fear the Lord in the days of their
youth?

Again, how unequal and indiscreet a thing is it to reserve old age for
repentance? were it not unfit, or very foolish, if a man had many great and
weighty burdens to be carried a long and tedious journey, and had many strong
and lusty Horses to carry them, yet should lay all the burdens upon one, and
the weakest, and poorest horse, which is scarce able to go, how foolish a
thing were this? such is their folly that do cast the burden of their
repentance upon their old age, sparing their youth and middle age, and letting
them go empty which were far more fit then old age, which is scarce able to
bear it self.

Again, how unjust a thing it is to serve the world, the flesh, and the devil
with our Summer and best days, and to offer our old, lame and decrepit age
unto God? The Lord charged his people that they Deuteronomy. 25.
should not have two manner of waights, a great and a small to measure by, and
how dare any man have two unequal measures in his live, one so great for the
Devil, the flesh, and the world, as if they were our friends, and the other so
short for God, as if he were our enemy? thus we see how unequal a thing it is,
and how hard a thing it is to defer the taking care for our souls until
sickness or old age, and how difficult then it is to seek the Lord, and to make
up our peace with him; Let us therefore remember the counsel of the Wiseman,
to remember our Creator in the days of our youth; and the rather,

1. Because our lives are uncertain, Motives to to induce us.
therefore they are compared to a Pilgrim, to a Weauers shuttle, to the flower
of the Grass, to smoke, to a Vapor, to a Bubble, to a dream that is ended
before it be well begun. All which show the shortness of our days; and what
need had we then to spend them in the service of God? yet for all this, many
(we see) are ready to go out of the world before they knew wherefore they came
into it. Therefore he that is well now may be sick and dead before he is
aware: Herod was well and in health when he began his flourishing Oration, but
Act. 21. 23.
before the end thereof, and his departure from the people, the Angel of the
Lord smote him, and he was eaten up of worms; by whose fearful example we
may learn, that if we defer our repentance but one day, yea but one hour,
death may prevent us, before we repent, for no man can tell what dangers a day
or an honre may bring forth.

2. Because as we have showed before, that the longer a man does defer his
repentance, the harder it will be for him to repent, to leave and forsake his
sin; the nail that is driven fast in with a hammer with many strokes is not
easily got out: So sin the longer we nourish it in our bosoms, the harder at
last it will be to master, and the weaker we shall be to overcome it.

If a man have received a deadly wound in his body, he will not defer the
cure of it to a year, or a quarter, or a month, nay a week, but will take
the opportunity of time. Are men so careful to preserve their bodily life?
but oh how careless are many for their souls, which will post off their
repentance to their sickness, or old age? But let no man so dangerously
adventure to tempt God as to put all to the success of the last battle, having
no better weapons then these wherewith so many have been foiled.

3. If we defer our repentance to the last, we may in the mean time be
deprived of the means by which God usually works faith and repentance; that
is, the preaching of the Word, which may be tanslated either nationally, or
parochially from us, and if we neglect the means it is presumption for us to
think that God will work faith and repentance without the means, which being
neglected, our comforts are abated, our faith weakened, and the Devil
aduantaged against us. If therefore we would be assured that our care is good,
and that we shall not be deprived of our hope, let us take the opportunity of
time while it is offered unto us, for if it be offered us now, who knows
whether it shall be offered us again or no? and the more pauses and delays
we make, the more unfit we are to lay hold upon the means hereafter: for when
Satan has so prevailed with men, that he can bring them into a custom of
sin by negligence, carelessness, or any thing else, what follows but
hardness of heart, and what follows hardness of heart but impenitency? and
so we treasure up Gods wrath against Romans 2. 4, 5
the day of wrath; this should carefully be laid to heart of all, but
especially of those which have so many lets and hindrances, that they can find
no time to take care for their souls. If old age make men unfit to attend a
King, as Barzillai tells David, saying, that ^ Sam. 19. 35.
he was unfit to do him service; how unfit are all those that defer the
serving of GOD to their old age, in which many have as little taste and relish
in godliness, as ever he had in his meat?

4. We are not sure we shall live till old age, how fearful a thing the^ is it
for us to defer our conversion? The Israelites perished Number. 11. 33.
while the meat was in their mouths; and Jobs Children Job 1. 18.
were slain while they were banqueting in their brothers house; and many we
see and hear of are taken away before they are aware: happy then are we, if
we can learn wisdom by other men's harms; if we could now descend into hell
to behold the damned in their torments, frying, and burning in fire and
brimstone; If we should ask them the cause of their misery, one would tell us
he made account to repent him of his sins, and make his peace with God when
he was fick: but alas, he dyed suddenly, and now must live miserably in
torments. Another, he meant to repent him when he was old, but he dyed while
he was young; All of them would tell us in effect, that if they were to live
again, they would prepare for their souls presently. Well, they are gone and
past recovery, let us now while we have time, and means, and opportunity,
repent, and turn unto the Lord that he may show mercy unto our souls.

5. Late repentance is not so acceptable to God, as the willing service of
youth. Late repentance is feldome true repentance. A good devout Father
disputing this point, says, He Ambr.
that repents, and reconcileth himself at the last cast, and passes hence,
I confess unto you, that we deny not unto him what he desires, Non dico
saluabitur, non dico damnabitur, tu ver^ age poenitentiam dum sanuses.
but I dare not say he went well hence, I do not presume, I do not promise,
I do not say, he shall be damned, neither do I say, he shall be saved; but if
thou will be assured and freed from doubt, repent while thou art in health; so
run that thou may obtain, and then thou shall be sure to be safe,
because thou repentedst at that time when thou might have sinned; but if thou will repent when thou can sin no longer, thy sins have dismissed thee,
and not thou them, Si aetate prohibitus a peccato desistis, debilitati gratias
agendum. Basil. Qui prius a peccatis relinquitur quam ipsa relinquat, ea non
libere. sed quasi ex necessitate condemnat. Aug. de vera and falsa poenitentia.
c^. 17.
and if a man leave sin when age and weakness hinder him from following it,
we must thank his weakness, and not him, and it is no thanks to mortify our
sins, when they are mortified by sickness.

True repentance must be voluntary, and performed willingly: therefore let no
man tarry so long in sin as he can; for God requires the liberty of the will,
and he that will not take the time that God gives, it is just with God that he
should seek for time, which shall be denied; Let us prevent it, lest we be
prevented by it, we know in Praef^at praeuenire. quam prae^eniri.
regard of our time, we have but a short time to live, and that short time
full of misery, many of us have spunne a long thread, and so have set our feet
within the gates of death, and many of us have trod in the path of old age, in
which the Almond flourishes, and many of our hairs are turned white to the
harvest of death. Old age is honorable if it be found in the ways of
righteousness; but if old men be found in the ways of sin, ignorance, and
profaneness, oh how dishonorable are those gray hayres! what, an old man a
swearer! an old man a Drunkard! an old man a Gamester! an old man a Liar! an
old man a Whoremaster! an old man an ignorant man! oh what a shame is this!

Brethren, the Israelites were commanded to gather twice so Ex. 16. 22.
much Manna the day before their Sabbath as they did any day in the week
before; and should not the gray hoare head that looks every day for his last
day of mortality, and his Sabbath of rest, should not he I say labor to get
twice so much knowledge, pray twice so much, read twice so much, and ponder in
his heart the works of the Lord, of mercy, and of Justice, and grow in the
graces of Gods Spirit, that they Tit. 2.. 7.
may show themselves patterns of all goodness for young men to imitate? the
days of man's life are threescore years and ten, says Moses the Man of Psalm.
19.
God; but oh the carelessness of many! which have passed this age, and though
death stand at the door, yet they will not believe it. It is said of Ephraim,
that gray hayres were upon him, yet he knew it not; he had Hos. 7. 9.
marks of death upon his face, and hair, yet would still be young; and what
was said of Ephraim may justly be said of many old men in our days, whose
windows grow dim, whose sight fail, and they bend downward to their long
home, and yet they consider not their latter end, therefore they fall Lam. 1. 9.
miserably, and many die fearfully. Oh consider this all ye that forget God!
oh how sour and stinking are the dregs of sin and profaneness of old men
in the sight of God! as old men are to repent betime, so are young men, they
are to remember their Creator in the days Eccles. 1. 2.
of their youth; for it is needful to begin betimes, because they have much
work to do, and they have no lease of their lives, time and tide stays not:
therefore all of us while it is called to day, hearke^ and obey, for between
old men, and young men there is little difference; old men go to death, and
death comes to young men; therefore as all men must die, all must labor to get
their souls saved.

For it is a just thing with Iustum est vt a Deo contemnatur moriens, qui Deum
omnipotentem contemp sit viuens.
God that he should contemn that man in his death, which contemned God
Almighty in his life; therefore let us not defer this needful work, but
presently set upon it while we have time, and while it is called to day, for
it may be to morrow may be too late; and Gods mercy being abused, he is a
consuming fire: and therefore it will be a most fearful thing to fall into his
hands.

Ob. Oh but God is a God of mercy, and he showed mercy unto the Thief at the
last hour, and therefore I doubt not but he will also show mercy unto me.

A. It is true indeed, God is a God of mercy, full of compassion, and his
tender mercies Ps. 145. 8, 9 Ephesians. 2. 4.
are over all his works, yea, he is rich in mercy, and therefore thou think
his mercy will be as great to thee, as it was to the Thief upon the Cross;
This was a rare example of Christ's mercy, and cannot be applied to any
particular man, because the promises of mercy do join the means and end
together. Therefore we cannot deny, but that as God is merciful, so also he is
just, and Justice and Mercy cannot dispense one with another. God deals with
man, as Physicians deal with their Patients; we see many learned Physicians
sometimes give over their Patients, not for that they want skill, but because
they see them incurable: so thou that posts off, and defers thy repentance, and
care for the salvation of thy soul till the last gasp, if thou be damned, it
is not because the Lord wants mercy, but because thou art dead in thy sins,
and past recovery, and so the mercy of the Lord can do thee no good: thou
remainest in thy impenitency, hardness of heart, and unbelief. The Apostle
tells the believing Romans that God is able to graft the Jews into the true
Olive plant again, if they do not continue in their unbelief; Intimating
unto us that God is not able to show mercy unto unbelieving and unrepentant
Romans 11. 23
wretches, so long as they continue in vnbelife. See therefore what thou art
like to gain by this rare example of the Lords mercy, showed unto the thief
upon the Cross. But because this is the strong hold wherein many desperate
wretches hide themselves, we will therefore by the light of Gods Word diue
into this example, and weigh every circumstance in it, and what we discover, we
will plainly set down, and show what rocks and shelues lie in this harbor,
and how dangerous it is to cast Anchor here* and having found out the danger,
we will hang out a bloody Flagge, which may threaten death and destruction to
all that seek to harbor upon this sandy foundation. Tell me not therefore of
the Thief upon the Cross, for of two thieves one was damned, though he saw
the repentance of his fellow, and heard Christ's gracious promise, yet for all
this he repented not; Why do we not bring him for a pattern, and apply it to
our selves, and say, Might not this be our case, which have put off our
repentence unto the last? Here is a Thief against a Thief, the one is saved
and the other damned: that this thief was saved was a miracle, and miracles
were no miracles if they were common; We have of this rare mercy of GOD one
example, that no man should despair; and but one example that no man should
presume.

1. This is a rare example without any promise of God, if that thou can show
a promise that thou shall repent at the last hour of thy life; but if thou
can not, then thou promisest that to thy self, which God never promised to
give thee.

2. Again, this was a work of wonder, and every way miraculous, for Christ
was hereby pleased to honor the ignominy of his Cross, and to manifest his
power in his greatest humiliation, his cruel enemies raged, and blasphemed;
his stripes and wounds showed him to be but a mortal and despised man, and his
Disciples despairing after so many miracles, whether he were the promised
Messiah or no; therefore our blessed Savior to manifest his power, and to show
that he was the Lord of life and death, was pleased to show mercy to this
poor wretch, that he might acknowledge that which his Disciples believed not,
or at leastwise doubted of: therefore this miracle is placed among the
wonderful works of God, raising the dead, and darkening the Sun.

3. This was but one particular instance, and therefore it is no sure arguing
from a particular example unto a general cause, and from an extraordinary
example to draw an ordinary; one Swallow we use to say, does not make Summer;
all the Scriptures do not afford such another example, and therefore to
presume upon this shadowy hope, is all one as if some madd man should hope that
his horse would speak English, because Balaams Ass once expostulated the case
with his Master; or because once the Israelites went through the Red Sea, and
were not drowned; Once Daniel was cast into the Lions Den, and was preserved;
And the three Children were cast into the fiery furnace, and were not hurt, but
we are so worldly wise as that we will not try conclusions herein; why then
should we rest on the other? for if once the Prince pardons a condemned
Malefactor, when the halter was about his neck, and he ready to be turned off;
is it safe then for every Malefactor to trust to that? Our Lord Jesus being now
to go into his Kingdom, pardoned a great offender, as Princes use to do at
their Coronation; were it safe, and a worldly wise part for a man to commit a
robbery, and to expect a Coronation between the fact and his execution.

4. This was a work of Christ's Divine power, which could command and work
grace, which none now can give.

5. The case of this thief and many desperate wretches now a days is not one
and the same; he had never grace offered him, nor never heard of Christ till
now, for if he had, he would not have been the last among the Apostles, which
is before them in heaven; but it is probable he was a Roman, and never had
any knowledge of Christ before, but thou have heard of Christ, and despised, and
rejected the means which he has appointed for thy salvation; then what hope
can thou have to be saved? or what comfort can thou take in this example?
Lay all these circumstances together, and see if he be a fit pattern for
thee to imitate, and if thou will needs make him a pattern, then when Christ
comes again to be crucified upon the Cross, and thou be a thief, and never
heard of Christ in thy life, then may thou expect in such a miraculous manner
to be saved. But if we will make a right use of the mercy of God, let us
rather be led by it to repentance, then any way to be Romans 2, 4. Quae mayor
iniquitas, quam vt inde a te Creator contemnatur, vnde plus amari merebatur.
Bern.
settled in security; for what greater iniquity can there be, then that thy
Creator should be contemned of thee, for which he deserved more to be loved.

But to conclude this point, it is a double shame and sin for old me^ to put
off their conversion, and to be of an unclean life, or ignorant in matters
concerning their salvation; for the nearer we draw to Canaan, the further we
should be from Egypt, otherwise it may come to pass in Gods just judgment,
that he shall swear we shall never enter into his rest. Oh how miserable will
it be for that man when he comes to the very point of time, when Gods
Children shall enter into the spiritual rest, then he to be cast down into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, for the
longer that God in mercy, expects thy a mendment, so much the more
grievously will he punish thee if thou neglect it? Oh consider this all ye
that forget GOD, Quanto diutius Deus expectat vt emendetis tanto crauius
iudicabit si neglexeritus Aug. de vanit. saec.
for by this deferring of our repentance, and putting off the time of our
salvation we sin three ways;

1. Against God. 2. Against the Saints. 3. Against our own souls.
We will endeavor to make all this good.

1. Hereby we sin against God, because we dally with him, and abuse his
patience, putting that day far off which may come in a moment, if the Lord do
but withdraw our breath from us.

2. By deferring of the care for the salvation of our souls we sin against
the Saints, because we deprive them of that company, comfort, and profit which
they might have of us, and we of them, for herein stands the Communion of
the Saints, in having a fellowfeeling of one another miseries, comforting them
in their griefs, strengthening them in their infirmities, helping them in their
wants, by endeavoring to bear one another burden, and by encouraging them in
the faith and power of grace which they have received.

3. And lastly we sin against our own souls in putting them upon such an
uncertain and doubtful adventure, in not providing mercy before they are
plunged into those desperate streights, and then it is just with God to let our
consciences fly in our faces as a just revenge for our former carelessness in
neglecting the means of our salvation.

Ob. Oh but may some say, that servant in the Gospel which was hired at the
eleventh Mat. 20.
hour received the same reward that those received which came in at the third,
sixth, and ninth hour?

Answ. Thou that think thou may repent at the last hour, how do thou
know that thou shall come to the eleventh hour? may thou not be cut off in
thy youth, and so perish before thou art aware? then why should thou lose thy
time, and what answer can thou make to GOD for the neglect thereof? It is
lamentable to consider, that though nothing be more precious Nihil praetiosius
tempore, sed he^ nihil body vilius astimatur. Transeu^t dies salutis, and nemo
recogitat, nemo sibi non reditura momenta perijsse causatur. Bern. decl.
then time, yet nothing is more basely accounted of? The days of salvation
pass away, and no man regards it; no man considers that his time which
will never return again does perish from him.

2. From parabolicall divinity we cannot ground sound arguments, because many
times we may miss of the sense and intent of them, and so cannot infer such
conclusions from them, as that we may build our faith upon them.

3. In Parables we must observe the scope and maine end wherefore they were
propounded, else we may draw much blood from them in stead of wholesome food.

The scope and maine end of this Parable is to show, that eternal life is the
free gift of Romans 6. 23
God without any merit or desert of man; and tha^ some men are called sooner,
some later, yet they that are called at the last hour may be saved as well as
those which are called at the first; for an old man which has wanted the
means all the days of his life, may when the means is offered him,
comfortably lay hold of everlasting salvation; else God would never have
enjoined Nunquam pecca^ti indicta esset pro peccatis deprecatio, si deprecanti,
non esset remissio concendenda. Aug. de fide.
man to crave the remission of his sins, if he had no purpose to grant it.

2. This Parable does fully answer this objection, in showing that those which
were hired at the eleventh hour, came as soon as they were called; if they
had been called at the third, sixth, or ninth hour, no doubt but they would
have come: therefore this example will not justify them that are called at all
hours, early and late, and yet will not come.

3. This Parable shows, that the householder went out early in the morning to
hire laborers, therefore God expects that we should come in at the first
hour, and begin our repentance betimes, and if we do not come when God calls,
it is questionable whether we shall receive repentance to come at last. And
though God have Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non promisit peccanti
poeni^entiam. Aug. de poenit.
promised pardon to him that repents: yet has he never promised repentance
to him that continues in his sins; neither is it in any man's power to repent
when he will.

Thus brethren by Gods mercy we have beaten the presumptuous sinners out of
their strong holds; what remains now, but that every one of us enter into
examination of his heart, and bewail the loss of his time misspent, and now
labor to make up his peace with God, that the Lord may have mercy upon his
soul; else what is a man profited if he gain the whole world and lose his
soul. Seeing the soul is so excellent; we must have principal care to avoid
those evils that may endanger it, and to use those means whereby it may be
saved.

The things then which are dangerous to the soul may be couched under these
two heads; as there are two ways of destroying the body, so are there likewise
two ways of destroying the soul:

The first is positive, by offering violence to it.

The second privative, by withholding the means of preservation of it.

Sin is that which offers violence to the soul; sin is like leaven that will
leaven the whole lump; and like poiso^ that will corrupt the whole body, by
obscuring the Will, and Understanding, and by disturbing the faculties of the
soul, and body. The devil as a strong armed man, keeps rule in that soul
which is held under the slavery of sin. Sin though it be delightsome in the
committing, yet it breeds a worm in the conscience, which perpetually vexes
it with endless Voluptas transijt, peccatum remansit. Bern. Cito praeterit
quod delectat, permanet sine fine quod cruciat. Aug. Omne peccatum est mors
animae
woe, and remains when the pleasure is gone. All the itching delight of sin
is soon at an end; but it leaves bitter footsteps in the soul; every sin
does wound and kill the soul. We use to say, we will not buy gold too dear;
why then are we so foolish as to buy the pleasures of sin at so high a rate,
as the loss of our soul? When the Fish has swallowed the Hook, had she not
been better without the bait? so when our souls are lost, how much better had
it been for us never to have tasted of the pleasures of sin? If then we
would have our souls saved, we must be careful to expel and cast out sin
by unfeigned repentance. We see men will subdue their appetites, and defraud
themselves of many things nature desires for bodily health; and shall we do
nothing for the salvation of our souls?

Now then seeing we have found a way to remove our sin, and to obtain of
our Physician a purgation to cure Cur cessas aggredi, quod scias mederi tibi?
Tertul. de poenit.
our soars, which is repentance, then why do we delay to get that which will
be our cure, and why do not we seek the Lord while he may be found? for else
it may happen, That he Qui tempus senectutis expectat ad poenitendum speret
misericordiam, mu^niet iudicium. Greg. Seminemus dum tempus est, vt met^mus,
nauige^us dum mare nauigari potest, antiquam sit ^iems, quando magnus ille, and
tremen. dus dies aduenerit non licebit nauigare. Chrysostom.
which puts off his repentance until the time of age, or day of death, in
stead of mercy may find judgment. Therefore let us sow our seed while it is
seed time, and set forward to sail while the Sea will serve; for it may be it
will be too late to begin our journey when the Sun sets, and to hoise up our
sail when the tempest arises; to sow our seed when we should reap our corn;
and to repent when we lie a dying, and to do good when we are dead.

One thing I lament says a holy Father, and I fear another; the first is my
sins, the second is Gods judgments seat, bewail therefore thy sins, and
lament thy iniquity, so shall thou shun those tormenting Vbi nec tortores
deficiunt, nec torti misere morientur. Aug.
torments, where the tormentors are never weary, nor the tormented shall ever
dye; Therefore while it is called to day harden not thy heart, but break off
thy sin by true repentance. Have thou therefore bin a drunkard? now learn
sobriety: Have thou been intemperate? now embrace chastity: Have thou been
malicious? now show charity: Have thou been proud? now be humble; labor now
to get the life of grace into thy soul; which must be done by the amendment of
thy life, and by forsaking of thy sins; for regeneration begins at
repentance, and repentance at the leaving and forsaking of sin. Try and
examine thy self then whether thou have forsaken sin or no; if thou have not
bridled thy tongue from bitter, and blasphemous speeches; if thou have not
taught thy hands to work without deceit, and brought thy heart to pray without
hypocrisy, and do to thy neighbor as thou would have thy neighbor do to
thee; thou have not yet forsaken thy sin, but remainest still in the gall of
bitterness, and so have neglected thy souls health.

2. The second way of losing the soul is by withholding from it the means of
preservation. Thus those hazard their salvation that despise, and contemn the
powerful preaching of the Word of God, and so by putting from them the Word of
GOD, they judge themselves unworthy of eternal Act. 13. 46.
life. Thus also many hazard their salvation by neglecting of prayer, and are
careless in the duties of mortification.

Seeing then the soul is so excellent, and may be lost, then let it be every
ones care to get it saved in the day of the Lord. To this end labor to keep
faith and a good Conscience in Romans 13. 14.
all thy ways, for faith does apply, and put on Christ; now if Christ be put
on by faith, then he is a most glorious garment to cover all our filthy
nakedness out of Gods sight, and an armor of proof to defend, and protect us
from all dangers of our souls, and of our bodies.

A good Conscience is a sweet comfort in all troubles; If then we can rejoice in
the testimony of a good Conscience, we are in a happy condition. Be conversant
in the Scriptures, let the Word of GOD dwell plentiously in thee; this will be
as great a comfort unto thee in all thy afflictions, as ever it was unto David
in his troubles.

Be fervent in prayer; begin the day with calling upon Gods name, and praising
him for all the mercies thou have received; and at night let prayer be a Key
to lock thee up under the protection of the Almighty.

Join thy self in society with those that fear God; they can teach thee by
their experience, and direct thee in the ways of Godliness; and labor to
exhort one another to continue constantly in the fear of the Lord. Thus if we
do, we shall redeem the time for our souls health. But alas, how many times
have we come together, and yet have had no care nor thought to do one another
good, for our souls health; but have spent our time in profane and Idle
talk; letting our tongues loose to discourse of all manner of vanity?

But oh the miseries of our times, in which there are many which are so far
from helping their brethren in their salvation, as that they hinder them, and
by their lewd examples turn them from the way of godliness! Our time is
short, as we have heard; and as we behave our selves here upon earth, either
in walking in the ways of godliness, or spending the time in serving our own
turns; so shall we fare everlastingly in the world to come.

Therefore seeing life or death is gained in this world, let us give all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. And seeing our time is but
short, let us learn a point of policy of the Devil, he knows his time is but
short, therefore he does all the mischief he can: so let us on the contrary,
knowing our time is short, labor to do all the good we can for our souls.
But if we will still turn the grace of God into wantonness by despising the
riches of his mercy, in waiting for our repentance and humiliation, we shall
at length be turned out of these houses of clay, (wherein we have lived in much
peace) as the most unworthiest wretches that ever lived, and shall give a
strict account unto God for all the time and means that he has vouchsafed us
for our souls good; and if we have spent our days well, then we shall
receive the reward of the Just; but if ill, then woe unto our souls that we
have sinned; for, What is a man profited ^f he gain the whole world and lose
his soul?

And thus having finished this small Treatise, I beseech you in the bowels of
our Lord Jesus to suffer the words of exhortation, and the Lord from heaven
give us all grace to make use of it for the salvation of our souls. But I
fear I have wearied your patience with this Non minor virtus scire desinere,
quam scire dicere.
my tedious discourse, and therefore because it is not less commendable for an
Orator to end his speech in good time, then to begin with good liking, I will
therefore at this time imitate the Roman Orator; Non omnia effundam, Cicero
Philip. Orat. 2.
vt si saepius dicendum vt erit, semper nouus veniam. I will be loath to spend
all my store at this once, but I will keep somewhat fresh, if I shall have any
occasion to come again. In the mean time for our farewell, let us commend
each other to the protection of Almighty GOD, and to the Word of his grace,
which is able to build us up in godliness, and give us an inheritance among
them that be sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom with the
Father, and the Holy Spirit be ascribed, as is due, all honor and glory from
this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table expressing the chief matter contained in this Book.
A
Apostacy, the danger thereof, 6 Apparel, vain and immodest, 196 Makes men
proud, 190 How to be esteemed, 191 Men exceed their degrees, 195 Every one will
be in the fashion, 195 Men of place may wear costly Apparel, 192 When it must
be laid aside, 193
Age, the dignity and duty, 340, 341 Old age unfit to begin to repent, 326,
336 A shame to defer repentance, 353 Reasons why, 327, 328, 336 It is very
unequal, 329 Unjust, 330
Adultery defined, 137 The filthiness of the sin, ibid. Danger of it, 138,
143, 144 Condemned by the Law of God, 139 Of Nations, ibid. God takes notice of
it, 143 Preservatives against it, 140, 141, 142

Vide Fornication. B
Busybodies, 249 What they should do, 247
Beauty defined, 217 Good in its nature, 217, 218 Granted to the wicked why,
218, 219 To the Peacock, Swan, Lillies, 219 If not sanctified vain and
deceitful 219 A snare to entangle, 222 Bane of the Soul, 220 Has made many
adulterers, 222 Never any chaste, ibid. Full of evil effects, 223

C
Charity, the Devil showed more charity then many of our proud Dames will
show, 256 Christ's Kingdom not earthly, 1, 2 Necessity of his death, 4 His
great love to us in helping when riches could not, 8
Peter's Counsel carnal, 2, 3 Covetousness, makes the godly slaves to the
world, 93, 94 To question Gods Providence, 93 They desire riches to their
destruction, 94
Care, true Christians care, 322 Cross, the godlies portion, 6, 7 Yet they
must endure it patiently, 7 Though they have many pullers back, 6
Contentation, a duty, 90, 91 How obtained, 26, 27 1. By learning the truth of
Gods providence, 100 2. Because nature is content with a little, 96 3. Because
it must leave all at death, 97
God will supply earths wants with heavens joys, 9 All men full of discontents,
26, 27 Heathens teach Contentation by natures light, 99 They shame Christians,
101
Cock fighting, unlawful, 175, 176
D
Drunkenness, what it is, 153 Satan turns him about like a fool, 153
Condemned by God, 154 By Fathers, 155 By wise heathen, 156, 165 A Drunkard
unfit for any employment, 157, 159 He is a thief abroad, 160 A Tyrant and a
beast at home, 161 The effects it produces, 163 What will make him speak
sense, 158 Antido^es to prevent it, 166, 167
Damned, their intolerable pains, 289, 291 Ever dying, 292, 300 Their
fearful sins, 292 What they would tell us, 337 Difficult to weane the heart
from the world, 9 More to save the soul, 324
If we neglect our duty, and fail of our hopes we must not murmr, 96 Day of
sickness and death no fit time to repent in, with reasons wherefore, 311, 345
Very dangerous to hazard our salvation upon uncertainties, 320, 221, 322
Dancing, wanton dancing a gate leading to whoredom, 172 A provocation to
uncleanness, ibid. Feet not given to trip like Rams, skip like Goats, and leap
like madd men, 173 Dancing, how lawful, 175

E
Enemies, men are great enemies to their own salvation, 268, 276, 285, 305
Separatists enemies to the peaceable government of the Church 243, 244
Example, a lamentable example, 134
F
Men are fearful of wants, but few of the loss of their souls, 305, 281, 303
Fornication, a great sin, 130 The cause of great judgments, 130 God will not
let it go unpunished, ibid. A Fornicator branded with the sign of Gods
hatred, 13^ An enemy to salvation, 133 To be abhorred, 131 The cause of many
sins, 133

Vide Adultery. G
Gluttony, what it is, 145 Whence it came, 145 A dangerous sin, 148 Sin of
Sodom, 151 Gluttons monsters in nature, 146 They make a god of their belly, 147
Effects it produces, 149 Benefit of moderation, 151 Motives to induce to the
practice thereof, ibid.
Garment, he wedding garment, 213
H
Hell, a place of t^^ment, 291 A great deep, 296 O^t of it no redemption, 301,
298 The Deu^ll is the Jailer, ibid. He delights to torment, 292 He will spare
none, ibid. Torments are lamentable, 291 Always dying, ibid. Nature preserved to
endure torments, ibid. They shall last eternally, 298
Humility, Christ a pattern of humility, 215 It is a medicine against pride,
ibid. Benefit of i^, 214
Hearers, fantastical, hard to please, 229 What they delight to hear, 230
Such are very ignorant, 231 What they must hea^e, 235

I
Idle persons neglect their salvation, 273, 284 Inkhorne terms, 236
K
Knowledge, without practice vain, 232, 233 Excellency of heavenly knowledge,
235 Where it grows, 238

L
Loss of the soul the greatest loss, 265 How lost, 273, 277 Nothing able to
recompense the loss, 265 It is unrecoverable, 259
Landlords cruel, 202, 203 Learning a great blessing, 225 To be honored, 237
Pray for Wisdom to use it well, 228, 238 No profit in it without grace, 233,
234 Else dangerous, 228, 232 How abused, 226, 235
Life very short and uncertain, 331
M
Man made of earth, 215 His nature weak and feeble, ibid. His life vain and
miserable, 215 Therefore he must not be proud, ibid.
Mammon the worldlings Idol, 76 Means being neglected fearful, 334 Ministers
dignity, 240 How they should be qualified, ib. Their duty, ibid.

N
Natural men their fearful estate, 275 Their bondage worfer then the Turks,
275 Wherein, 275 Men are unwilling to be freed, 276

O
Ornament, modesty joined with piety the best ornament, 204 Obedience,
Separatists cannot learn it in all the books of the world, Objections for the
neglect of salvation answered, 307 For the clearing of the severity of Gods
Justice, 290, 298, 300
Oportunities to be embraced, 335, 343 Their profit, 359 Men will watch
opportunities to enrich their estates, but are careless of their souls, 320,
321, 324, 325, 333

P
Pleasures are of diverse sorts, 123 Blessings of God, 125 Lawful, 123, 124
Sinful, 128 Pleasures dangerous, 125, 182, 183 Cause of ruin, 130 They draw
away the heart from goodness, 131, 179, 184 Satan's baits, 180 Opposite to
grace, 181 Full of uncertainty, 188 How to be used, 178, 179, 187 Lovers of
pleasures, 185 More then godliness, 185, 186 Constant pleasures, 188, 189 How
to get them, 179
Pride the forerunner of destruction, 201 A woe denounced against it, ibid.
Causes Gods judgments, 211, 212 Pride turns charity out of doors, 198 Their
wanton apparel disgraces them, 205 Becomes none but harlots, 206 Pride makes
way for lust, 205 Heathen condemn Christians, 210 How pride may be prevented,
213, 215
Plays, Stageplayes unlawful, 170, 171 Dishonor God, and nourish vice, 169
Mispend time, ibid. By whom invented, 170 What they teach, 169, 170
Parables, no sound conclusions can be drawn from them, 357 Their scope and
end, 358

R
Riches, Salomons riches and prosperity, his verdict on them, 14 They are in
their own nature good, 64, 71 May be desired, 65 Yet not to be ouervalued, 71
They are a blessing which the wicked enjoy, 72 How they are a burden, 76, ^9
They fill the head with care, 32 Heart wi^h distrust, 77 They are deceitful,
28, 29, 52. 258 Dangerous to trust in them, 20 They are unable to preserve from
judgments, 17, 20 Sickness 17 Satan's m^lice, 35 Mittigate pains, 40 Give
content, 22, 23 Purchase faith, repentance, etc. 36, 37 They make men forget
God, 49 Question his Providence, 76
Steal away faith and humility, 52, 53 How to be esteemed, 58 Durable riches,
85, 89
Repentance not to be neglected, 335, 336 It must be voluntary, 338 Late
repentance seldom true, 338 Very dangerous, 365 Trial whether sound, 365, 366

S
Soul, how excel^ent, 280 How admirable, 285 How serviceable, 378 How cruel
we are to them, 279 And careless of them, 268, 270, 273, 279 Live as if they
had no souls, 284 Men will labor for any thing but their soul, 305 Loss of
the Soul the greatest loss, 288 What destroys it, 361, 366 It is immortal,
and therefore will rue it, 288 A lamentation for the neglect of the soul, 268,
284, 302, 303, 366 How it may be saved, 367, 368
Scriptures purity, 239 Contains a salve for every sore, 238
Sin a bone to the soul, 362 Delight soon at an end, 362
Sabbaths how profaned, 280 Men so live as if they had no part in the work of
Creation nor Redemption, 280 If God should look down from heaven, how many
he should find prosaning it, 281 How few praying and reading, ibid. Sinner
and his Saviors Dialogue, 294, 295
Sobriety hard to be found in this proud age, 199 Therefore be content to be
told of your faults, 208
Sickness, a time to live by faith, 313 Unfit to begin to repent in, 315
Strangers, the godly are strangers, 250 The wicked are straglers, ibid.
Separatists, they labor to displant good order, 241 They amaze weak
Christians, ib. They are further wrapped in zeal then they can pass through
with discretion ibid.

T
The repentant Thief a Patron for all sinners, 346 A rare example, and work
of wonder, 348 Of Christ's Divine power, 351 No fit pa^^erne, 352
Temptation, to hazard salvation upon the last hour, 334 Time abused and
neglected, 357 Must be redeemed for our souls good, 226 Time ^^ repentance
when, 323, 324 It is in Gods hand, 324 Very shameful to defer it til old
age, 353, 354

V
Vain glories original, 224 Sets men's wits a working, 234 Lays open men's
ignorance, 235 How worthless, 225

VV
World, what it is, 249, 255 Momentany and mutable, 248 An unfit place to set
up rest, 248, 250, 251, 255 It must pass away, 55 Worlds glory cannot be
reduced to any of the Beatitudes, 88 Upon whom the world must leauie her bond
service, 95 Worldlings happy man, 16, 75 He is a miserable man, 39 His triumph
vain, 87 What he would give for a good Conscience, and to have his peace made
up with God, 40 Worldly men vain in their judgments, 78, 79
Wicked, how God esteems them, 78, 119
Y
Youth, sins to be repented, 268
Z
Zeal, Separatists zeal furious, 241
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 20. for Exodus 14. read 8. p. 107. for mice r. mire. p. 117. for Ethicall
r. Ethnicall. p. 121 for deal r. doat. p. 131. l. vl^. dele. end. p. 167. for
the r. to. p. 286. ^. senseless stone. Other faults less material are
omitted*


