A TRVE RELATION OF THE LAST SICKNESS AND DEATH OF CARDINAL BELLARMINE. Who
dyed in Rome the seventeenth day of September 1621. And of such things as have
happened in, or since his Burial. By C. E. of the Society of Jesus.

printer's device of the English College at Saint-Omer, featuring the seal of
the Jesuits or Society of Jesus, a sunburst containing a cross over the
letters IHS over three nails

Dilectus Deo and hominibus Moses [ Bellarminus,] cuius memoria in
benedictione est: similem illum fecit in gloria Sanctorum.

Ecclesiast. 45. Moses ( Bellarmine) was beloved of God and men, whose
remembrance is blessed: God made him in glory like unto the Saints.

Permissu Superiorum,



M. DC. XXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE L. M. M.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
To dye is the course of Nature, to dye well, of Christian Art: that is common
to men with beasts; this proper unto Gods servants alone: Omnes 2. Reg. 14.
morimur (said the woman of Thecua unto David) and quasi aqua in terram
dilabimur: we all do dye, and like water fall upon the earth: few dye well, and
therefore make a further fall. The Philosopher will have Science to stand in
speculation, Art in work; the one in knowledge, the other in practice: and the
more exquisite the Art is, and has the more noble object, by so much the
greater labor and industry is required: the Art we speak of has a most
eminent end, and of such difficulty, as it requires for labor, our uttermost
endeavor, for time our whole life. Art either Arist. ^. Physi. tex. 79.
perfits nature, or does imitate it. This for imitation has nothing, because
death is nothing but the corruption of Nature, the defect and privation of
life, the divorce and dissolution of our essential parts; and the death of the
wicked is termed by S. Bern. sermon. 26. in Cantica.
Bernard, the mother of sorrow, the enemy of glory, the gate of hell, the
entrance to perdition: none will imitate, which most abhor. Art therefore must
perfect this deformity more truly in the mask wherewith it comes covered the^
in the thing it self which is without horror, unless it be of such as our
selves cast upon it. This art of perfiting nature all should learn, but most
neglect; many precepts are delivered, but all included in one, to wit, a
constant good life, which makes this rough passadge plain, this dissolution
easy, this deformity amiable, this divorce most delightful: non habemus (says
Saint Ambrose) quod in Ambros. de bono mortis cap. 8.
morte metuamus, si nihil quod timendum ^it vita commisit; there is nothing
that we need fear in death, if our life have committed nothing that is to be
feared.

Of this argument all spituall books do treat, and in particular that which
purposely was written of this art by Cardinal Bellarmyne, and was the last
that ever he vvrote: but for that words where works are wanting do blush, as
Tertullian says, and Tertul. lib. de Patient. Leo sermon. 1. de San. Laurent.
Saint Leo validiora sunt exempla quaam verba, and before est opere docere,
quam voce: Examples are of more force to move then words, and more effectual
it is to teach with real actions then verbal discourse; therefore unto the
doctrine of the Cardinal in this behalf I will adioine his Example, that the
one may confirm the other. And although, omitting his life, (which others are
now in hand to write) I relate only his last sickness and death; yet from the
one we may conclude of the other, because as S. Ambrose testifyeth, Mors
Ambros. ibidem.
vitae est testimonium, death is the testimony of our life: and selcome we see
a saintlike death to follow after a sinful life; the privilege is rare, the
examples few; the common style as Saint Augustine notes is otherwise, to wit,
that Mors Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 13. cap: 2. in fine.
bonis bona, malis mala; a good death befalls to the good, and an ill to the
wicked: wherefore the death of this Cardinal being so notable as it was, will
not only confirm what he vvrote in his book of this art, but also testify for
his former life, and show that what he there said, came not so much out of his
great learning and reading, wherein he was singular, as it did ex abundantia
Matthew. 12. Luc. 6.
cordis, out of the inward habitual virtue wherewith he was endewed.

And for that his doctrine and example do show and confirm one and the self
same thing, I mean the great sanctity of the man, they shall not be separated
in the dedication that in the argument do agree. Whereas therefore his Doctrine
in our tongue came forth in your Name, his Example may not pass in any other;
in which alone you may as in a glass behold how lively the Child represents
the Father, the work the workman; so far truly, as the Art he wrote may seem
to have been nothing else, but an artificial description of his own death
that was to ensue. Some will take upon them to teach others to dye, who when
they come to it themselves are to seek a master; and such a one may truly
say, that which Saint Gregory, Greg. in Pastor. ca. vltimo.
out of mere humility, said of himself, when he had in his book called
Pastorale, described an excellent Pastor: Pulchrum depinxi Pastorem Pictor
foedus: I have painted a fair Pastor, being my self a foul Painter: I have
taken upon me to teach that which I never learned to do, and therefore all his
teaching as Saint Chrysostom well notes, Chrysostom. hom. 16. in Matthew.
serves to no other end then to condemn the teacher: but contrariwise unto
the renowned Cardinal we may very fitly apply the words of our Matthew. 5.
Savior; Qui fecerit and docuerit, hic magnus vocabitur in Regno caelorum; He
that shall do and teach, shall be called great in the Kingdom of heaven: his
doctrine you have already seen in his book; the ensuing narratio^ which I now
present you will particulerly declare how in his last sickness and death he did
correspond threunto: to which further I add his funerals, burial, and some
other remarkable events, few in number out of many, but so warra^ted for
truth, as greater, in things of this nature, cannot be required.

And here I do sincerely affirm, that in this Relation I follow no
uncertain rumors, no doubtful assertions, no flying reports without ground
or subsistence of truth; much less am I moved by any partial affection to
exaggerate or extenuate any thing: but faithfully put down what I saw my
self, or what other eye-vvittnesses have seen, what upon their own
knowledge and conscience they have affirmed; many, yea most things I have taken
from an Italian letter of this subject written by Father James Minutoli, a
grave, learned, and virtuous man, to Cardinal Farnesius; and I use the more
willingly his testimony, both for that I know his integrity, and for that by
the appointment of the General he continually remained with Bellarmyne, from
the beginning of his sickness till the last gasp, and set down no more then what
he saw in any particular: others somtymes I allege, but of such singular
credit as they are beyond exception, or else I would not have so much relied on
their words. Who they are, for the most part I name, when I set down any
thing of moment upon their attestation. But least this Epistle seem to long
for so short a Relation, I will here conclude it with my prayer, that the
death of this famous man may serve to put you in mind, with the beginning of
the new year, not to forget the end of your own life. This last of December
1621.

Your dutiful poor servant C. E.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE DEATH OF Cardinal Bellarmine, of the Society of JESUS.
ALTHOUGH this renowned Cardinal neither vvhiles he lived in Capua, of which
he was Archbishop, nor yet in the Court of Rome to which he was after called,
ever pretermitted his ordinary devotion, every day making an hour of
meditation, saying his Mass, the offices of the Breuiary and our B. Lady, the
Letanyes to his family and other prayers: yet had he obtained of the late Pope
Paulus V. some years before his death, to retire himself for a whole month
together, every year in the Nouitiate of the Society of Jesus in Romans And
this he did always in September, in which month only, the high Priest of the
old law did enter into Sancta Sanctorum; His preparation for death long before
it happened.
and this high Priest prepared his entrance into that Holy of Holies (whereof
the other was a figure) and not prepared himself only, but entered also in this
month as we may well think into the same. In this time secluding all other
affairs, he made the spiritual Exercises, bestowing four hours daily in
meditation; and in the time between, of which his Mass, mattins, beads, and
other prayers did take up no small part, he wrote the golden books that after
he set forth of spiritual matters, printing every year one, of all which the
last (as if he had presaged what was next to follow) was the Art of dying well,
whereof in his best health he was never unmindful. And this last year of
1621. as if he had received responsum mortis, a month sooner then ordinary, to
wit, in the beginning of August, he began to think, not of a retireme^t only
for one month, but of a perpetual sequestration from al ordinary employments,
to attend to that one thing which the Psalmist no less thirsted after the^ the
Heart the water, saying, Psalm. 26.
Vnampetij a Domino, hanc requiram, vt inhabitem in domo Domini omnibus diebus
vitae meae: One thing have I desired of our Lord, that will I seek for, that I
may dwell in the house of our Lord all the days of my life.

And to compass the better this his desire, he made great suit unto this
present Pope Gregory the fifteenth, to be delivered from the Court, from al
Consistoryes, He retyreth from the Court.
and Congregations, and what other Office soever, that he might bestow the
small residue of his life on God alone, alleging many reasons for this his
resolution, to wit, his great Age, and that which follows thereof, his weakness
of body, decay of sight, hearing, and memory; his auersion from these toils to
heavy for so weak shoulders; and finally his fervent desire of returning again
to the quiet haven of Religion, out of which he was taken and advanced to be
Cardinal, and in which before his advancement as the mirror, and sple^dour of
that Order he had lived 38. years together, in the continual practice of
Religious discipline, and all Christian perfection. Wherefore having been more
tossed in the waves of worldly affairs by reason of his dignity, then he
would, he now desired to strike sail and in that place to yield his own
spirit to God, where first God had so bountifully imparted his holy spirit unto
him: there he began his religious life, there he would end it.

Pope Gregory albeit he were loath to loose the comfort and counsel of so
worthy a man, whom the better to enjoy he had before called to dwell with him
in his palace; yet seeing him so earnest in his demand, and the demand in it
self so reasonable, at length yielded thereunto; and forthwith the Cardinal
left the Court, returned to the Nouitiate of the Society, and dismissed the
greatest part of his family, but yet so as they might remain still in the
palace and in the same state they were before under him, and at his charge,
until they could place themselves in some other service. Which tidings
although it grieved them all, both for that they saw the loss they were like
to find in the exchange, and for the great love and most dear respect which
they bare unto his person, from whom nothing but his command, or their own
death could have drawn the^: yet seeing the constant and resolute mind of their
Lord, every one bare the Cross as he could, more applauding his virtue then
their own fortune in this divorce; which the more grieved them in that they
judged him to have less need of any other preparation to dye well, who even
from his infancy had still exercised himself in that Art, which by practice he
had observed more then threescore years, before ever he left any thing written
of that subject in his printed book.

Being now arrived at the harbor of his so long, and much desired repose on
the 25. of August last, when the feast of S. Bartholomew is kept in Rome, one
He falls sick.
business of moment yet remained in the Congregation of the Indice, which much
required his prefence for dispatch, and the Cardinals being now assembled on
the 28. day, thither also he repaired, and after that it was ended, he took his
leave and farefull of them all. All seemed to be sorry thereat: some would have
persuaded him to continue, but as the Evangelist says of our Savior, Ipse
faciem suam firmauit, vt iret in Jerusalem, he steadfastly Luc. 9.
bent his face to go to Jerusalem, his mind was on heaven, he would not look
back or be withdrawn from his journey, which indeed was shorter then any one
(or perhaps himself) did imagine: for that very night being the feast of S.
Augustine (to which holy Doctor he was very specially devoted, as all his
works do testify) he fell sick and was taken with a very sharp and violent
fever, that bereaved him of his senses for the time. Which rough entrance of
the disease in one of his years made all afraid, and most of all his
Physicians (for there came four every day unto him) who apprehended evident
danger, and much grieved at this mischa^ce; but their grief was not greater
then his joy, who desired nothing more then to leave the world, as presently
after appeared.

For when this fit was past, with great alacrity of mind he began to discourse
of the great gladness and comfort he had, for that he was so near his home, or
as he did always in this sickness call it, a Heaven Bellarmines house.
Casa mia, to my house: and worthily did he call it his house, for as S.
Augustine says of the militant Church on earth: non magis est domus tua, quam
domus vhi habes Aug. tract. 10. in Ioannem.
salutem aeternam: There is no house more thine, then that house where thou
have everlasting salvation: so might he no less fittly say of the triumphant
house, Kingdom, and inheritance of all Gods servants on earrh, which he with
so long and infatigable labor had purchased, that it was his house, for there
had he fixed his hopes, there had he heaped up al his wealth, there was his
heart, his treasure, all his desired good: to this world he was not so much a
stranger as an enemy. And although that even here Honor did follow his noble
labors as the shadow the body; yet did none more fly from it, none more
contemn and condemn it, then he. The Cardinal proceeding in his discourse
said and often repeated these words: satis di^ vixi, I have lived long enough,
it is time to depart hence and rest with God in everlasting peace. What I have
to do more in this world? I am now feeble and fit for nothing; I am only a
mere burden and trouble to my self and others. And then further declared,
how he did loath and abhor, and had still loathed and abhorred the course of
this world, that men were so deeply plunged in the desire of temporal and
transitory things; grieuing at their preposterous proceedings, that their
endeauours were not directed to their right end, and that God was not sought
for, known, nor glorified as he ought to be: and this point piercing indeed
his heart, he concluded with saying, that God had showed him now a spiritual
savor to call him away, because it was bitter and distasteful unto him to
stay any longer here etc. Thus with more to this effect did he then speak,
and of these things only was his continual speech.

The Physicians expecting the issue of the disease, and nature thereof, found
it to be a continual fever per subintrantiam, with proportion of a double
Tertian, the one more excessive then the other: the former bereaved him of his
senses, the other was much more moderate. And truly it seems this bereauement
to have been sent him for the greater manifestation of his virtue, for therein
he no less edifyed others that savv His extremity of sickness, and singular
patience.
him, then he did in the other, but rather much more; for according to the rule
of the Philosopher In repentinis cognoscitur habitus, our disposition is best
known by sudden events: so the violent and sudden pulls did show the
habits of his Saint-like mind, having no other effect therein then to make him
recurre to his prayers, which he did as soon as they began, and say them as
far as he was able. When this vehemence was a little relented he would make
the sign of the Cross, and begin another prayer; never so much as once in all
these extreme fits speaking any idle word, or showing the least sign of any
impatience. In so much as my self in company of others often visiting him, and
that at such times as he was in this fever, I do sincerely protest, that I
never saw man in his best health, repose more quietly, or make less show of
feeling the force of any disease, then always I saw him in this. For the most
part his arms were decently laid a Cross on his breast, he never moving
(unless he were willed) any part of his body, never sighing, never complaining,
no though his tongue were scorched with the raging heat of the ague, did he
ever so much as call for drink, or once offered to refresh his mouth; so as
the beholders could make no other judgment of him, but that which the
disciples made of Lazarus: si dormit saluus erit, if he sleep he will recover;
Joan. 11.
for his magnanimity was such he rather seemed to sleep then to be sick and
thereby gave greater signs of life then death.

But notwithstanding this his great courage and patience, the disease still
increased, and the increase caused the Phisitia^s according to their wont to
warn His will and testament.
him to make his last will and testament, to the end he might be the more free
in thinking on the life to come, toward which he did now draw on apace. To
this suggestion he made no other answer, but that all was dispatched, his
testament was made, his goods disposed, every thing determined many years ago;
adding withal that he had given to every one of his servants somewhat according
to their degree and place which they had in his service, and according to that
small ability he had to gratify them withal. For other things, although he
once intended to make no will, as mindful of that poverty which he had vowed in
Religion; yet afterward least such small things as he left, should come unto
other hands then of poor men, he made a short Will agreeable to his little
wealth, which I shall after set down, leaving his Order (the Society of Jesus I
mean) heir not to his wealth which was none at al, but as he said unto the^
in his sickness, propensae voluntatis ac paupertatis meae, of my affection and
poverty: and he might well say of his poverty, for besides that which he had
left for his own diet (which was always very mean) and the wages of his
servants, he had already bestowed the rest on the poor, in so much as he had
not enough left him for his burial and exequies, in case the Pope had not
favored him, as after shall be showed: and the Will it self was such as might
beseem Bellarmine, but to others will seem perhaps as strange as any that
has been made for many years by a Cardinal.

Now though this mention of making his last Will gave him to understand the
danger of his disease, yet he much desired to be more particulerly informed
thereof, and to that end requested all the Physicians to tell him plainly in
what state he was, assuring them all that he feared not death but desired it:
and so far (quoth he) I am from all fear as that I find a special comfort to
think thereon; yea life it self would be more grievous unto me then death.
Wherefore I pray you advertise me betymes, that I may receive the holy
Sacraments ere I depart. Upon these words the fourth day of his sickness it was
consulted amongst the Doctors whether it were not expedient that he should
receive the B. Sacrament of the Altar per modum viatici; and they judged it not
expedient to give it him in that manner, but only by way of ordinary
communicating, and their reason was because he might yet continue for many
days, and in case some sodden accident should befall him, this receiving might
suffice for the other.

Upon this warning given, he prepared himself to Confession, and in such He
devoutly receaueth the B. Sacrament.
manner as if that Confession were to be the last that ever he should make in
this life; and such was the innocence of the man, that albeit he were in his
perfect sense, yet could he hardly find what to confess; in so much as his
Ghostly Father was in some perplexity as wanting matter of Absolution, till by
recourse to his life past he found some small defects of which he absolved him:
and when the B. Sacrament was brought he would needs rise to receive it, as he
did, and prostrated himself on the ground with singular devotion and humility,
to the great edification and amazement of all the beholders. And this his piety
upon every occasion did manifest it self in all his sickness, in so much as he
desired the Physicians leave to say the Office of his Breuiary, and that so
earnestly, as the Doctors, though they denied that (as a work to great for
his weakness,) yet to satisfy his importunity they granted that in lieu thereof
he might say his Beads, but with some pawse between every decade, least his
too serious application might hurt his head. And seeing that no more would be
granted him, he said to those about him: Me thinks I am become a mere
Secular man, and am no more Religious, for I neither say Office, nor Mass, I
make no prayers, I do no good at all; and this seemed to afflict him more then
his sickness, which yet was most violent and mortal.

After meat all his recreation was to hear the lives of Saints read unto He
causes the lives of Saints to be read unto him.
him, especially of Bishops, and above all of S. Francis, and in the hearing
their rare and eminent virtues, he would always weep and sigh after that
perfection of life to which they had so happily arrived, and from which (such
was his humility) he thought himself to be much further of the^ he was; for
he could not but be near them whom for so many years he had most diligently
follovved. Besides this grief conceived for himself and his own unworthiness,
another thing also seemed to afflict him, to wit, the continual watch in the
night with him, for he would ordinarily demand of such as he saw about him in
the mourning, whether they had watched with him all that night; and if they
said yea, then would he reply; so much trouble, and of so many, for my sake!
For me, I say, that am but a worm, a poor wretch and fit for nothing! and if
he savv more together with him, he would say, one is sufficient to watch, let
the rest sleep, and let another watch whiles he does sleep, the trouble of so
many is a trouble unto me who deserve not so much attendance. Likewise when
His charity and continual remembrance of the poor.
he saw any extraordinary thing brought him to eat, as chickens or the like,
he would say, that such expense was ill bestowed upon him, and would be better
on the poor, whom he so loved, and was so bountiful unto them, as he left
himself so little, as could hardly mainteyne him and satisfy his family: and
for that on his deathbed he was so careful of them, it will not be amiss to
put down some example of his life in this kind, and it shall be the first he did
after his promotion, by which some conjecture may be made of the rest which I
leave in silence.

Pope Clement the 8. soon after he had given him his Cardinals Hat, made him
also Archbishop of Capua: forthwith he left Rome, and like a true Pastor
repaired to his flock there to reside, and discharge all the duties of his
function. And first of all finding the reuenews of A liberal allowa^ce.
that Church to amount to three thousand pounds sterling, he presently gave
unto the poor, two thousand, maynteyning himself and his family with the
rest, which for one of that rank was very little, but he would no more; and
when after the death of the said Clement with other Cardinals he was to repair
to Rome, for the election of the new Pope, the poor came flocking about him,
crying, and saying, that his departute would be their undoing. Not so (quoth
the Cardinal) for my going to Rome will not I hope take away my rents, and if
they remain to me, they shall rest where they are with you. They all replied
with tears that they thought he should return no more (as indeed he did not)
and then that the rents should be neither his nor theirs. And my self have
seen often in Rome when the Cardinal went abroad, at his return all the lower
entry of his house full of poor people, on whom he bestowed his ordinary
alms. And in particular, which I may not omit, one shrouetyde an English man
half distracted of his He gives half of his dinner unto a poor Englishman.
senses came boldly to the Cardinal (for neither his doors, ears, or purse
were shut from the poor) and demanded some relief, having as he said nothing
to eat: the good Cardinal without any further deliberation caused his own
dinner to be divided in two, and gave the one half thereof unto the said
Englishman, and dined himself on the other: and my self coming that very day
to the Cardinal, was advertised thereof. But examples hereof are so many, as
would make a volume, and I mean not to disgresse any further from his death.

Many other virtues were noted in him at this time, and so many as that this
sickness may seem to have been the abridgement of all which he had exercised
in his life before. For besides the above mentioned courtesy in this extremity
His great courtesy and respect unto all.
to all that did visit him, his resignation of mind was admirable. And for the
first he never respected his own inconvenience, pain or trouble, in so much
as not only to Cardinals and Prelates, but to any other that came to see him
(and there came many) he would take off his nightcap, lift himself up in his
bed, speak unto every one more or less as the quality of the person, or
matter that he spoke of did require; and would never endure that any should
stand bare headed in his presence, and this even until the two last days of
his life, when nature being far spent, the fever with the decay of his strength
still increasing, he either attended not to such as came, but unto his prayers,
or else his eyes and ears failing, he neither saw nor heard them, unless they
spoke somewhat loud: and even to his own servants he bare that respect, as he
would endure much rather then put them to any trouble. And when F. Minutoli
once told him, that no man held it for a trouble to serve him, and such as
there attended were his own servants; he answered only to these last words,
and said they are not my servants but my brethren, brethren they are, and for
such I esteem them.

And that indeed he esteemed them more like his brethren then servants many
ways appeared, especially if any of his house fell sick as there did two,
immediately before he ^ell sick himself: ^or then his custom wa^ to go to
their cha^bers, to sit and talk with them, to comfort them, and every way to
assist and help them. And touching these two, the last of which Matthaeus
Tortus was one, the other an attendant of his chamber, this memorable thing is
recorded; that whereas Tortus was exceeding sick, and held to be in great
danger of death, and the other but in the entrance of his disease which he
seemed not much to regard, yet the Cardinal having seen the^ both said, that
Tortus should recover and the other dye, which as it seemed strange to all that
heard it, who saw great signs of death in the one, and scarce the appeara^ce
of any sickness in the other; so the event proved to be true: for the later
within few days departted this life, and Tortus is yet living, and in perfect
health.

His resignation and indifferency of His resignation and indifferency.
of mind was very exact, without all contradiction or reply: whatsoever happened,
whatsoever was determined, nothing troubled his mind, no exception was made,
one thing only excepted (if yet that thing be subject to exception) for thus it
happened. He having from the beginning of his sickness prepared himself to dye, it
fell out that the seventh day held by the Physicians for Critical, he began to
be somewhat better: much joy was conceived thereat, and the same signified unto
the Cardinal, who weighing the matter in another balla^ce, was somewhat troubled
with this soden resolution, and said myldly unto the Doctors: I had thought at
this time to have gone to my house and home, and now I see that you will hinder
me: I pray you let me go. Their answer was, that it belonged unto their
office to preserve his life as long as they could, and was pleasing unto God,
and he also was bound therein to concur with them, to do as they should
ordain, and be contented to stay in this world until that God should
otherwise dispose. Well then (quoth the Cardinal) his will be done: but if the
choice were in my hands, I should rather dye then live; wherefore do as you
will, I shall follow your direction. And when the Physicians were gone, he
seemed so much to be discomforted, that his Attendants were all moved to
comfort him, and that no less then ordinarily men use to comfort others that
are to dye, and would longer live.

Again, at another time when three of his four Physicians had consulted and
determined to make trial of a new remedy, he said unto them: Will you not yet
let me go? Ah let me alone now it is high time. Fa. Minutoli ansvvered and
said, the Rule of our Society does bind us in sickness to obey the Physicians;
he had no sooner named the Rule, but the other recalling his former words
said: you say well, there is a Rule, let them appoint what they will, I will do
whatsoever they will have me: so punctual he was in observing the Rules of the
Society in all things, either for life or death, with, or against his own
inclination. Some near perhaps will say, that notvvithstanding he loathed
this life, thirsted after heaven, and would gladly be with God, yet he was
not to wish for his own death. To which idle fancy I answer with S.
Augustine* Aug. lib. 2. in Gaudient. cap. ^^. in fine.
Non est iniustum homimi iusto optare mortem, quando amarissima est vi^a: sed
si Deus optatam non dederit, non erit iustum nisi tolerare eam amarissiman
vitam: it is lawful for a good man to vvish for death when as life it self
is very bitter unto him: but if God yield not unto his desire, he cannot
lavvfully refuse to endure his bitter life. So he. And so the Cardinal
although he wished for death was yet resigned unto Almighty God, to undergo
the longer endurance of a bitter life.

But leaving his virtues for a while which every where occur to be
recounted, let us a little behold what other things happened in the whole
course and success of his sickness, in the beginning vvherof it was thought
good for avoiding of recourse to speak little thereof, and to extenuate the same
as not mortal, but rather some casual indisposition; and this persuasion
continued for three or four days till the Pope truly Pope Gregory visits
him on his deathbed.
informed by his own Physician who repaired daily unto the Cardinal, and by
the General of the Society in what state he was, came in person to visit him
the fifth day of his disease, for then all apprehended the matter as it was,
and made no other account but to loose him. When the Cardinal saw his Holiness
enter into his chamber, he said with the good Centurion, Non sum dignus, vt
intres sub tectum Luc. 7.
meum, I am not worthy that you should enter under my roof; with other words
of great dutifulnes and humility: and when the Pope showed the grief of mind
he conceived for his sickness, and how much he esteemed his loss; the other
answered as he had always done, that he had lived long enough, and therefore
desired no longer respit on earth, and I will pray God (quoth he) to grant The
humility of Pope Gregory.
your Holiness as long life (for he is ten years younger then Bellarmyne was)
as he has unto me. The Pope replied (but not in so loud a voice as the
Cardinal could hear him) I have more need of Bellarmines meritts, then of his
years. Many words past between them of great affection in the one, and
submissiue humility in the other. The Pope after that he had twice most
lovingly embraced him, being to depart, said that he would pray to God that he
might recover: not (quoth the Cardinal) that I may recover being now fit for
nothing, but that Gods will and pleasure may be done either for life or death.
After that the Pope was gone, he seemed to be much more cheerful then he was
before, the cause whereof he disclosed unto F. Minutoli saying: Now truly do I
well hope that I shall dye, for the Popes are never known to have visited
Cardinals but when they were in danger of death, or rather past all hope of
life, to which effect he alleged diverse examples.

Remaining therefore in this joyful hope, when diverse of the Society came to
him and offered to say mass and pray for him, he would very lovingly thank
them all, but still accepted their curtesy with this Caveat, that they should
not pray for his longer life, but contrariwise His desire to leave the world.
that he might soon make an exchange thereof for a better, that his passage
might be safe and soon. The cause of this his desire he alleged to be, for
that now he had prepared himsel^e, and knew not for the time to come what in
the rest of his life, if it were prolonged, might befall him: for, said he, I
have known diverse, who if at some time when they were well disposed had
departed this life, had been in very happy state, who recovering their health,
fell after very far from that fervor, and dyed so desperately as in humane
judgment they may be rather thought the children of perdition then life: Now
therefore (quoth he) seeing I am ready, why should I live longer and expose my
self to such an hazard? Now nothing troubles my conscience, for God (his
goodness be still thanked therefore) has so preserved me hitherto, as that I
do not remember in the whole course of my live ever to have committed any
sca^dalous action, which perhaps if I should life longer, may befall me, for
weakness of body draws oftentimes with it weakness of mind, by which good men
have been seen to have relented from their former vigor and virtue. This
with more to this effect did he speak to express the cause why he desired the
dissolution of his earthly tabernacle, which was no other, but that least
through the frailty of body and mind he should ^eerafter offend God, whom
hitherto, in sanctitate and iustitia omnibus diebus Luc. 1.
vitae suae, in holiness and virtue all the days of his lire, he had so
carefully, so continually served, and whom now he had rather dye then
displease.

This his fervent desire grounded on the foresaid motive was so imprinted in
his heart, and fixed therein so deeply, as His disease is found to be mortal.
even then when his violent ague bereaved him of his senses he was often heard
to say: Signore, vorrei andare a casa mia: quando sara quel giorno che io venga
al vostr^ Regno etc. O Lord I would gladly go to my house; when will that day
be when I may come to thy Kingdom? And the eleauenth day after his sickness he
said unto all his Physicians: When shall I hear from you that happy news that
I must depart to another life? when shall I be delivered from this body of
death? They answered as before, not so long as they could keep him alive. Well
(quoth he) God sees my desire, and how willing I am to come unto him. And
indeed non est fraudatus desiderio suo, God heard his prayer, and that very
night he was seen to yex or sob in such manner, as a learned Physician
watching with him held it for mortal, and forthwith advertised the General
(for so had the Cardinal before willed them, when they should perceive him in
evident danger) who came early the next morning, and seeing how matters went,
thought it best, plainly to acquaint him with the truth, and said unto him: My
Lord, I think that the end of this sickness will be the end your life, and by
all likelyhoode you cannot escape long, for the Physicians now give a very ill
censure of your disease, upon some signs they have seen, and more and more
discern in you: so as it seems Almighty God will call you unto him, and you
shall do well to make your self ready, and dispose of what you have, the time
is short, and delays are dangerous.

At this unexpected, but much desired message, the good Cardinal replenished
His great joy at the news of his death.
with inward joy, presently with cheerful countenance, and undaunted courage
brake forth into these words: Buona nuoua, buona nuoua, o che buona nuoua e
questa! that is, good news, good news, o^ what good news are these! Lo the
security of an innocent mind, of a sincere servant, and Apostolical man, who
ioyed in death, whereat others do tremble; and made that his gain which
worldly me^ esteem their greatest loss: but these graces are not bestowed,
but upon such only as have wholly bestowed themselves upon God, for such alone,
as S. Gregory says ( conte^platione quadam retributionis Gregor. 24. in Job.
cap. 7. prope finem.
inter^ae, etiam priusqua^ carne expoliantur, hilarescunt; and dum vetustatis
debitum soluunt, noui iam muneris laetitia perfruuntur) by the co^templation of
that which their soul receaues within, do, before they leave their bodies,
become cheerful; and eue^ then whiles they are yielding to the dissolution of
their old nature, do enjoy the comfort of their new reward. So he of the
virtuous in general, which in this worthy man we see so particularly
accomplished, who still prayed with the Apostle and said, Cupio dissolui, and
esse cum Philip. 5.
Christo: I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

After this joyful exclamation, turrning his speech unto F. General, as
answering unto that which he had suggested, he said: For disposing of my
things I have nothing left to dispose, and it grieueth me that I have nothing
to bestow upon the Society, for I fear much that in making you mine heirs, as
if I The poverty of the Cardinal.
had something to leave you, I shall but charge you with new debts, which for
my sake you will be forced to discharge. The General replied, that therein he
should not trouble himself, he had left the Society so much, and so much
honored it with his name and immortal labors, as it esteemed that treasure
more then all the riches of the world. Well the^ said the Cardinal, I came
hither to bestow one whole year in preparing my self to dye, but if it please
not God that I bestow any more time heerin, neither truly shall it please me;
and therefore your message of death is most grateful etc. After this he caused
one to read unto him the death of S. Charles Borromaeus, as S. Charles
Borromaeus.
desirous in his own to imitate it; which being ended he desired to receive
the Sacraments of holy Church, and that as soon as might be, least after he
should be less able for indisposition both of body and mind to receive them,
and to prevent also any suddayne accident that might in this weakness take him
away, ere he had armed himself with this so necessary and sovereign defense.
He receaueth the ^. Sacrament with great denotion.


Forth with all things were made ready for receiving of the B. Sacrament of
the Altar for his Viaticum, which was ministered unto him by the hands of the
General, and received with exceeding devotion of the Cardinal: for
notwithstanding his extreme weakness of body, he would needs again, as he had
done before, rise out of his bed, and kneel on the ground to receive it; and
so earnest he was to receive it in this reverent manner, as it was not
possible, without his great grief and distaste, to hinder him. The General
perceauing his will so fervently bent on that devotion, would not withstand him
therein, least the inward grief might more afflict his mind then that
exterior action endomage his body: wherefore he received it kneeling on the
ground, with singular humility; and after some collection made according to his
wo^t which endured for some while, he began to talk with the General about
his burial, and the manner of his funerals, which he did with so great peace
of mind, and so familiarly, as if in his health he had spoken of going to
dinner, or some other light and ordinary matter.

Much he desired to be buried like a Religious man; and all his discourse
tended A true religious Spirit.
thereunto. For first he requested to be buried in the common vault under the
ground (for so in Italy they use to bury) where others of that Order are
ordinarily laid; then that his funerals might be plain, and in such manner
as i^ he had dyed in the Society; and had never been advanced, being very
earnest that no pomp or splendor accustomed for other Cardinals might be
made for him; that they would not open and enbalme his body, but bury it
entiere as they do others; and finally that his dead body presently after his
death might be conveyed secretly to the Fathers Church called the Casa
professa, and there be interred, none intermedling with the Exequies but the
said Fathers, as they use to do for their own in such cases. The General not
to trouble him, being in those terms, made no semblance of any mislike,
howsoever he thought it not convenient that all should pass in that order.
Wherefore conferring with the Pope therein some things were reuersed, for his
Holiness would have him buried like a Cardinal, but with meaner pomp; he would
have him embalmed, and would have the other Cardinals to be present, sending
also his own Quiristers thither; in the rest he condescended to what he had
determined, as after shall be showed.

The same day some six or seven hours after his receiving, he demanded He is
anneyled.
the other; and last Sacrament of the sick, Extreme Unction I mean, which he
requested the sooner to receive, because he would be sure, he said, not to be
deprived of it, or to take it when he should not know well what he did take; he
was now in his perfect senses, and therefore might receive it with devotion; as
he did, and answered Amen, with great compunctio^ of heart at each several
unction; and now with greater serenity of mind then before he expected his last
call, and coming of our Lord to take him out of this vale of misery and bring
him where he might see, Bona Domini in terra Psalm. 370
viuentium, the joy of our Lord in the land of the living.

And for that some Sectaries of these days had bruted abroad that he had
favored their cause (of which he was the He makes a Protestation of hi^ Faith.
destruction) or had recalled some of his opinions; he entreated Fa. Andraeas
Eudaemon-Ioannes then present, that he would testify in some written record,
that whatsoever he (to wit the Cardinal) had written or printed concerning
matters of Faith against the Heretics and Heresies of these times, that now on
his deathbed, he did most resolutely avouch again, ratify, and confirm the
same, and caused this his attestation to be written, and subscribed by diverse
that were present, as by his two Nephevvs, certain Fathers of the Society, and
some of his own servants; and I doubt not but the said Father out of the great
love and dutiful respect which he always bare the Cardinal, will very
willingly discharge this debt in some work that he shall shortly set forth, if
his health do not hinder him, as it has done many others of his most
commendable, and profitable endeauours.

Being thus armed for his last encounter, and in great tranquillity and peace
of mind, he began again to cast back his eyes on his life past to see what
therein might trouble his conscience, or breed any fear in him at that strait
account before God, which now hourly he did expect to be called unto: and
after See the tender conscience of this most holy and innocent Cardinal.
all his discussion and search he said unto Father Minutoli, that no one thing
so much troubled him of all that he had done in his life past, as that he had
left his Church and Archbishopricke of Capua, where by his continual residence
he might have done more good to the honor and glory of God, and good of those
souls committed unto his charge, then in any other place; and that here in
Rome it seemed that he had lost his time, and had done nothing of any weight or
moment: whereas yet he was well known to leese no time that he could well
spare, and was employed in all matters of most importance which concerned the
whole Church, the proper office of a Cardinal, as the said Father told him,
which is not so much to attend to a particular member, as to the common profit
of the whole body: for as Saint Leo Leo. epist.
will notes: publica praeferenda sunt proprijs, and ibi intelligenda est ra^io
vtiliatis, vbi vigilat cura communis. Moreover, said the Father, you can have
no scruple in this matter which you did by command of the Pope, whom you were
bound by your rule to obey, and consequently your abode not being of your
seeking but his enforcing, it cannot be imputed to you as a fault; but
contrariwise is commendable, as proceedinge from exact Obedience which you
could not refuse.

Indeed, said the Cardinal, so the Bellarmin would not leave his Church and
keep the rents.
matter passed, and I plainly signified unto Paul the fifth, that I could not
in conscience, not residing in the place, keep the Archbishopricke in my
hands, and therefore desired him in case he would have me to remain in Rome,
that I might altogether renounce the Archbishopricke, that men might not
justly charge me, and with reason say: He has forsaken his wife, and yet
keeps her dowry: and therefore leaving the one, I renounced the other, and
yielded up all entierly as well charge as profit into the Popes hands, without
ever making any mention of allowance for my self to be deducted from thence.
So he. And yet he might have substituted a Suffragan, and kept at least two
parts of three, had he been so disposed; but he renounced all freely, and
wholly, and after the renuntiation made suit to the Pope to allow him somewhat
for his maintenance, having now only left him the title of a Bishop without a
Church, the dignity of a Cardinal without any living, and charge of servants
without having so much rent as to pay his Cook; the Pope allowed him, as he
had in Capua allowed himself, four thousad crowns, and for that one part of
this sum was levied by way of pension on the rents of the Church of Capua,
though it were done much against his will, he never ceased til his death,
yearly out of his small allowance to bestow something on the poor Monasteryes
of that City; so as all this matter passed with singular commendations of
heroical magnanimity on his behalf, and in most honorable manner. But for
that he had learned of his dear Master B. Fa. Ignatius, not only to seek the
glory of God, but maiorem Dei gloriam, the greater glory of God in all things;
and because he thought that he might have done more good in Capua then in Rome,
therefore did he sorrow, and had this remorse. O noble Bishop, O zealous mind, O
rare example worthy of the name, renown and eminent virtue of Bellarmyne! How
holy was his life not stained with mortal sin? How secure a conscience, that
had at his death no scruple, but for the exchange of one good work for
another, and that imposed upon him by an inevitable command? What shall I
here say, but that fecit mirabilia in vita sua, he has, even Eccles. 31.
in this mortal life, done vvonderfull things.

This scruple being removed, and Scipio Card. Cobellutiu^.
his mind quieted, there remained one difficulty touching his temporal estate,
to wit for repayment of his Cardinals Ring; for effecting of which he used the
help of the Cardinal of S. Susanna to his Holiness, alleging this reason,
that non erat soluendo, for he had not where withal to bury him, much less to
pay that debt; adding further that the same grace had been before granted
unto Cardinal Baronius, and another Cardinal. Unto which request the Pope
most willingly yielded; and further at the request of the General, for the
Cardinal sought it not, the Pope also condescended to give a pension of three
hundred crowns between his two nephews, and had doubtless granted more, if
more had been demanded; but the Cardinal little minded his nephews or
earthly preferments, having his thoughts on heaven, which he alvvayes called
his Home; there was his reward laid up: Et merces eius magna nimis.

When it was known in the City that the Pope had been with the Cardinal,
that he had taken his Viaticum, that he was anneyled, and that there means to
see the ^^eke Cardinal.
was no hope left of longer life, wonderful it was, not to only hear the
honorable reports which all made of him, but to see the means and inventions
used, and that by men of Quality, to come unto him. Some sued unto the
Cardinals and great Personages; some entreated the Fathers; some used the help
of his servants, and others made other devises, and this not only to see him,
but to kiss his hands, his head, or some other thing about him; and when
therein they had satisfied their devotion, they would touch his body with their
books, their beads, handkerchieffs, Crosses, Medalles and other the like
things, and that very reverently on their knees: and in this kind none were
more forward then the Cardinals themselves; who by reason of their more
frequent conversation did best know him, and some of them mentioned his
Canonization: and when once they knew of his sickness they came very often unto
him, and ten of them somtymes in one day, who all desired his blessing, but he
constantly refused to give it; and one of them taking him by the hand kissed
the same, and the^ touched his eyes and head therewith, at which Bellarmine
meruayling when the other was gone asked those about him, what kind of curtesy
this was, and how long it had been in use amongst the Cardinals?

Another time the Cardinals that came would needs before they departed kiss
his hands, at which he was much Great reverence done him by Cardinals and
Prelates.
grieved, and would have withdrawn them back, but was not able to resist
their importunity, and therefore only said, non sum dignus, I am not worthy of
this honor especially from you my Lords, and he offered to have kissed theirs
again one by one, but they would not yield, and he was to weak to force the^;
and some Cardinals again together with other Prelates would needs have his
benediction, which he utterly refused to give; and they continuing to ask it,
he craved theirs, so as the contention grew who should bless each other; which a
Cardinal perceauing decided the matter by taking Bellarmynes right hand, and
blessing himself there with perforce, at which sight the others not vvilling
to use that violence, desired again so earnestly his blessing on their knees,
as he to avoid so importunate molestation give it, but said withal after he
had given it: what will the blessing of a poor miserable wretch as I am aualye
you? why do you trouble me so much for it? And so in his death and life the
honors which with their sweet stings do deadly wound others, he always turned
to his greater humiliation.

Two Cardinals above the rest seemed Cardinal Hippolitus Aldobra^dinus.
to be more sollicitous of him, Aldobrandino and Farnesius; the first was then
in Rome, the other absent; the first came very often to the Nouitiate to
enquire how he did, and out of courtesy forbear to visit him as not willing to
trouble him with his presence, yet at length he resolved to see him, although
his sight cost him tears; when he saw him past all hope of recovery, and
measuring Bellarmyne by other men, he demanded of F. Minutoli, whether the
present apprehension of death did not affright him? Nothing less, quoth the
Father, of which your Honor shall now see the experience, and then asked the
sick Cardinal, whether he would not gladly depart to another life. I would to
God said Bellarmyne that I might, and that very soon, I wish that I were
already gone, for what should I stay any longer in this world? with other lik
words which showed not a desire only, but a delight also that he had to think
on death; in so much as when any would comfort him in his sickness, they would
mention the same as a discourse most pleasing unto him.

Diverse ways did this foresaid the Cardinal manifest his affection unto
Bellarmyne which I here forbear; and when he with others, requested that
when he came to heaven, he would remember Bellarmine notwithstanding his
singular confidence in God had great distrust of himself.
them, and pray for them; although the virtuous Cardinal always showed a
great hope and confidence in Gods mercy; yet was this conjoined with no less
distrust of himself, for he would earnestly crave every ma^s prayers, and to
this petition of the Cardinals he answered more the^ once saying: To go to
heaven so soon is a great matter, and to great for me; men use not to come
thither in such have, and for my self, I shall think it no small favor to be
sure of Purgatory, and there to remain a good while in those flames, that must
purge and cleanse the spotts of my offenses, and satisfy the just wrath and
justice of almighty God. But when I am come Home, quoth he, I will not fail to
pray for you all; and this he promised to do not only for these Cardinals,
but for all his benefactours and servants, unto whom, and to all those in the
Nouitiate he gave (being thereunto much urged) very often his blessing.

Cardinal Farnesius was at this time Cardinal Farnesius his judgment and
esteem of Bellarmyne.
at his house of Caprarola thirty miles from Rome, who hearing of the sickness
of Bellarmine wrote many letters to Father Minutoli, desiring to be informed
from time to time of the progress of his sickness, and, when it should happen,
to have the whole narration of his sickness and death together; moreover that
Bellarmine by him might be advertised of the singular affection which he bare
him, or as it pleased him to term it, dutiful respect: 6. Septe^b.
adding withal: Ma quando piacesse a Dio, di voler questo Signore per ^l Ci^lo
etc. but in case it should please God to call this Cardinal to heaven, I
desire your Fatherhood to procure me of F. General some pair of beads of the
Cardinals, or else his Breuiary, and I will make that account of it, as the
great opinion I have of his singular sanctity does require that I should* The
same again he solicited in another letter written four days after, at the
end of which he added with his own hand these words: Viuo con pena di questa
immine^te perdita, ma insieme 10. Sept.
godo dell'opinione che gia si comi^cia scoprire della santita di questo
Signore. That is, I live in pain of this loss so near at hand, but withal I
am glad for the opinion which already begins to manifest it self of the
Sanctity of this honorable person. And in another which was written after his
death he says, that he will put ^9. Sept.
Bellarmine before his eyes, come un essemplare degnissimo d'imitatione etc. as
an example most worthy of imitation: and I hope (says he) not a little to be
helped by the intercession of that holy soul, that I may a far of follow his
stepps, who has so much honored the whole Church and sacred College of
Cardinals, and that no less with his virtue then learning. So Farnesius, with
more to the same effect.

This Cardinal in respect of the great obligation the whole Society has ever
had to that name, which his own Bellarmin did greatly esteem F^rnesius.
merits have much more increased, and for the particular affection he bare unto
Bellarmine, was of him also had in special regard, and as often as Farnesius
his letters, still full of love, were read unto him, he would in very
effectual words make remonstrance how far he was indeared unto him, and how
little able to discharge that duty which he did owe him, of which in his health
he was never unmindful, and had determined to dedicate a great work unto him
which he had began upon S. Paul's Epistles, containing a literal, moral, and
dogmaticall explication of all the Apostles words; a work worthy of
Bellarmyne, necessary for these times, much urged and desired by many; but
having finished some Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, considering with
himself the length and difficulty of the thing, his small helps, with other
great employments, his weak body, the short and uncertain time of his life,
he left off that enterprise, and wrote his other little books, as he
insinuates in an epistle, to the Cardinal himself prefixed before his book of
The eternal felicity of Saints. Longitudo Operis (says he) and breue spatium
quod mihi superest vitae, and quotidianae occupationes quae parum omnino ad
scribendum mihi otij relinqunt, effecerunt, vt de Opere illo perficiendo plane
desperarem: the length of the work, the short space that remaynes of my life,
and my daily business which leaves me very little leisure to write, made me
despair of ever finishing that work. So he: and for that it pleased Cardinal
Bellarmine to show such singular gratitude to this his friend on his deathbed;
and on the other side, for that Farnesiu^ is further resolved to erect some
honorable monument of him in the place where he is buried, I could not let him
pass unnamed in this narration.

And for the other Cardinals, they Bellarmin much honored and loved of all
the cardinals.
did also so tenderly affect him, as few or none of all those which came to
visit him, could forbear weeping: and one of them a very grave man said unto
F. Minutol^, that he did greatly glory to hane been made Cardinal by that Pope
which had made Bellarmyne Cardinal; and that in toto genere (I use his own
words) the world has not had any of so singular learning accompanied with so
great humility and Religious maturity as he, for many ages, and perhaps may
expect long ere it have another. And he did well to specify his humility, for
though he were equal to any, yet he so still demeaned himself as though he had
been servant to all, and this even until death; for to all that came unto him
in his sickness, although he did speak with all respect and duty unto them, yet
at their departure he would crave pardon of them, and say; My Lords I pray
pardon me, if I do not as I would, or as I am bound, for I am not mine own
man, I want strength of body, I can do no more: and indeed he did more then
was convenient for one in his case to do, though much less then he desired to
have done to them, whom so heartily he did honor.

In fine, when the danger of his disease was once diuulged over all the
City, not only Cardinals, but many Bishops, Prelates, and other of special
Note the common opinion that all had of his sanctity.
note repaired unto him, especially the three last days before his death, when
being sometimes sleepy, sometimes with his eyes closed in prayer and
meditation, he neither marked who they were that came, nor heeded much what
they did: in which time the foresaid Cardinals, Bishops, Prelates and others
sent many little cappes of silk, such as they use to were under their square
capps; and others sent white night-caps which they desired might be put on his
head as they were, and with them they sent also little Crosses of gold and
silver, Reliquiaries, prayer-bookes, and other things to touch him, and that
in such multitudes, as there were more the^ a hundred and fifty red, white,
and other capps put on, and taken from his head during this time, and since his
death that number has been much increased: many things were taken away by
such as came to visit him, and those also by great personages; many more were
begged and sought for from many places, as after in part I shall show or rather
touch only, for the particulars of this alone would much exceed the length of
this Relation.

Honorable is virtue, and the root of all true honor, in regard vvherof the
ancient Romans built the Temples of Virtue and Honor together, because the
one must necessarily depend of the other, as we see to have happened in this
Cardinal whose virtues were conspicuous in the eyes and judgment of all, as
not only the good did dearly prize them and him for them, but also the bad did
reverence and honor them; in so much as hitherto I have not heard of one in
Rome that did not, and does not honor him; yea the wicked Jews enemies Even
the Jews did honor Bellarmines virtues.
of all goodness have confessed the^, and (were their words of any weight) have
spoken of him in most honorable manner; in so much as a Prelate of great name
said, that Bellarmyne had overcome all envy and won the hearts of all. And for
that the Jews since his death have so much extolled his virtues, I think it
not amiss to let the Reader understand, what is now very opportunely come to
my hands touching this point, out of Polonia, in a little book written by a
learned man of the Society of Jesus under this title: Vindiciae doctrinae
Societatis Jesus, a calumnijs Patroni Turonensium Anonymi. Auctore Georgio
Tiszkiewic, who relates a notable accident to this purpose which fell out upon
this occasion.

There was set forth in print in the year 1614. a most infamous Libell,
composed (as is thought) by some Sacramentary Heretic in Dutch of the the
death A notable testimony given of Bellarmin by a Jew in Polo^ia.
of Cardinal Bellarmyne, which related most strange and prodigious things of
his life and death: for Africa is not more full of monsters the^ these men are
of most monstrous inventions; amongst other things it was reported that he dyed
in the year 1613. when he was then alive, and wrote after that time all his
spiritual books now in print. Besides this, the whole Libell was so full of
villainy, as that many more moderate and modest Protestants disclaymed in print
from it, and none more vehemently then he who was reported to have been the
printer, Lewis Coing dwelling in Basil, a City of the Switzers, who wrote a
sharp letter against the writer thereof, denying that ever he printed any
book, kept any press, or had any thing to do in setting forth of that
Pamphlet; nevertheless the Caluinists in Dantz (a town in Germany) reprinted
the same again, and urged it, as a great argument for the truth of their
Gospel, seeing that God had punished the chief defendo^r of the Catholic
Faith of our Age with such a disastrous and dreadful death; and had he indeed
been dead, the lie though never so loud had found credit amongst the Brethren;
but his life for so many years after quailed this fable; though yet some
Merchants of more faith then wit (for besides their justifying Faith, they have
also an Historical) did constantly affirm and believe it to be true; whereupon
that fell out which the Author above named does report in these words.

Oliuae nonnulli Gedanensium Senatorum inter alia quae ante annum vnum
miscebant cum admodum Reuerendo Patre Philippo Adlero dignissimo Oliuensis
Monasterij Ordinis Sancti Bernardi Priore colloquia etc. At Olive amongst other
Conferences had between the chief Citizens of Dantz, with the Reverend Fa.
Philip Adler Prior of the order of S. Bernard, they of Dantz related in one of
them all those things which the nameles Author of the foresaid Libell does
impudently report, or rather with which he does most falsely calumniate the
Cardinal. The Priour denied all, affirming that they were impossible, and out
of the great good will and affection he bears thereunto, did much commend the
Society of Jesus: on the other side they accused all, and above all Bellarmyne.
Whiles they were in this debate, a Jew newly come out of Italy arrived thither,
of which when the Prior was advertised, he called for him to come before them,
and being come the Prior spoke to him in this manner: have thou any news from
Rome to tell us? what is become of Cardinal Bellarmyne? Is he alive or dead?
how, and in what manner does he live? Here our Dantz Senators stand attent,
and expect very greedily the answer, which they thought would second their
lewd reports; but contrariwise the Jew affirmed that Bellarmyne was alive, that
he was in health, that his life for all virtue, gravity, and other deportment
was most exemplar; that finally if the Jews could see al Catholics, or the
greater part, to live as Bellarmyne does, they would all of them presently
become Christians. With this narration and their own shame, the men of Dantz
were not a little confounded. And this have I heard from a most Religious and
sincere man, a Prior also of the same Order, called Andrew Clewsky, who was
both an ear, and eye witness of this matter. Hitherto that Author. So as now
of Bellarmines sanctity etiam inimici nostri sint Iudices, the Jews themselves
may be Judges, who in this show themselves to have much more conscience, then
the forenamed Heretics.

The devotion of others unto the Cardinal has made me make the longer
digression from his own person: but now leaving them a little (to whom
eftsoons I shall return again) let us a while contemplate, and cast our eyes
back on the sick man, who perceauing in himself so great decay of strength,
and his vital spirits to be so much exhaust, prayed more instantly to be
delivered from this body of corruption, and His great desire to be with God.
said: Filthy flesh only fit for worms to feed on, why do thou keep me from
God? and taking the flesh of one of his arms in his hand, he said in Italian:
Carnaccia traditora, perch non si stacchi? sarria pur tempo: che indugi? che
stai a fare? Treacherous base flesh, why do thou not dissolve and sever thy
self from the soul? it is high time: why do thou delay? why do thou not
dispatch and make an end? And then turning himself unto God, and wholly relying
on his merciful disposition, he said: non mea voluntas, sed tua, fiat: not my
will but thine be done. And now drawing on apace to the last period of his
life, he found more and more difficulty to take any meat, or keep what he had
taken: and he had not only a great repugnance and auersion from eating, but a
great loathing and horror to see any thing brought him. Here what should his
attendants do? to force him, seemed to violent for one so weak, so meek, and
of that rank and dignity: to persuade him, was but lost labor, for such
difficultyes are hardly overcome by persuasion: nothing remained but to urge
him the Physicians command, and that he was bound under Obedience to His
exact obedience in things most repugnant to his nature.
eat.

Hereat presently he would rise, take and eat whatsoever they brought him, and
that very readily though it were never so much against his stomach, and though
he did presently cast it up again, never looking or respecting what was given
him: and which is more strange, even when he was besides himself in the
extremity of his bad fit, the very name of Obedience would have made him taken
whatsoever they had brought him: so accustomed and affectioned he was to that
Virtue, as nothing seemed hard unto him, that came under that title, imitating
therein his dear master our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who as S. Bernard
witnesses: Ne perderet obedientiam, perdidit vitam, lost his life that he
might not loose his obedience: conform to that of the Apostle S. Paul: factus
Philip. 3.
obediens vsque ad mortem, he was obedient even until death. So Christ, so his
disciple, and I doubt not but that those who shall write his life (if more then
one undertake it) will find many notable examples of this virtue in the course
thereof.

This here I will auerre upon certain knowledge, that after his promotion, he
put himself under the Obedience of the General of his Order, and bound
himself to obey him no less then before in all things of any moment. And
because the Rules of the Society do by^d all in the time of their sickness, not
When he was Cardinal he was obedient to the General of the Society, yea even
to his own servants.
only to obey the Physicians, but al such as have any care of them; the
Cardinal having one of his chamber a most diligent and faithful servant to
attend him in this sickness, him he also obeyed in whatsoever he bid him do;
and he knowing well his Lords pleasure, when any thing was to be done, would
not say as other servants use to do, If it please your Honor to do this, or
take that, and the like, but in resolute terms: My Lord, lift up your self,
Take this, Do that etc. and presently without any reply he would do it, never
saying more, but, As you will, As it pleases you. Neither did this custom
begin between them on his deathbed, but had still been in use and practice
before, and that with all humility and alacrity, for he regarded not whom he
did obey, but for whose sake he did it, and that made him even in his servants
person to reverence our Savior. And so much for his Obedience.

The nynteenth day of his sickness, being the beginning of the new moon, his
pulse which hitherto had been strong began much to fail, and many other ill
signs appeared which did evidently prognosticate his departure to be very
near at hand. The Cardinal still continuing as he could in his accustomed
devotions, in making devout Colloquies, and iaculatory prayers unto God, when
any thing was suggested unto him fit for that time and present occasion, he
would thank the suggestours, and give them to knew Pope Gregory granted him a
pardon.
that he took great comfort thereof, which was in manner redoubled when he
understood that the Pope had sent him a Plenary Indulgence, for the better
gayning of which spiritual grace he said his Confiteor, with his diverse other
prayers: and the last night of his life which was the 23. of his sickness, the
former signs still continuing, and increasing brought him into a certain
dulnes or insensibility, especially some five or six hours before his death,
which made all who were about him to think, that now every hour might be his
last: yet even in this state he made them all see, that he was present to
himself, knew his own danger, understood what was said unto him, and answered
directly to whatsoever was proposed: in so much as Father Minutoli speaking
unto him of the confidence he was now to have in God, and recourse unto his
divine mercy, by imploring his help in this passage, for pardon of his sins,
and defense against all assaults of the enemy now most vigilant; he answered
very devoutly and directly unto him in a low voice, that so he did, and that in
the best manner he could, and to manifest the same unto them, to the end they
might both see, that he understood their words, and his own case, he showed
this exterior act of Christian piety.

Having a little Cross of silver in his hand, he kissed it very often, and His
great devotion to the Cross.
blessed himself diverse times wherewith, saying some prayers by himself, some
together with them that were with him, and kneeled at his bed side:
afterward taking into his hand a greater Cross that stood by which had the
picture of our Sauiors body fixed thereon, he did oftentimes very devoutly kiss
the the same; a little after he laid it on his eyes, and taking it from thence
he laid it on his left shoulder, embracing it very hard between both his arms
being put a cross one over the other, and so continued a good while, till
removing it a little toward his breast he lifted his hand up to his head to
take off his nightcap, but could not do it, and such as kneeled by him knew
not what he meant, til at last by conjecture Father Minutoli gathered that he
meant to do some act of devotion, and therefore took off his cap for him: then
the Cardinal took the Cross, with both his hands, and so much forced
himself, as he placed it on his bare head, and all this he did for the love he
bare to the death and passion of our Savior, whereof this Cross is a lively
representation. Moreover to show the Holy Images.
reverence he bare unto holy Images, for which point of Christian belief more
martirs have lost their lives by the hands of the bloody and barbarous
Iconoclasts, then perhaps they have done for any other article whatsoever.

Lastly, I doubt not but that he showed this zeal to the holy Crucifix, to
show his zeal against the Heretics of these times, the true children of these
parents and lively brood of these Progenitors; that the world might see how
exact he was in adhering unto that Faith in all and every branch and member
which in his works he had lo learnedly defended, and procured in this his last
sickness as before I said, to have left registered in print after his departure:
These reasons I say, made him so often and so earnestly to exercise these acts
of Veneratio^ to the holy Cross; which finally he laid on his breast under the
couerlet where it remained till he was dead: so as he seemed unwilling to see,
think or desire any thing but Christ, and him crucified, and to testify to the
world the interior love he bare in his heart to Christ, by the exterior
reverence which he did show to his picture, the true character of a Catholic
Christian man.

Now was he come to the last hour of his life, and though his pains were The
manner of his death.
greater, yet his courage, his patience, his quiet and peaceable repose the
same. The holy man began his prayers, said the Pater noster, and Aue Maria, and
began again the Pater noster, which being ended he said distinctly the Psalm
Miserere, to the end: and being warned to say also the Creed, in protestation
of his belief, and that he dyed a member of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman
Church, presently he began the same, and said it all through, and (which was
much noted) with the end of the Creed he ended his speech, these being the last
words that ever he spoke clearly and distinctly Vitam aeternam, Amen.
in this life: Et vitam aeternam, Amen: and life life everlasting, Amen. After
which his voice so failed, that they could scant with all diligence used, hear
him, yet he said very softly to himself in such manner as he was able Jesus,
Jesus, Jesus, and continued still in the same till the last gasp, which of
such as beheld him was in a manner insensible, without any violent motion of
his body or contracting of his countenance, any writ^ing of his mouth, any
panges or gasps, in so still, quiet, and peaceable fashion as it seemed a sleep
rather then death, rather a mylde and voluntary passage, the^ a matter of
horror or dread, rather a Saint-like repose then a final departure out of
this life. He left this world the seauenteeth day of September, between six
and seven of the clock in the morning* wanting not three weeks of threescore
and nynteene years, for he was borne on the fourth of October being S. Francis
day, and dyed on the feast of the same Saint, dedicated to his sacred wounds,
which miraculously he had received; the solemnity of which feast the Cardinal
much labored with Paul the fifth, to have granted to the Religious of that
Order, with a special Office for that day.

His body soon after his departure by a secret way, for avoiding the resort of
people, was conveyed in coach to the Church of the Fathers, where he was to The
devotion and reverence showed to hi^ body.
be buried: and because as yet nothing was prepared for his exposing, it was
carried into a private chamber of the house with express order of debarring as
yet all access unto it: but there came so many to see and kiss the same, and
so great personages, as the prohibition was soon recalled, and leave granted
unto most to come. All kneeled thereat as to the body of a Saint, and with
great devotion kissed the same: some commended his learning, some his virtue,
all his mylde, loving, and most affable behavior: amongst the rest a great
Prelate on his knees kissed the thumb and two forefingers of his right hand,
which had written so much to the glory of God, good of his Church, and comfort
of many, no less then fifty times: and another not inferior to the former,
did the same after him; which devotion of people and Prelates continued until
it was an hour within night, and had done much longer, but that the Popes
Physician, together with his brother a Surgeon, came to open and enbalme the
body, who earnestly requested this office as a favor at the Fathers hands,
saying that they should both of them grieve much in case any other should do it.

As soon as they began the same, many were present with to wells,
handkerchiffs, He is embalmed and his blood saved and kept for relics.
sponges, and other linen to save the blod and preserve it for Relics, and
so Religiously industrious and diligent they were, as nothing thereof was lost:
the Physician himself in lieu of reward, cut away a little piece of the hinder
part of his which he esteems as a peerles Jewel and inestimable treasure:
the other three Physicians were already provided: for whereas in the beginning
of his sickness they prescribed that he should be let blood, and another time to
have horseleeches applied to dravv more; at both of these times they came with
clean handkerchiffs, and dipped, or rather dyed them in the blood, which by
them and others was so greedily taken, as that no drop remained; and the
Physicians were heerunto the more moved, for that besides the common report and
opinion of his virtue, they saw in this sickness such lively proof thereof, as
none of them had ever seen the like in any before, which they never cease to
admire and commend whenever any mention is made, or occasion given the^ to
speak of his sickness.

The next morning the Nobility and Gentry of the Congregation of our B. Lady
got his body into their Oratory, or Chapel, where being all assembled they
said the Office of the dead for him, two Gentlemen always standing at his head
to keep the multitude from kissing his bear face, permitting them only his
hands and feet. He lay on a fair hears^, vested like an Archbishop, with his
myter and pall, in so gracious manner as I never saw a fayrer corse, and the
same was said by very many that saw him. The Office being ended, the narrownes
of this place was not capable of so great concourse, and to avoid the
inconvenience of such press of people, the more have was made to carry him
into the Church, where being laid on a bed The wonderful devotion of the people
to his body, when it was exposed in the Church.
prepared for the same, there came to behold it, or rather to reverence and
worship it, as though, not the dead body of Cardinal Bellarmyne newly
departed, but either the body of S. Augustine, or S. Ambrose, or S. Athanasius,
or some ancient Doctor, Bishop, or Patriarch had been exposed and laid open
to be honored: and I know not what more devotion the people could have used
unto their sacred relics, then now they did unto the body of this Cardinal.

For they came not as ordinarily on such occasions they use to do, to gaze,
and see the pomp of the funerals (which here was very little) not to pray for
the party deceased, not to enquire of his heirs, his testament, his wealth,
his burial, or the like more curious then necessary matters; but to see as
they called him, the Saint, to pray unto him, to reverence his body, and that
in such sort, as if already he had been canonized: and for that it was now
placed higher then they were able to reach, and compassed by some of the Popes
Guard, and Macebearers of the Cardinals that came to be present at the Dirige,
they wearyed them all with giving their beads unto them, which the one on the
top of their truncheons, the other of their Masses, lifted up to touch his bare
face; and so many beads being given to touch, and that so continually without
any intermission, all looked or rather feared that his face would have been
disfigured therewith, for it was touched, as most conjecture by more then
twenty thousand pair of beads; and there had been no end of touching it, had
not the Fathers with help of the Popes Guarde after more the^ three hours
within night carried it away perforce, as presently shall be said: and
notwithstanding that the body lay aloft, was well guarded with troncheous and
halbardes, yet were there of these pious thieves so cunning, as that some of
them cut away pieces of his myter Great industry used to get relics of the
Cardinal.
that he wore, others the tassells and knots of his Cardinals hat, others the
skirts of his vestements, others other things; and what each could get with
great devotion he kissed the same, lapping it up in clean linen, silk etc.
and two Prelates brought each a short staff under his garment, and when they
came over against one the other at the lower end of the hearse, where the hat
lay at the Cardinals feet, they cast it off from thence very dexterously with
their staves into the bosom of one of their servant ready at hand to receive
it, who had conveyed it clean away, had not one of the Fathers by chance
espied him, who by help of the Pops Guard recovered it out of his hands, and
carried it into the Vestry. In fine had not his body been well guarded, I
think that neither hat, or myter, or vestement, or any thing else had been
left, and perhaps the very body it self had been taken away and deuiuided for
pious spoil.

And although his body were thus exposed in more plain and positive manner,
with less splendor and majesty then is accustomed for Cardinals: Great
co^course of Cardinals to his burial.
yet were his Exequies in other respects very honorable. For contrary to that
which both in his will he had designed, and desired of the General on his
deathbed to have no Cardinals present there at, there came so many as more have
not been seen at any burial: for excepting two or three for exceeding great
age, sickness, or some other business absent, all the rest were there, and stayed
until the very end of the office, which was performed by the General in his
Cope, and the Fathers of the Society: and further there was such resort as none
living ever saw more, or perhaps so many at once in that Church. When the
Office was done, to satisfy the importunate request of so many as desired it,
the body was taken down, laid on a Bear covered with black velvet, and
carried to the Chapel of our Blessed Lady in the same Church, not without a
strong Guard, where such as entered at one door passing out at an other gave way
for more to satisfy their desires; but it was not possible to satisfy all; for
though it remained there until after three hours in the night (as I said) yet
were the Fathers forced to send away many that were still flocking thither much
against their will, and not without main force of the Guard and others, that
commanded and compelled them out of the Church, and shut the doors, to their
no small regreet.

The multitude being excluded, the body was put into a plain coffin of wood,
and laid in the ordinary vault He is buried in a common vault.
where others of the Society are wont to be buried: therein condescending to
the Cardinals desire, who would needs lie with them in grave, with whom he
had lived, whom he had loved, and to whom for many years before his death he
would have returned, and ledd again a Religious life, under the common Rule,
with the resignation of his Cardinals Hat and dignity, if it might have been
permitted him, as I have been informed by one to whom he imparted his mind,
and would have used in the same; and my self have heard him very heartily to
wish it. But howsoever for some small time (for long as I hear it shall not
remain in that place) his body rest in a poor vault, yet his soul (...) yet
were his other noble virtues so shrouded under the mantle of Humility; as they
could not be seen in their perfect nature; and such as best knevv them, had
least list to speak them, lest them words might disclose what the Cardinal
would have to be secret: but now has that Glory overtaken him which he did
still eschew, and beat back with contempt of himself; now he who seemed
amongst the Cardinals to be inferior to all, is more honored then any: now
that the earthen pot of his mortal body is broken, the shyning lamp of his
virtues accompanied with the trump and triumph of fame, yield their light to
the world, and consound all malicious inventions of the Mad^anites. Now is
the candle no more laid Iud. 7.
under a bushel, but set on a Candlestick for all to behold: now is the
mouth of detractors stopped that would with their lies have blemished his
life, and disgraced his death many years ere it happened: now (will they, nill
they) truth shall trample falsehood underfoot, and the clear beams of
Bellarmynes virtue ouerbeare all slanderous reports of malignant
Sacramentaryes. Let them forge infamous fictions, let them print as they have
done most exorbitantlyes, let malice ma^cht with learning, arm their pens to
write reproach, yet shall all their force and fury fall to the ground, and his
name be renowned for ever. The warrant is sure that is signed with his promise,
who said by the Psalmist: In memoria ^ter^a erit iustus, ab auditionemal^ non
Psalm. 111.
timebit: the memory of the just shall remain for ever, he shall not fear any
ill report: and not only his life and death, but as the Prophet foretold of
Christ, Erit sepulerum eius gloriosum, even his sepulcher shall be glorious;
for thither now Isa. 11.
come many to pray, thereon daily they cast fresh flowers, thereof they speak,
that specially they respect: it was common before to many, but is now made
famous by him alone.

The Habit, as the Philosopher says, is best known by his Privation; the
dark night makes us more to esteem and value the clear day, and liberty is
always most grateful after a long restraint: so Bellarmines absence has made
his virtues more prized, and the sense and feeling which now all find in his
want, makes them with grief to recall to mind, what a treasure they had
whiles they did enjoy him alive. The Cardinals have lost the prime flower and
brightest star of their College, the Bishops a lively pattern of a true
Pastor; the Religious a perfect example of imitation; the learned a renowned
Docto^r; the poor a Father; the afflicted a comforter; the whole Church an
ornament; and to renew still his happy memory in their never dying affection,
many Cardinals, Prelates and others of great Nobility have carefully sought,
and always do seek for something of his; and so much is already gotten, as
besides his body little or nothing else is left. One Cardinal got his bed,
another his Missall, another his Diurnall, Farnesius his Bre^iary. What others
got either during his sickness or since his death were to long to write; they
got his dublet, hose, stockings, caps, linen, woollen, writings, pictures,
shirts, handkerchiffs; and what else they could procure, leaving him so
destitute of all things, as that the Fathers of the Society were forced after
his death to cloth him of their own, and to borrow a square cap of an other
Cardinal to put on his head (whiles his body for a day and night lay in a
lower chamber at the Casa Prosessa) his clothes and caps being either all taken
or given away before.

And not in* Rome only, but from other His Relique^ much desired by many.
places abroad many letters have been sent, and means used to get something
that had been his, which I let pass, setting down only the clause of one
letter written by a very worshipful Gentleman of our own Nation, residing in
Naples, which came to my hands as I was writing this Relation. The party wrote
it in Italian, that the General (to whom he is well known) might see it, and
in this manner. Son stato agrauato and questo con grandissima instanza della
Sig^. Duchessa di Santo Elia molto mia Signora, and Patrona, di sarli hauere
qualche cosa che sosse della felice memoria dell* Illustrissimo Sig^. Cardinale
Bellarmino; come a dire, qualche berettino di tela che ildetto haues^e portato,
o qualche part di vua sua camisia, e questo per la gran diuotione, che la
detta Signora porta al morto: and essendo bisogno, pregara N. N. in nome mio di
cooperare quanto sia possibile, di trouar qualche cosa per consolare la
diuotione di questa Signora. That is: I have been urged, and that with
exceeding importunity by the Duchess of S. Elias, my very good Lady and
Patroness, to procure hersom what of Cardinal Bellarmyne of happy memory;
that is to say, some linen nightcap which he has worn, or some piece of his
shirt, and this for the great devotion the said Lady bears toward the dead
Cardinal. And if need be, you may entreat N. N. in my name to help as much as
is possible to find out something to comfort the devotion of this Lady. So he.
And although that this letter came soon after his death, yet were all these
things either given, or taken, or stolen away ere it came, and her request
satisfied another way. Bellarmines behavior and carriage.


In fine, no man in Rome of his rank in the memory of any man living has dyed
with so general good opinion of all; no funerals have been celebrated with
so great concourse and honor; no sepulcher so much frequented* Two and twenty
years he lived Cardinal; forty a Religious man; he began betyme to bear the
yoke of Christ; was never wearyed; never sainted till the end. A man of such
lenity and meeknes, as he would offend none; of such candor and sincerity, as
he could not dissemble with any; of such kindness and courtesy, as he was
beneuolous unto all. Of temporal emoluments he was never moved with loss, or
delighted with increase; his wealth was the poor man's gain, not his own
profit; his loss their hinderance, not his hurt; to men of our Island as well
English and Scottish he always showed himself a worthy friend and special
benefactour; never denying them any thing that conveniently he could grant;
never sparing his labor, his pen, or purse to pleasure them as far forth as
he was able; of which I could allege very many examples, were not that field
to large, and this no place to recount them. Of all which, and whatsoever else
he did, we may now say, Laudant Prou. 31.
^um in portis opera eius, his works praise him in the gates; that is, at the
tribunal and Judgment seat of God, where their worth is valued, and their
valor rewarded, and he in his everlasting rewards glorious for all eternity.

Here if any out of a curious mind, should expect to hear somewhat spoken of
some miraculous event which has When the sanctity is singular there needs no
miracles to confirm it.
happened in, or since his death, for further confirmation of his sincerity: I
answer hereunto, that as the sanctity of S. John Baptist did sufficiently
warrant it self without any miracle at all, besides his miraculous virtues: so
the happy life and death of this Cardinal being such as they were, need no
other miracles then themselves for their proof. And to speak only of his
death, what was his invincible patience without the least sign of sorrow, or
syllable of complaint? what his security of mind ouerbearing all tentations?
what his purity of conscience without all mortal remorse? what his exact
Obedience without reply? what his reverent receiving of the Blessed Sacrament,
his constancy in faith, his devout death, but a miracle, or rather many
miracles in one? Who can esteem otherwise of his courage against death now
looking him in the face, when he desired it to draw nearer, to take him away,
then that it was miraculous? Unless he will contradict the judgment of S.
Bernard, who writing of his brother G(...)ds Bernard. (...) ^6. in Cant.
death, has these words: Acci^^s sum ad id miraculi, videre exult ant^m^n
mor^e (...)nem, insultantem morti. I was called to that miracle, to see a man
reioying in death triumphing over death. Truly this holy Cardinal, as you have
heard, so much rejoiced in death, as he had no other sorrow in his sickness,
then to think that it was further from him, then indeed it was, or greater
joy, then when he was to shake hands with it; the true effect of a well
prepared mind, for as Seneca says: mortem venientem nemo hilarious Epist. 30.
excipit nisi qui se ad illam diu compos^er^t: no man cheerfully imbraceth
death, but he that has long before prepared himself for it.

These things, I say, need no other miracle then themselves to confirm them.
For at S. Aug. says of such a one as would four hundred years after Christ see
some Aug. l. 22. de Ciui^t. Dei cap. 8. initio.
miracle that he might believe: Magnum ipse prodigi^m est, qui mundo credeme
prodigia adhuc inquiri^ vt credat: he is himself prodigious, who seeing the
world to believe in Christ, does yet seek for some miraculous wonder to
believe: So in The sanctity of Bellarmin very eminent and acknowledged by all
that knew him.
this case, seeing the former miracles, seeing the common opinion that all have
of his Holiness, seeing all that ever knew him, to have canonized him with
devotion to his body, or constant report of his integrity; seeing all his
writings to have been to confound heresy, to erect the banner of truth, to
comfort the faithful, to teach the ignorant, to advance virtue; seeing all his
actions to have been signed with innocence, to have proceeded from charity,
and by pure intention to have been directed to Gods glory or good of his
neighbor, without touch, spot, or reprehension in the whole course of his
life; he may indeed be thought prodigious that would further seek any other
confirmation, any other miracle, or miraculous proof; which I do not say to
condemn or any way extenuate the force of other miracles, God forbid, for
somtymes they are necessary, and here they are not wanting: but only to show
that eminent sanctity may prove it self by the clear beams of her own
beauty, without any any borrowed light derived from supernatural power, as it
did in S. John Baptist above mentioned, and many other Saints.

YET for further confirmation of this The time of Bellarmines death revealed
and foretold to Pope Gregory the xv.
particular, there are somethings reported, and not reported only but manifestly
proved to be mi^aculous. Or which that first occurreth to be remembered, that
the General, after the death and ^uneralls of the Cardinal repayring for
audience to this present Pope, Gregory the fifteenth, was willed by the said
Pope to read a letter which he took from of a little table and gave him, in
reading whereof, he found these words: Between the sixtenth and seauententh of
September, Cardinal Bellarmyne shall go to heaven, and as his Holiness
testified the writer of that letter, could not then when he wrote it, so much
as have heard of the Cardinals sickness: and indeed about midnight of the
sixteenth day he fell into his agony, and dyed the next morning. Although out
of humility the Writer desired to have his name concealed; yet does the thing
it self speak both Bellarmines sanctity, and thrice happy end, and the
singular virtue of the said party, and great union with God: for he could not
have known this but by revelation, no natural causes to one so far absent,
being able to yield so exact and punctual assurance in so uncertain a
casuality as is the life of man, which depends on so many, and those so
indeterminate circumstances, as are the means by which it may be either
contracted and cut off, or else drawn on to a greater length. This knowledge
alone appertains unto him, from who^ nothing can lie hid, and in whose hands
alone are all our lives, all momentes, all times, which by us can be no more or
less known, then it shall please his merciful Goodness to open and disclose
unto us.

The same morning that the Cardinal departed this life, his voice was He
reuealeth his own happiness.
heard to speak unto some in the City (of the number I am uncertain) and to
say unto them, Adio, adesso me ne vado in Paradiso: farewell, for even now I go
to heaven: which voice amongst others was heard of the Duchess of Sforza, a
very virtuous Lady now living in Rome: and one of the other who heard the like
voice did not at that time know that the Cardinal was in any danger of death
at all. The Virtue, Nobility, multitude of these personages, together with the
uniform report, is a sufficient warrant of their words. And even now (though
somewhat late) is come to my hands a brief Relation of a miraculous cure done
by a Relic of his, upon a Religious woman of the order of S. Bennet, called
Paula Landi, in the Monastery of our B. Ladies in Campo Martio of Rome. Thus
the thing fell out.

The said Paula the sixth day of October A strange and miraculous cure done by
a Relic o^ the Cardinal.
by a fall brake one of her rib-bones in such sort, as that one part thereof
did stand out, and the other was turned inward toward her breast; the pain she
felt was excessive, and withal her weakness was such, as she could not vest
herself, eat, or use her arm. The Surgeon in setting the bone right,
increased her pain; and besides the extremity of her bodily grief, she was in
wardly also very much afflicted in mind with the fear either of a continual
lamenes if she did recover, or with the long end^rance of that insupportable
torment which would have no other end, then the end of her life. Whiles she
remained in the perplexity of these afflicting thoughts, there was brought to
the Monastery a piece of linen, that had touched the Cardinals body, which
she desired to have, and when she had it, did apply the same to the wou^d much
swollen with the concourse of humors: then betaking herself to prayer, heartily
craved the intercession of the holy Cardinal; and lo in the space of one
hour she was delivered from all pain, could vest herself, walk, and do any
thing as before, in so much as on the Sunday following (for this happened on
friday) she served the rest at table, and at this present is as well able to
do any thing as ever she was before. And this the party has testified to my
self, who purposely got leave to speak with her about this matter; and not
only the said Paula, but others of her Order, who were present when I speak
unto her, did testify the same, adding further that all of the said Monastery
would do the like; and Paula herself wrote as much as here I report,
subscribed the same with her own hand, and sent it to the Fathers of the
Society of the Casa Professa, where the Cardirall is buried.

Since the former cure there has happened another, and that upon an Honorable
personage, to wit, the Lord Riuiullo Bishop of Bel-Castro. This man being much
afflicted with a pain in his sides, that wonderfully molested him, before he
would apply any medicine thereunto, called for a little red cap of silk,
which Bellarmyne did wear under his square cap, and confiding much in his
merits and intercession, touched those parts that grieved him therewith, and
incontinently he was cured, and fully delivered from all pain, as the said
Honorable Personage has testified and confirmed by his Oath, Hand, and Seal.
More in this kind I might write; but for that I have not such means to search
out their truth, as I think is requisite, ere they be thus diuulged, I leave
them to others to relate, who do better know them: and in the history of his
life which already is thought upon they will I doubt not be most faithfully
recorded, to the Glory of God, Honor of his Servant, and Comfort of others.
These things thus testified, I thought good to set down, which have so soon
happened after his death, because in part they confirm what before I wrote of
his holy life and saint-like departure. God grant us his Grace so to imitate
his Virtues, as we may shut up this our mortal and frail life, with so happy
an end. Amen.

Cardinal Bellarmyne was borne in the year 1542. the fourth day of October
being the feast of S. Francis. He entered into the Society of Jesus at Rome the
20. day of September 1560. He was made Cardinal the third day of March 1599.
he dyed in the Nouitiate of Rome the 17. of September 1621. being friday, and
the festival day of the holy wounds miraculously imprinted in the hands,
feet, and side of Saint Francis, 24. days after he had left the Court,
vvanting but sixteen days of threescore and nynteene years of age. He lived
in the Society before his promotion 38. years, five months, and thirteen
days; in his Cardinalate two and twenty years, six months, and fourteen
days: Cuius memoria in benedictionibus dulcedinis.

Exemplar Testamenti Illustrissimi Carainalis Bellarmini.
IN nomine Domini Jesus Christi. Ego Robertus Bellarminus Tit. Sanctae Mariae in
Via P^esbyter Cardinalis ex Societate Jesus assumptus, petij a Sanctae memoriae
Cleme^re Viij. facultatem condendi Testamentum ad pias causas tantum, vt certus
essem ea quae mihi decedenti bona temporalia superessent, quaeque dum viuerem
dispensari Pauperibus, vel Ecclesi^s non potuerant, vtpote meae sustentationi
necessaria, ad Pauperes, and Ecclesias redirent; concessit Pontifex indultum
Testandi general^us quam voluissem, ^ed non acceptaui, nisi ad pias causas, vt
petieram. Habetur hoc indultum inter alias Bullas mihi concessas, in mag no
folio pergameno cum plumbo, datum anno Domini 1603. sex to Idus Aprilis,
Pontificatus Sanctissimi Papae Clementis Viij. anno 12. Ergo hoc indulto
prae^upposito Testamentum condi^i Capuae cum esse^ Achiepiscopus eius Ciuitatis
deinde ^o abrogato aliud condidi Romae, sed propter circumstantias mutatas, hoc
secundo etiam abrogato, nunc iterum Testamentum condere statui, cu^ sim annorum
soxaginta nouem, and proximus vltimae diei, vt opinor, sed ment^, and corpore
per Dei gratiam been valens. Primum igitur spiritum meum in manus Dei
commendatum toto cord exopto, cui ab Adolescentia seruire desideraui, and
precor, vt me inter Sanctos and Electos suos non aestimator meriti, sed veniae
largitor admittat. Corpus meum, non apertum, nocturno tempore sine vlla pompa
ad Ecclesiam Societatis Ies^, vel Collegij Romani, vel Domus Professae deferri
volo. Et exequiae fiant per solos Patres and Fratres Societatis, sine
interuentu sacri Collegij, sine lecto sublimi, sine insignijs, vel flabellis,
eademque simplicitate, quae ceteris de Societate fieri ^olent. Et hac de re,
quam maxim possum sanctissimum Dominum nostrum humiliter rogo, vt desiderio
meo satisfaciat. Quod attinet ad locum sepulturae, libenter iacere corpus meum
voluissem ad pedes B. Aloysij Gonzagae, mei quondam spiritualis filij, sed
tamen Superiores Societatis vbi voluerint, corpus meum ponant. De rebus
temporalibus mihi a Sede Apostolica co^cessis, vel vndecumque acquisitis ita
dispono. Haeredem vniuersalem nomino, and instituo Domum professam Romanam
Societatis Jesus, in qua religione nomen dedi. Volo au^e^ vt primo soluantur
debita si quae fuerint, and iura ijs quibus debentur. Deinde dentur familiae ad
quadraginta dies more solito, quae ad victum pertinent, id est quod illis
taxatum est in pecunia propane, vi^o, and companatico. Neque aliud ^is
relinquere possum, cum ad solas pias causas Testamentu^ faciendi facultatem
petierim: and eadem causa singulis stipendium sieve prouisionem aliquam dederim,
praeter victum. Fratri meo secundum carne^, vel eius Haeredibus, restituatur
Imago, seu quadrum Clementis viij. Pontificis maximi. Nepoti ^eo Angelo, detur
Imago, seu quadrum Roberti Card. de Nobilibus, and vnum ex duobus quadris S.
Caroli Borromaei, and vna ex paruis Crucibus quas ad pectus gero cum reliquijs
inclusis. Collegio Romano restitua^tur Annalium Card. Baronij tomi sex, quos
mihi acco^modauit, vt eide^ dentur alij sex mei, nam cum hac co^ditione accepi
a Coll. sex primos tomos qui me^ nomine dati fuerunt Collegio eidem ab eodem
Auctore, vt post obitum relinquerem integru^ opus. Eidem Coll* relinquo vna^ ex
tribus Planetis pretiosis cum stol^ and manipulo, quam vol^erit, and omnia
scripta mea, and totum Bibliothecam, nisi Reuerendissimo Patri Generali
videatur Bibliotheca^ alicui alteri loco Societatis magis egenti applicare.
Sanctae Mariae in Via, qui titul^s meus est, relinquo vnam ex tribus Planetis
pretiosis, quam haeres meus dare voluerit. Aliud titulo meo non relinquo,
quoniam satis multum expendi in fabrica Ecclesiae, vt Fratres sciunt, qui hoc
ipsum petierunt loco paramentorum, quae illis emere constitueram. Reliqua omnia
bona quae quocumque modo ad me pertinent, seu pertinebunt, sieve immobilia, sieve
mobilia, sieve se mouentia, sieve iura, sieve credita, sieve sacra ad Cappellam
sieve profana ad vestiarium, vel cellas varias pertinentia, sieve pecunias
numeratas, sieve quaecumque alia, integra ad haeredem, id est ad Domum Professam
Romanam Societatis Jesus vt dictum est pertineant, volo; and in illis omnibus,
and singulis ipsam haeredem instituo, and nomino. Pro auxilio Animae meae nihil
relinquo, vel prescribo, quia parum admodum erit, quod ad Haeredem meum
perueniet vt existimo, cum ego cumulandis pecunijs, vel rebus pretiosis
acquire^dis numquam ope^am dederim; tum quia confido, imo certo scio no^
defuturam huic officio piam charitatem Matris meae, Religionis videlicet
Societa^is Jesus, vt pro alijs filijs suis numqu^ deest, and quemadmodum ego non
des^u toto vitae meae tempore pro defunctis Societatis sacrificia, and
orationes Deo osser^e. Executorem hu^s meae voluntatis nomino honoris causa
Illustrissimu^ and Reuerendissimum Dominum meum Cardinalem Aldobrandinum: labor
enim, vt existimo, nullus erit in executione Testame^ti huius. Relinquo aute^
ei^em Illustrissimo Domino meo id quod pretiosius nihil habeo, videlicet Cr^cem
ligneam reliquijs pretiosissimis refertam, quarum catalogus in scriniolo
cooperto holoserico rubro inuenietur.

Hoc Testamentum valere volo prioribus abrogatis, quae in omnibus and per omnia
reuoco, casso, and annullo, etiamsi hoc forte non fuerit cum debi
tissolemnitatibus factu^. id enim aperte concedit Bulla Summi Pontificis
Clementis viij. in qua mihi data est facultas testandi, etiam per simplicem
epistolam, vel scedulam manu mea subscriptam.

Ego Robertus Cardinalis Bellarminus vt supra dispono, instituo, lego, and
restor, non solum praefato, sed omni meliori modo. Die 23. Ian^arij 1611.

A Copy of the last Will and Testament of Cardinal Bellarmyne, made in the
year 1611.
IN the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. I Robert Bellarmyne Cardinal of the
title of our Blessed Ladies Church called This title was changed a year before
his death, and he made titular of S P^^xedes.
in Via, being promoted thereunto out of the Society of Jesus, desired leave of
Clement the 8. of holy memory, to make my will that my goods might be applied to
pious uses, that I might be sure that such temporal things as should remain
after my death, and such as vvhiles I lived, could neither be bestowed on the
poor or on Churches, as being necessary for mine own mayntena^ce, might
return unto the said poor and Churches.

The Pope gave me a more general grant then I desired, which I did not
accept, but only for bestowing them on good uses as I had desired. This Indult
or grant is amongst other Bulls granted me, in a great leaf of Parchment
sealed with lead, dated in the year 1603. the 8. day of April* and 12. year
of the Ponficate of the said Pope Clement.

This grant presupposed, I made my will at Capua whiles I was Archbishop of
that City: afterward that will being annulled I made another in Rome* but
the circumstances of things being altered, and that second also abrogated, I
determined now again to make my will, being of the age of threescore and nine,
and very nee^e as I imagine to my last day, but yet by the grace of God in
perfect health of body and mind.

First therefore I desire with all my heart, to have my soul commended into the
hands of God, whom from my youth I have desired to serve; and I beseech him,
not as the valewer of merit, but as a giver of pardon, to admit me amongst his
Saints and Elect.

I will have my body, not being opened, to be carried without any pomp to the
Church of the Society, either of the Roman College, or of the professed
Fathers: and let the exequies be made by the Fathers and brothers alone of the
Society, without concourse of the holy College (to wit of the Cardinals)
without any bed made alost, without arms or scutcheons, with the same
playnenes a^ is accustomed for others of the Society: and in this I do as
earnestly as I can humbly entreat his Holiness that he will satisfy my desire,

As for the place of my burial, I would gladly have had my body layen at the
feet of Blessed Aloysius Gonzaga once my ghostly child, but notwithstanding
this, let the Superiors of the Society bury it where they list.

Of the temporal things granted me by the Sea Apostolic, or gotten any To
the professed Fathers.
other way, I dispose in this manner. I nominate and make my general Heir the
house of the Professed Fathers in Rome of the Society of Jesus, of which Order
I was; but first of al I will that my debts be paid if there be any, and all
duties discharged to whom they are due: then for forty days (as is the
fashion) let there be given to my family such things as appertain unto their
diet, that is to say, so much as is allotted them in money for their bread,
wine, and victuals. I am able to leave them nothing else, because I desired
this leave of making my will, to bestow all I had on pious uses (as Churches
and poor people) and for that cause gave every one of them wages, or some
allowance besides their die^.

Let there be restored unto mine To his brother and Kinsman.
own brother, or to his heirs, an Image in a frame, of Pope Clement the 8. Let
there be given to my nephew Angelo also a little picture, in a frame, of Robert
Cardinal de Nobilibus, and one of the two, in frames, of S. Charles
Borromaeus. and one of the little Crosses which I wear about my neck with the
relics that are in it. To the Roman College.


Let there be restored to the Roman College six tomes of the Annals of
Baronius which it lent me, that other six of mine might be given to the same:
for on this condition I received of the College the first six tomes which were
given thereunto in my name by the Author himself, that after my death I
should leave them all his works entiere.

To the same College I leave one of my three best vestments with the stole and
manuple, which it pleases, also all my writings, and my whole library, unless
it shall please our most Reverend Father General to bestow the library on some
other House of the Society, that is more in need.

To our Blessed Ladies Church in To his first Titular Church*
Via, which is my titular, I leave another of my three best vestments, such as
it shall please mine Heir to give. I leave no more to that Church, because as
the Friars know I have been at great charge in building of the same; and they
requested that of me in lieu of other Ornaments which I had determined to have
bought them.

Whatsoever else does belong unto me, or shall belong, whether immoueables,
moueables, living things, whether duties or debts owing me, whether sacred
belonging to my Chapel, or profane belonging to my wardrobe, or to my
cellars, or other places, whether ready money or whatsoever else, I will as is
said, that all entiere apperteine unto the heir, that is to House of the
Professed Fathers in Rome: and I appoint and nominate the same for heir in all
and every of these things.

For the help of my Soul, I leave or prescribe nothing, because very For the
benefit of his soul.
little will come unto my Heir, as I suppose, seeing I never took care to heap
up money or to gather wealth: as also for that I trust, or rather know, the
piou^ charity of my Mother, to wit the Society of Jesus, will not be wanting to
help me, as it is never wanting to other of her Children, and as my self have
never been wanting all my life time, to offer Sacrifices and prayers for such
as were departed of the same.

I nominate, for honors sake my most Illustrious and Reverend Lord, Cardinal
The Executour of his will, and what he left him.
Aldobrandino, for the Executour of this my will. I hope there will need no
labor in the execution thereof: and I leave unto the same most Illustrious
Lord (then which I have nothing more dear) a vvoodden Cross filled with most
precious relics, the names of which he shall find in a little deske, covered
with red silk.

This Will and Testament I will have to stand in force, the former two being
annulled, which in all things, and for all, I revoke, make void, and
annullate, notvvithstanding that this Will has not perhaps been made with
wonted solemnityes (as the Law requires) for the Bull of Clement the 8. in
which leave is given me to make my will, does expressly grant me this liberty,
and further to make it by simple letter, or any other writing subscribed with
mine own hand.

I Robert Bellarmyne do dispose, ordain, bequeath, and appoint by Testament
as above, not only in the foresaid, but in any other better form whatsoever.
The 23. day of January 1611.

IN FVNERE ROBERTI CARD. BELLARMINI ORATION TARQVINII GALLVTII SABINI e
Societate Jesus. Habita Romae, in Templo Domus Professae eiusdem Societatis,
Idib. October. Anno. M. DC. XXI. Illustrissimo Principi ODOARDO CARD. FARNESIO,
Angliae Protectori etc. dica^a.

printer's device of the English College at Saint-Omer, featuring the seal of
the Jesuits or Society of Jesus, a sunburst containing a cross over the
letters IHS over three nails

Iuxta Exemplar impressum Romae, apud Alexandrum Zannettum, 1621.

SVPERIORVM PERMISSV.



Imprimatur, si videbitur

Reuerendiss. P. Mag. Sacr. Palate. Apost.
P. Episcopus de Curte Vicesg.

Imprimatur,

F. Greg. Donatus Magist. and Soc. Reu. P. Fr. Hyacinthi Petronij Magist. Sacr.
Palate. Apost. Ord. Praedic.

ILLmo. PRINCIPI, ODOARDO FARNESIO S. R. E. CARD. AMPLISS. Angliae Protectori
etc. Tarquinius Gallutius F.
QVAS in priuato Funere haud multis ante diebus ROBERTI BELLARMINI Cardinalis
exposui lauds, eas, Illustrissime Princeps, in tuo splendore proponam, ac
producam in publicum. Hanc opinor audaciae meae facile veniam dabis: qua^, vt
coniecturis assequor, ipse mihi^e beatorum domicilio tribuit Bellarminus.
Respuisset ille quide^ viuens hoc laudum suarum acroama, quod alioqui
mortalibus est ita iucundum: sed nunc, cum tam pium prohibere non potest
officium, si consuli posset mortuus, responderet haud dubie, placere sibi
virtutum suarum ornamenta tibi potissimum offerri, ac dedicari; Cui praecipuum
ipse semper honorem habuit; Cui libellum de caelesti felicitate pulcherrimu^
inscripsit; Cui etiam paulo ante obitum se debere professus est plurimum.
Hauserat hanc ille a maioribus suis haereditariam obseruantiam erga Nomen
istud, Domumque Farnesiam, egregiorum altricem hominum, virtutique bonorum
apertam semper, and ^ospitalem ex ea quippe cum alijs long plurimis, qui vel
sacram Se^atus augustissimi Purpuram, vel summum Christianae re^ Principatum
adepti sunt, ille quoque Marcellus olim prodijt, que Bellarminus and auunculum
habuit a genere, and virtutum suarum idoneum, quod imitaretur, Exemplar est
nactus. Hunc, inquam, aduersus Farnesiam gentem acceperat a suis quasi
translatitium amorem, ac reuerentiam: sed nominatim erga promeritum, ac
virtutem tuam sic erat effectus, vt qui faceret omnia temperate, in te vno
diligendo, obseruandoque modum habere non videretur. Et recepit quidem a te
parem beneuolentiae significatiouem, ac gratiam; cum Tu praeter ceteros
insignem hominis doctrinam, and sanctimoniam admiratus, non modo verbis
amplissimis eum semper ornaueris, sed eiusdem quoque in actu vitae postremo res
gestas singulas, ac pronunciata designari, notarique scripto volueris, quae
tibi proponeres ad imitandum. Quin id quoque merito gloriaris, quod tu, supremo
loco ab eode^ consecratus Episcopus, eorum clauseris agmen and numerum, qui
tantam in eo genere sunt adepti felicitatem. Est enim animo periucundum, a
sanctissimis, ac celebratissimis viris eiusmodi munus accipere, quod sacrum
nihilominus esset ac sanctum, quamqua^ nohis a gregarijs, and communi
sanctitudine praeditis hominibus impartiretur. Vtinam pateretur iustae modus or
ationis, hic a me percenser^ omnia, quae de Bellarmini sanctitate spectabili
cupis agnsocere simul enim obsequerer animo tuo, simul satisfacerem votis orbis
terrarum, qui praeclarum hoc virtutum omnium speculum vehementer exposcit. Sed
explebunt hoc manus alij, qui vitam bominis enucleate perscrutabuntur omnem,
quaeque sapienter ab eo, acrecte facta sunt opera, diligenter, accurateque
persequentur. Interim, Illustrissime Princeps, haec pauca deliba, and a me,
atque a tota Sodalitate nostra, quam impendio foues, vale plurimum, ac salve:
^eque Christianae Reipublicae orname^to and commodo diuturuum atque incolumem
praesta.

ORATION.
MAGNVM e Collegio Purpuratorum superioribus hisce diebus extulimus hominem:
magnum sane parentem, ac patronum amisimus: magnum ipsa Religio Custodem luget,
ac Defensorem: magnum, vt semel dicam, mihi video propositum argumentum,
ROBERTVM BELLARMINVM Cardinalem, Tutorem, Praesidem, Consiliarium, Senatorem
Christianae Republicae magnum. Mentiuntur haud dubie, ac saepe mortalibus
imponunt Mathematici quidam dolosa Chaldaeorum instituti disciplina, qui
diuinare se putant, ac futura praedicere: nec quisquam paulo sapientior est,
qui genus hoc hominum, vt dixit ille, consulentitibus infidum, sperantibus
fallax, qui malitiosam hanc artem commentis, and mendacijs illaqueantem
plurimos, vetari legibus semper, semperque retineri non conqueratur, Mirantur
tamen aliqui, cur ex fallaci doctrina, responsa quaedam fortuita sane, atque
inconstantia, sed euentum interdum habentia, vulgoque probata proficiscantur;
tum praesertim, cum totius anni futuras belli, pacisque vicissitudines, aeris
salubritatem aut luem, annonae pretium, pecudum vale^udinem aut morbos, hominum
in^eritus and ^unera, ex astroium notatione generatim, vniuerseque significant.
Q^am profecto non nullis admirationem in hunc Bellarmini decessum curiosius,
quam par esset, intuentibus, mouit nuper lustorum aliquis, qui p^onunciare non
dubitauerat, hoc anno vertente magnum e viuis esse demigraturum Antistitem.
Excita^at adeo plurimorum expectationem illa praedictio, perquirentium, Ecquis
ea Magni nominis appellatione designaretur ad obitum? Sed confestim ambigua
suspicione liberauit eorum animos exemptus e mortalium numero Bellarminus:
cuius tanta magnitudo nominis est, vt hunc demum es^e putauerint, cuius exitus
e vita fortuito fuis^et, and casu denuncia^us. Mihi quidem neque praedicttum
harioli, neque vulgi simplex ista probatur, and credula natio: ve^umtamen ex
illa interpretatione prorsus, id omnes existimasse, idque me posse, probantibus
vniuersis, ac iure contendere, Magni cognomentum multo sane magis in purpuratum
hunc Antistitem cadere debere, quam in eos, qui olim a magnitudine rerum
gestarum illum sibi titulum inuenerunt. Eum enim vere magnum dici posse, atque
hoc nomen in eo tantum modo poni debere crediderim, in quo virtus illa
deprehendatur, quae quoniam humano fastigio superior esse videtur, ac mayor; ab
officiorum praeceptoribus appellatur Heroica. haec autem non vna est militaris
illa fortitudo, quam poetae immanibus etiam, and truculentis hominibus interdum
attribuunt; sed ipsius quoque temperantiae, mansuetudinis, ac modestiae,
singularum denique virtutum apex, and extremitas vltima praeclaro illo nomine
cohonestatur. Nullis adeo virtutis Heroicae legibus inhibemur, quo minus hunc
sacri Senatus moderatissimum, ac modestissimum Patrem dicere Magnum excellenti
nomine debeamus; cum ipsis quoque lenioribus congruere virtutibus Nomen illud
Heroicum possit, si eum gradum eminentem, supremamque determinationem
attingant, quae non tam in homines conuenire videatur, quam in aliquos omni
humano captu, atque ingenio celsiores. Quamquam ne illius quidem fortitudinis,
cui solum Heroicum nomen imperitia poetarum impartit, si minus expressam vim,
certe similitudinem aliquam in hoc homine prorsus, omninoque considerabimus, si
eius intueri scripta illa volue^imus, quorum impressione bellum Christianae
Reipublicae perduellibus acerrimum fecit, facietque quoad litterae loquentur,
and monumenta stabunt, quoad erit humanum genus, quoad ipsa rerum vniuersitas
communi populorum omnium rogo, ac tumulo conflagrabit. Statuarum se poeta
Pindarus esse gloriatur, and dicit artificem: non tamen ea signa caelare, ac
facere, quae vel temporum, hominumue iniuriae sint obnoxia, vel motu careant,
ac vita, vel sua semper in basi, and loculamento consistant; sed carmina
condere statuis meliora, quae terras, ac maria peruage^tur, quae victoru^
coronas toto terrarum orb circu^ferant, quae nullis sint, aut belloru^, aut
temporu^, aut aliarum calamitatu^ procellis, ac te^pestatibus opportuna.
^lorietur hic etiam noster, ea se composuisse, ac reliquisse posteritati
armamenta doctrinae, quorum beneficio, ac vi, non in vna, vel altera terrarum
ora, non vno, vel altero tempore, sed vbique ac continenter implacabile bellum
cum deser^ortibus olim gesserit, geretque semper in posterum, vita quidem
functus, ac spiritu cassus, at in monume^tis illis aeternum spirans, atque ob
rem pro Christiana Religione felicissime gestam, ipsa nominis immortalitate
superstes. Sed vt planius, explicatiusque propositum attingam, ac ea, quae de
doctrina dicenda esse arbitror, in loco dicam, ac separatim, ita statuo: in
Bellarmino, quem iure Magnum appellari debere contendimus Antistitem, magnam
oppido fuisse sapientiam, magnam religionem, ac pietatem, magnam rerum
humanarum contemptionem, temperantiam, mansuetudinem, modestiam, ac
moderationem, ceteras denique virtutes huiusmodi faciliores etiam magnas; hoc
est ^as, quae communibus egressae finibus, humanum vicisse modum, mensuramque
mortalitatis omnem superasse videantur. Et quoniam doctrinae splendour eximius
in hoc primo vestibulo confestim occurrit, huius ego ductum aduersitoris vltro,
ac libentissime sequar, qui and clarissimam praeferet ceteris virtutibus in
itinere facem, and Heroicam in hoc homine laudem esse multo facillime
demonstrabit.

Ex honestis, bonisque Maioribus in vrbe Politiana, quod norunt vniuersi,
Bellarminus est natus; quibus vt ipse continuo moribus ac pietate respondere
studuerit singulis, multo se tamen similiorem exhibuit auunculo suo Marcello
Ceruino Pontifici Maximo, religiosissimo, doctissimo, ac prudentissimo Viro,
quem Christianus orbis tamquam e coelo per machinam in hoc Theatrum extemplo
demissum effuse gratulatus est, ex ^odem repent subductum vehementer indoluit.
Anno aetatis 16. nondum exacto, humanaru^ pertaesus, atque affectus fastidio
rerum, Sodalitatem hanc nostram infantem adhuc, and prope crescentem in cunis
precibus expe^ijt infimis: sed cu^ a patre ad explorandam animi constantiam in
quodam vico Ceruinorum attineretur, praeterqua^ quod, operi futuro praeludens,
ad paganos de Deo, deque Christiani hominis officio concionabatur assidue, in
consanguineorum etiam aequalium Academia, vbi aliu^ alij scriptorem
explicabant, orationem ipse pro Milone Ciceronis egregiam, atque vt antiquorum
aliqui loquuntur, orationum Reginam ausus est illa aetate puer interpretari.
quo tempore, vt eius quoque facultatis, in qua mirabili modo iuuentutis prodere
se solet ingenium, and amoenitas animi, specimen aliquod daret, carmen fundere
coepit, and bonum, and multiplex. nam cum alia multa latina, popularique lingua
poemata fecit, tum vnum, quod primum fuit, de virginitate praeclarum, and
eclogam, elegiamque de Rober^i Nobi^ij Cardinalis obitu long pulcherrimas;
quae in hominum honesta corona pronunciatae, non modo cum acclamatione sunt
exceptae, verum etiam auditae cum lacrimis. Cum hac indole post aliquod tempus
hanc Sodalitatem ingressus, illico coepit inter excellentia ingeniorum lumina,
quibus etia^ tum efflorescebat hic coetus, ita praefulgere, vt Philolosophicis
tantum imbutus artibus, necdum sacris initiatus, simul ad domesticos de
virtutu^ cultu statis ex more diebus verba faceret, simul humaniores in
Gymnasio doceret litteras, simul sacras explicaret in templo, tanta cum
approbatione, quantam ne ipsi quidem veterani promerebantur. In quo munere cum
Monti-Regali Cispadanorum Vrbi praeclaram initio nauasset operam, Flore^tiae
deinde, ac Patauij, tum denique Veneijs, in Vrbe Domina, prima nostrorum
hominu^ iam inde ab initio Societatis altrice summa^ consecutus est laudem: vbi
eum nobilissimi, disertissimique Senatores, quorum illa Respublica
florentissima, and singulari sapientia regitur, and abundat numero, non cum
admiratione solum audiuerunt e loco superiore dicentem, verum etiam ad extremum
opera perfunctum sua, and discendentem exosculari cum pietate voluerunt.
Paucissimi quidem fuere, tamen fuerunt aliqui ad militaria studia sic facti, vt
exercitus ante duxerint, and copias, quam aut in tirocinio fuerint, aut inter
gregarios stipendia fecerint: id quod nominatim contigisse Lucullo ferunt; qui
propter incredibilem ingenij magnitudinem subito ingressus est imperator in
Asiam, cum fuisset rei bellicae rudis ex Vrbe profectus. Sed quod in re
militari tam rarum exemplum est, id ego video in omni doctrinae laudae
Bellarmino adolescenti singulariter esse concessum. vt enim Augustinus omnium
illa genera rerum, obscurissimo ab Aristotele stylo descripta, nullo magistro
praeeunte percepit; sic ipse difficillimas quasda^, grauissimasque docere
aggressus arts, optimus repe^te magister apparuit earum rerum, quarum aut
nunquam, aut certe vix fuisset ante discipulus. Missus in Belgium est necdum
Theologiae cognitione penitus institutus in schola, nec vllis instructus
Ordinibus ex ijs, qui Sacerdotio praeparant viam; ita prorsus, vt necesse
habuerit Leodij minores omnes, and e maioribus, ac sacris vnum accipere,
reliquis autem Gandaui a Cornelio illo Iansenio, cuius in Euangelio laus, and
perfecta lucubratio est, aliquando fuerit insignitus. Et tamen illa aetate
iuuenis, ac ty^^ sacrarum interea monumenta literarum latina concione Louanij
sic interpretabatur in te^plis, in exedra Theologiam, excellentem illam,
diuina^que scientiam ita docebat, vt clamoribus vndique factis, ad eum
audiendum vtriusque re^ causa ab innumerabili multitudine cum pugillaribus, and
palimpsestis ex tota prouincia concurreretur. Hic videlicet, vbi nouitius
praeceptor inter imperatoria munera tam egregia rudimenta ponebat, meditari
coepit bellum, quod postea, and indixit animose, and suscepit ardenter, and
promouit constanter, and bona demum ex part profligauit aduersus Ecclesiae
transfugas, quibus in toto terrarum orb vix habet alios hosts Christiana
religio capitaliores. Vagabantur multis sane locis, and Christi fundum,
regnumque vastabant haec monstra, ferocitate formidolosa, veneno pestifera,
numero infinita. Repebant humi quaedam, mordebantque praetereuntes, quasi
dracones, and colubri per insidias: alia voluntabantur in coeno, nec extra
popinas, and ganeas egrediebantur: alia velut Harpyiae quaedam Angelorum illum
panem, and Regum delicias conabantur inficere: alia tamquam tauri cornibus,
pedibusque aras, ac Caelitum imagines euertebant: alia Regibus, ac Dynastis
infensa sanguine respergebant vrbes, templa, fora, loca omnia vulneribus, ac
caede cruentabant. Singula denique separatim ipsa per se monstra erant immania,
communiter, and coniunctim Hydram componere videantur, cuius vulnera
periculosiora essent, and foecundiora, quam sanitas. Non tamen est tanto
labor, periculoque deterritus hic Imperator: sed comparata sibi disciplinarum,
litterarum, linguaru^que omnium copia tanta* quantam ne multi quidem simul
homines assequi possent, classicum cecinit illud, quo tamquam ^eonis rugitu
perterrefactae minores belluae, ad meditandum effugium intra latibula se
condiderunt. Bezae quippe co^yphaei, atque antesignani repentino veluti sulmine
percussi e Geneuae gurgustio demum audita vox est, vi quadam diuina, and quasi
machina veritatis extorta; cum primo illo controuersiaru^ inspecto volumine,
vbi de Pontificis auctoritate disseritur, exclamare coactus est, Hic liber
enimuero nos perdidit. Eosdem alij quoque clamores emiserunt, ac lacrymas,
impe^dioque cogitare coeperunt, qua ratione ruinae possent occurrere, qua^ suis
imminere ceruicibus intuebantur. Confestim in Brita^nia certu^ excitauere
suggestu^, sedemque constituerunt a ceteris seiunctam, and propria^, ex qua
refelleretur accurate, ac sedulo Bellarminus. hoc enim confutato, putabant
arce^ omnem Catholicae religionis amoliri se posse; quemadmodum eorum vnus
scriptis ad Virum primarium hisce litteris haud dubie significauit: Gaudere se,
quod Bellarmini vulgata essent opera, quoru^ lectione planissime demu^,
certissimeque posset intelligi, quid in vnaquaque de religione controuersia
Romanae vindices Ecclesiae censerent, quaeque medulla esset Pontificij dogmatis
intima, quae non magis in ipso Pontifice, qua^ in Iesuitis (sic enim ipse
loquitur) esse crederetur. Infelicem, and eum, quem omnino merebatur exitum
nacta est tam insolens, ac putida diligentia: cum ex ea schola permulti de suo
iam dubitantes errore, plurimi quoque mutato plane consilio, atque ad veritatem
conuersi quotidie digrederentur. Intellexerunt adeo, frustra se demum conari
clauam illam infringere, quam Hercules haberet in manu: and iam tota Britannia
in eos, qui curiose obseruateque meditabundi cernuntur in via, common quasi
prouerbium dicitur, De Bellarmino refellendo, tamquam de Althantico mari per
cetylani exorbendo cogitare. Quin ita sibi persuaserant omnes; Bellarminum
statura procera, humanu^que supra modum eminenti praeditum fuisse natura; nec
ijs habebant fidem, qui testabantur hominem se Romae, alibique vidisse non ita
magnu^, ac paruo potius instructum corporis habitu, quam excelso. Neque enim
fieri posse putabant, vt praegrandi quoque statura, and corpore non esset ille,
qui animo, ac doctrina fuisset contra Gigantes istos, Titanasque Centimanus. In
summa, veritatis ineluctabilis est vis, frustraque testes adornantur aduersus
conscientiae iudicium, quod corrumpi, deprauarique non potest. Nam cum omni
lapide commoto, efficere se non posse cernerent, vt vel captionibus, ac
praestigijs, vel fictis etiam fabulis huius hominis eleuarent existimationem,
imminuerent fama^; coeperunt eunde^ ipsi quoque mirifice praedicare, verbisque
ac re illum plurimi pendere, quem aspernari sine sua vituperatione non possent.
Bataui quippe, sicuti nuper accepimus, in sua ipsorum publica bibliotheca
Bellarminum vel primu^ esse volunt, vel collocant inter primos: and alij, qui
aduersus eum scribere tamen aliquid audent, co^munem reueriti populorum
opinionem, eumdem co^mendant, vt nos ad hominem exornandum Oratores haud alios,
quam vituperatores istos quaerere debeamus. Placet istorum verba, quoniam
hostiu^ testimonia sunt, de scripto pene, ac volumine recitare* Magnum, inquit
eorum aliquis (Caecilium illum alloquens Angliae Quaestorem) magnum nomen
Bellarminus: de quo homine cum meam opinionem qu^reres, respondi vt sensi, me
illum iudicare virum sane doctum, ingenio felici, iudicio subtili, lectione
multiplici praeditum; qui soleret etiam apertius, ac simplicius agere, quam
ceteri, argumentum pressius vrgere, atque ad causam arctius adhaerescere:
cumque legisset omnes argumentationes, responsio nesque, selegit quas iudicaret
esse neruosiore^. Arduum sane opus, exclamat alius, Bellarmini quaestiones
illas infinitas in certa volumina relatas, admirans, arduum opus, quod exigit
scienentiam prope infinitam, non modo variarum disciplinarum, and linguarum,
sed etiam totius antiquitatis, omnium historiarum, ac temporum. multa isto in
opere, atque instituto peluti pila^as acts agmine facto oportet homini
^ccur^sse, cum in tantis rebus, argumentisque scientiam adeo multiplicem
desiderari putauerit, vt haereticos non vni^s generis, sed varia variorum
examina vna acie prosterneret. Auditis elogiu^ inimico profectu^ ex ore, ac
veritatem apertissima confessione de mendacio triu^phantem? euersos se,
prostratosque profitentur. sed ne solidum victori concedere gaudium videantur,
and se pythones isti, co^minuto iam capite, cauda tamen, ac reliquo corpore
commoueant, in huius partem laudis, ac gloriae collegas etiam vocant, quoru^
auxilio Bellarminus illa tam ardua monumenta perfecerit. non enim inducere
possunt animum, opus ita spissu^, tantisque difficultatibus impeditum vnius
labor hominis, ac studio confici, expedirique potuisse. Scio equidem hoc
co^mentum iugulatum esse nuperrime, viri doctissimi oratione, ac stylo, qui and
codices ex Romani Collegij bibliotheca produxit autographos Bellarmini manu
perscriptos, and vere, sancteque testa^us est, hominem se vidisse cum
quaestiones illas exararet, non modo nullis adhibitis eius laboris, operaeque
consortibus, sed ne amanuensibus quide^, aut exceptoribus accersitis, addam
tamen etiam ego symbolam meam, and istos, qui suo iudicio errare, ac decipi
volunt, inuitos sane, repugnantesque omni prorsus errore liberabo.

Est his, qui Bellarmini laborem, and gloriam cum alijs communicatam volunt,
ingenium, vt credo, mediocre, memoria fortasse non mala, doctrina, quae supra
litteraturam non attollatur, studium haud multum, comessationes,
compotationesque creberrimae, impietas in Caelites, in homines arrogantia non
ferenda: quibus cum moribus diuina se conciliare sapientia non potest, quae
modestis, ac bonis viris gratiam dare, ^uperbis elatisque se resistere
profitetur. Bellarmino fuit ingeniu^ singular, ordine ^ucido perspicax,
versatile, factu^ ad omnia; memoria, vt semel dica^, pene diuina, quae quicquid
^egeret, scriberetque statim, ac subito reciperet, quicquid recepisset,
fidelissime, constantissimeque retineret. Fuit studium ita pertinax, and tam
insatiabile, vt, non dico diem sine linea, sed ne momentu^ quidem te^poris
elabisine operae pretio pateretur; te^perantia vero incredibilis, vigiliae
plurimae, pietas, animique demissio disciplinarum studio mayor. Vultis igitur
acutissimi Silones ex me discere quid causae sit, cur ille aduersum vos, hoc
est aduersus impietatem, sine socijs, auxilijsque scribere potuerit opus, quod
tam multa librarijs era meretur, quod in sola Germania vigesima^ habet
editionem, quod immortalitate^ sibi iure pollicetur, quod cum fieret, multorum,
vt dicitis, and creditis ipsi, defatigauit ingeniu^; vos autem collato studio,
longoque post tempore librum proferatis in luce^, vel non magnu^, vel quatu^uis
magnu^, certe non bonu^, and qui vix natus exarescat, Principum edicto
proscriptus, atque obliteratus incendio? vultis inquam id ex me nosse? possum
enim hoc vobis oraculum facile reddere, totumque Sibyllae folium vno verbo
recitare. Cum vos in viola decumbebatis, and pluma, ille vigilans, ac pro
religione velut excubias agens, in rerum diuinarum, humanarumque contemplatione
versabatur. Cum vos in voluptatibus eratis, and procuratione corporis, ille
temperantia, ieiunioque oblectans animum, vel in Patrum sanctissimoru^
legendis, euoluendisque monumentis erat totus, vel feriatus a studio cu^
superis colloquebatur and Deo* cum vestris vos innixi viribus and ingenio,
stylum in Ecclesiam, hoc est, in Christi corpus armabatis; ille sibi diffisus,
ac doctrinae suae, tela preparabat quae regereret in aduersarios, pia plus
precatione, quam lucubrationibus and vigilijs, plus modestia, quam minis, plus
commodorum omnium despicientia, quam rerum copia communitus.

Sed hae nimirum illae virtutes sunt, quas in Bellarmino fuisse summas huius
orationis initio dixi. pergam igitur, atque a doctrina gradum faciam ad ea,
quae cum illa singulari scientia vinculo prorsus admirabili, ac perdifficili
copulatione coniunxit. Quam enim arduum sit, leniores quasdam, mansuetioresque
virtutes doctrinae praestabili, and rerum omnium cognitioni subnectere, scimus
omnes, qui literarum aliquo color leuiter aspersi, necesse habemus assidue
spiritus, atque animos premere, hoc est cauere, ne nobis ipsis sapientes nos
esse videamur ideo, quod supra vulgares, atque imperitos homines plus aliquid
intelligamus. Neque vero illam hic ego vitae partem attingendam puto, quae
nondum iniecta purpura, sed ^uce tantummodo lucebat sua: cum sit eius
conditionis ita propria moderatio, and rerum humanarum contemptio, vt quamquam
dicere singularia possum, nihil tamen^ praeter modum adimrabile me dicturum
esse confidam. Sin antem ex accessione purpurae. non modo nihil eum de
modestia, deque animi demissione, nihil de felicitatis, ac rerum omnium
despicientia remisisse, verum etiam eas virtutes auctiores long fecisse, ac
meliores ostendero, aliquid sine dubio proferam in medium ab ea vitae,
fortunaeque mutatione vehementer abhorrens. Vt enim hic ordo Purpuratorum
illustrissimus omnis plane moderationis, omniumque virtutum sua sanctitate sit
custos; splendorem tamen haberet eiusmodi, qui perstringat interdum virorum
quoque bonorum aciem, habet tantam supremo cum honor propinquitatem, vt animum
alioqui firmum, ac stabilem possit aliquantulum eius cupiditate labefactare.
Sed non labefactauit animum eius, qui purpuram illam, hoc est, honorem primo
proximum tam ingratis accepit, quam alij sitienter expectant, qui tacitum, and
quietum plus amaret o^ium, quam alij turbidam, inquietamque felicitatem, qui
fastigium omne dignitatis, and culmen finitimum putaret esse ruinae locum. Erat
iam Bellarminus, quamquam ipse frequentiam fugeret, hominumque notitiae
subduceret se, nomine celebratissimus, and fama* fuerat iam olim a Cardinale
Borromaeo Sanctissimo, quem nunc aris colimus, and sacris, expetitus ardenter,
frustraque Mediolanum e Belgio, Prouincialibus enixe repugnantibus, accersitus.
fuerat a Sixto V. Pont. Max. cum Henrico Cardinale Caietano Legato difficili
sane tempore missus in Galliam. fuerat ab alijs deinceps in dubijs de religione
quaestio nibus saepe consultus. a Clemente Octauo diligi, honorarique praeter
ceteros, ac multo maxim videbatur. Animaduertebat ipsemet eius in se
Pontificis illustria quaeda^, and peculiaria beneuolentiae signa: sed vir
antiqui moris, ac probitatis suspicari sero coepit, ad Purpuratoru^ ordine^
amplissimum se destinari. Pestem adeo sibi ratus imminere, admonet de
suspicione sua communem familiae nostrae Praesidem, ac Rectorem in tempore,
oratque vt tantum periculum a se, ac propter exemplu^ a tota quoque Sodalitate
defendat. Dum sibi, dum publicae rei tanto cum studio, ac sollicitudine cauet,
ecce tibi qui eum nunciarent Cardinalem esse iam factum, vetarentque domo pedem
efferre, nisi ab eius voluntate discedere vellet, cuius imperio traheretur ad
purpuram. Diceres afflatum sidere pestilenti, non ingrato nuncio verberatum.
latebras meditabatur, and sugam, antiqua proculdubio renouaturus exempla, nisi
fuisset aliorum iudicio, atque auctoritate prohibitus. Quippe animi dubious,
inopsque consilij, sapientiores Patres, and doctiores, quorum ipse in
Poenitentiario Diui Petri Collegio Praefectus erat, ac Moderator, in
consultationem accitos anxie percontatur, Ecquid sibi faciendum in illo
te^poris, ac rerum articulo censeant; remansionemne suadeant, an tacitam ad
Pontificem abitione^, vt de suo eum dolor, deque Sacramento, quo eiusmodi
vetabatur honorem capessere, faceret in priuato colloquio certiorem. Respondent
ad vnum omnes, id integrum non videri, nec esse deliberationi locum, vbi
praecepto tam amplo ad resistendum domi cogeretur. Abit e concilio tristis: and
quoniam clausa videbat effugia, quaerere molimina coepit, certo ad
Aldobrandinum Cardinalem homine dimisso, qui aditum ad Pontificem suo nomine
postularet. Cu^ ne iacta quidem hac ancora solum co^prehenderetur, eundum fuit
in coetum, vbi ceteri Collegae hominem operiebantur. Antequam de more
tonderetur, antequa^ noui ordinis indueretur vestibus, diu, multumque laboratum
est. Itum perfectis omnibus in coenationem ex more, vbi gratulationes erant,
velut in natalitijs epulis, and laeta colloquia. solus ipse interea lugere, ac
lacryman, solus angi, and fortunam complorare suam, tamquam in silicernio
funestorum esset, non in conuiuio Purpuratorum. Ductus denique cum reliquis ad
Pontificem, cum sui consilij rationem atque impedimentum, quo ab honor delato
prohiberetur aggressus esset exponere, indicta contumaciae poena, nisi
desisteret, ac silere continuo iussus, ceruicem aliqua^do supposuit iugo, quod
citra lethiferi peccati culpam detrectare non poterat. Libenter haererem hoc
loco, vbi magnanimae contemptionis offendimus exemplum ita rarum, vt gloriari
pene possimus, hoc nostro saeculo natum esse. libenter, inquam, hic immorarer,
nisi virtutes hominis antiquas in hoc honoris gradu retentas, amplificatasque,
nisi nouas etiam expositurus esse^, quas in idonea proposuit scena, suoque
velut in lumine collocauit.

Principio, quemadmodum in commentario legi, quem suo ipse chirographo
consignatum reliquit, id apud se certissimo decreto sancitum voluit, vt
pristini parsimoniam victus, piaeque consuetudinem precationis, ac ceteram
viuendi rationem antiquam perpetuo retineret: deinde, vt nullos a Pontifice
redditus, prouentusue peteret annuos, nulla prorsus a Principibus acciperet
munera, quibus occaecantur etiam lyncei: tum, vt nullas sibi pararet opes,
quibus affines, and consanguinei redderentur opulentiones. Quae profecto quam
exaggerate, cumulate que praestiterit omnia, duorum and viginti decursus
annorum, semper aequabilis, ac similis sui, sanctissima demum innocentis vitae
conclusio declarauit. Quod enim attinet ad diuinarum commentationem rerum, ac
pias preces, numquam commisit, quin eius studij causa de nocte consurgeret, and
^ecit semper, vt ad veterem vsum aliquid plus temporis, and vacationis
accederet: quod ad cibi, vitaeque degendae modum; and cum priori temperantia
ieiunia singulis hebdomadis ^erna coniunxit, and a generali Societatis nostrae
Moderatore legem efflagitauit, qua s^pellectilem, familiam, instrumentum omne
domesticum veluti certissima regula metire^ur. De prouentibus autem quam nihil
omnino laboraret, alias quidem semper, sed tunc maxim demonstrauit, cum post
accepti honoris initia, nullis ipse copijs instructus, debenti pensionem
Episcopo non copioso remisit tota^, condonauitque minime rogatus in perpetuum,
and Clementi Pontifici opulentum ei, quod primo quoque tempore suppeteret
sacerdotium pollicenti constanter affirmateque respondit^^ quicquid hoc esset
diuitiarum, and opulentiae alijs se libenter, vltroque concedere, sibi
sportulam, and cubiculum in ea Societate, cuius etiam tum pars esset aliqua,
deesse non posse. Suscepit ille quidem aliquando Capuae Sacerdotium, and
quoniam ita iubebatur, eius ciuitatis Antistitem se passus est fieri: sed vtrum
in eo quaestum pecuniae, an animarum facere compendium vellet, ab ijs
intelligite, qui totam eius muneris ineundi, procurandique rationem in hunc
modum exposuerunt. Principem Vrbis aedem, ipsamque domum Archiepiscopi male
materiatas, and squalore obsitas haud mediocri sumptu primo loco refecit, nec
festum vllum ire sinebat diem, quo non ipsemet in templo concionem haberet.
Deinde numero familiarum descripto, quarum vel angusta res esset, vel grauis
inopia, singulis mensibus certa pecuniae summa subleuabat singulas: denique vt
ne ijs quidem deesset, qui vicatim, oppidatimque stipem emendicant, iussit in
ipso domus atrio, vestibuloque diribitores esse, qui petentibus aduenis
quotidie cibatum, ac nummos impertirentur. Atque hoc institutum in obeunda
quoque prouincia, and ditione, quam singulis omnino lustrabat annis, per pagos
vbique concionabundus, accurate retinuit; neminem vmquam passus abire vacuum ex
ijs, quos aliqua premi rerum egestate cognouisset. In quo genere quoniam vnum
videtur esse, quod exponi solitary velit, ac separatim enarrari, non
committam, vt temere cum ceteris inuoluatur.

Nihil in tota sui muneris administratione prius habuit, aut antiquius, quam vt
corrigeret populoru^ capita sacerdotes: inter quos cum vnu^ offendisset alea
iam infamem, and talo, nec vllis aut verbis aut minis reuocare posset ab
angiportis in templum, rogauit hominem quid esset causae, cur tam impotenter ab
aris, and sacrificio ad alueum raperetur, ac pyrgum. Responder, rem sibi domi
curtam esse, nec facile, nisi per ludum consulere posse rationibus suis.
Extemplo (videre mansuetudinem ne dicam, an liberalitatem Antistis?) extemplo
numerata pecunia, omnem illi quaestum, ac lucrum aleae repraesentauit,
imperauitque, vt quoties tantumdem, aut plus e^iam argenti vellet, toties ad
accipiendum sine rubore, ac verecundia reuerteretur. Emendatus ille confestim
(quis autem ea charitate non emendaretur?) emendatus inquam, and redditus
exaleatore sacerdos, toti ciuitati miraculum fuit. Ne aliud quidem huic omni ex
part persimile obtegi silentio, aut negligenter, and per incuriam praeteriri
potest exemplum* est enim hoc etiam spectabile, non liberalitatis modo, sed
etiam charitatis, ac mansuetudinis argumentum. Externus quidam, profugus, ac
vagus ementito cum habitu, impuraque ad latus adiuncta pellice sacerdos, sieve
casu, sine consilio delatus est Capuam. vbi deprehensus, and patefactus, qui
carceres, ac triremes expectare merito poterat, abstractus a meretricula,
poenitentia lustratus, toga demu^ indutus, ac pallio, reperit apud Bellarminum
Antistitem eam animi salutem, ac vitae, quam ei diuturna illa, and erratica
desperatio denegabat. Accipite vero nune, non dicam probabilis auaritiae, cuius
ille vel vacuum nomen aduersabatur, sed piae cuiusdam cupiditatis, and
parsimoniae genus. Veniebat cum ceteris sacerdotibus in odaeum, canebatque
quotidie, non ea tantum gratia, vt alijs praeiret exemplo, verum etiam, vt
quoniam Capuae Archiepiscopus ex instituto veteri Canonicus item est, sua ipse
quoq, diurna stipendia, quae pauperibus elargiretur, excerperet. haec enim quia
priuato illo labor, tamque studioso parabat incommodo, dicebat vere,
proprieque se dare desuo, cetera, que capiebantur ex sacerdotij fructibus, ex
alieno se dare sibi videbatur. Non possum omnia persequi, nec vna tantum
oratione complecti, quae per hoc benignitatis, ac misericoroiae studium edidit
opera commemoratione, monumentisque dignissima sempiternis. De^ratiam omnis
pecunia, exhaustus prope iam erat ipse liberalitatis ac beneficentiae fundus:
non aerarium, quod ei nullu^ vmquam fuerat, sed horrea, cellae, pro^ptuaria
vacua iam erant, and inanianeque enim ille cibaria, non veste^, non culcitram,
non pallia superesse domi patiebatur. Reclamare omnes oeconomi, and rei
familiaris administri monere serio, ne viatici quidem aliquid reliquum esse ad
habendum in Vrbem iter, cuius, extincto Clemente Pontifice, propter futura
comitia necessitas impendebat: cum ille interea id solum ad ^a monita
respondere satis haberet, auersari se superuacaneam secuturae diei
prouidentiam, nec sibi quicquam odiosius esse, quam quae veritatis oraculo
damnaretur, de futuro, ac de crastino cogitationem. Et quoniam hoc Christi
Seruatoris effatum firmissime consignauerat animo, eam perpetuo retinuit ad
obitum vsque consuetudinem, ac disciplinam, vt Calendis Ianuarij, cum accepti,
datique consuluisset ephemeridas, erogari continuo iuberet quicquid ex anno
priori superesset. Neque enim eum annum auspicari se rite credebat, qui domum
suam omni spoliatam viuendi presidio non inuenieret. Et dubitabimus, vtrum
illud quoque promissu^ exsoluerit, quod tertio loco tum fecit, cu^ statim inter
Amplissimos Patres adlectus, secum ipse, ac Deo test sibi proposuit, nullas se
collecturu^ opes, quibus agnatos, ac posteros opimaret? O Testamentu^ illud
tuum, Bellarmine, pulcherrimae testimonium temperantiae, ac paupertatis! Vultis
hic ego resignem tabulas, quas decimo circiter ab hinc anno confecerat, and
supremam hominis innocentissimi voluntatem, asse^que pronunciem totum? Corpus
meum, inquit, efferri iubeo sine designatoribus, and pompa; nec in edito lecto,
sed in humili, vulgarique feretro collocar^ volo, nullis ornatum insignibus,
aut flabellis. Non potuit huic obtemperari mandato, quia Pontifici Maximo visu^
estaliter: sed profecto quemadmodum imperarat, faciendum necessario sic
fuisset, nisi eius haeredes inopiae, qui domus huiusce fuerunt Patres, tum ad
alia multa, tum ad haec etia^ iusta peragenda nonnihil ex corrogata stipe
contulissent. Ad expiationem animae meae nullam ego designo, legoque pecuniam,
cui cogendae, cumulandaeue nullis vmquam temporibus operam dedi: sed spero,
scioque mihi non defuturam Parentem, Altricemque meam Sodali^atem illam, cuius
ego defunctis socijs pro mea virili part non defui. Fratri meo, (erat enim tum
superstes) huic aute^ fratri suo quid expectatis, aut opinamini relicturum
esse? apud argentarios, and redemptores pecuniam? domi signa marmorea, vel
auream veste^? foris oppida, vel latifu^dia? o alienissima Bellarmini a co^muni
mortaliu^ cogitatione consilia! Fratri meo reddi volo pictam in tabula Octaui
Clement is effigiem. haec est tota legati summa, ho^ fraternae monumentu^
opulentiae, tam parui restitutio co^modati. Angelo nepoti meo (viuebat hic
etia^, cum testamentu^ conderetur) dari iubeo pictas tabulas duas, alteram
Roberti Cardinalis de Nobilibus, altera^ Diui Caroli Borromaei, and argenteam
crucem Sanctoru^ distinctam ornatamque reliquijs, quam e collo pensilem gerere
mihi mos est. Ne huic quidem, aut ceteris aliquid amplius testamento relinquit.
Supersunt enim alij ex paterno, maternoque genere probae indolis adolescentes,
quos indonatos propter inopia^ esse permittit, nec aliqua part huius, quae
nulla propemodum est, haereditatis aspergit. Sed ire sininite iuuenes optimi,
quae fortunae rapit iniquitas, and inconstantia. magna vobis a patruo,
auunculoque vestro traditur, and legatur haereditas, qui tanta cum omnium in se
beneuolentia vixit, tanta cum gloria decessit e viuis. Vidistis qua^to sensu
diligeretur ab omnibus, quanta mortaliu^ omnium commend atione celebraretur.
vidistis in morbo supremo adeuntem ad illum singulari cum amoris significatione
Pontifice^. vidistis ad eius genua primarios accidents viros, manu^
exosculantes, aliquid religionis causa deposcentes ex ijs, quae ille vel vsu
tractaret, vel gereret corpore. vidistis denique illo demortuo, totius in hoc
templu^ Vrbis Romae concursu^, vndamque populi, militum perrumpentis custodiam,
and corpus, aut lectum manu contingere gestientis. Huius vos amoris, and
gloriae ab eo, si nescitis, absque testamento, and syngrapha scripti estis
haeredes, in huius vos assis, and patronij partem venitis; quam, si sapitis,
Attali conditionibus anteferre debetis. Quemadmodu^ enim improbi parents
nullam perniciem, pestemque creant maiorem liberis suis, quam cu^ odium sibi
conflant, and maleuolentia^ popularem; sic innocents, and boni maiores nullam
tradunt posteris opulentiorem haereditatem, quam cu^ Principu^ sibi demerentur
amorem, and beneuolentiam ciuium. Has videlicet opes ipsi vos ab illa pauperate
decerpetis: demonstrabimini praete^euntium digito: relegetur in ore vestro
Cardinalis optimi dignitas, and maiestas: diligetur in idol virtus, ac
sanctitas; ipsa demu^ in vos, nisi degeneres esse volueritis, honoratissimi
patrui promerita redundabunt.

Ceterum iniuria virtutum sit, in eo magnopere diuitiarum, opumque
contemptionem admirari, quem excellentiora bona quaedam, and potiora, hoc est
summum honorem in terris, ac vitam ipsam scimus incredibili magnanimitate
neglexisse. Dixi de hon^ris despicientia sane multu^, cum demonstraui, quanto
cum sensu, ac dolor se passus est inter Purpuratos adscribi; sed dicenda sunt
ampliora. Neque enim ex eorum numero Bellarminus fuit, qui cum honores ingratis
acceperint, in acceptis deinde, quae humanae mentis est inconstantia, sibi
placere paulatim incipiunt, and maiores vehementius expetere, quam minores ante
repudiassent. Non hanc ille moru^ dissimilitudinem, ac varietatem vmquam
ostendit: sed eodem vultu semper honore^ intuitus, quo eum olim repugnanter
accepisset, auditus est aliquando cum diceret, sibi videri fla^mas aspicere suo
corpori circumfusas, cum se mitra indutu^, and purpura contemplaretur. Quin a
probatissimis ego testibus accepi, atque abijs ipsis, quibus cum animi sui
consilia communicauit, sedulo de se abdicando, deponendaque purpura
deliberasle; nec ante destitisse, quam intelligeret, splendide sane, atque ad
aucupanda^ sanctimoniae ^amam apposite, sed frustra, cassoque conatu id se
petiturum, quod ne Petro quidem Damiani prorsus, omnique concessum fuisset ex
part. Tanta quippe dignitas, ac sanctitas huius purpurae putatur esse, vt
inter res illas euanidas, ac fluxas, quibus ad seuerioris vitae ratione^
quaerendam remitti nuncius a pijs, ac religiosis hominibus solet, numerari non
posse videatur. Quae profecto causa Cardinales olim impulit, vt cum Ardicinus
secundus a Porta, ordine hoc amplissimo relicto, digressus esset ad Monachos,
ab Innocentio Pont VIII. qui eam illi veniam inuitus dederat, vt reuocaretur in
Collegium, quotidianis and precibus, and querimonijs efflagitarint.

Vnus tamen est in hoc honoru^ curriculo scopulus, quem paucissimi
praeternauigant; vnu^ illicium est, quo etiam callidi capiuntur, ac boni;
vltimus ille mimiru^ gradus, and suprema potestas, qua partibus explentur
omnibus ipsa vota mortalium. quippe animus etiam moderatus, ac temperans causas
sibi videtur habere probabiles, cur apicern illum exoptet, in quo grauissimi
Patres, and prima illa sanctitatis antiquae lumina prolapsionem, casumque
reformidarunt. Sed hic scopulus, and breuia, hae tam artificiosae periculi
latentis illecebrae illum fallere non potuerunt, qui and curiose discrimina
perpenderet omnia, and nihil in humanis, nisi quod est humile, tutum putaret,
and nominatim ab illo culmine sibi timeret ta^quam a saxo naufragijs opportuno.
Pronunciabat enim definiendo, idque crebris vsurpare sermonibus solitus erat,
Pontificiu^ munus laborem periculosissimum, ac periculum laboriosissimu^ esse.
Et quia circumspecti, ac suspiciosi gubernatoris est, etiam ea, quae non
eueniunt, sed tamen accidere possunt, animo secum ante peragere, dixit
aliquando, gaudere se, quod qui ad purpurae dignitatem ineuitabili praeceptione
fuisset, ac necessitate compulsus, ad supremum Ecclesiae Sacerdotium adigi non
posset imperio; cum tantu^ praecipendi ius in interregno quemadmodum
existimabat ipse, sit nemini. Sic enim paratus erat ad id quoque muneris,
honorisque repudiandu^, vt putaret, Cardinalium suffragatione omnium, ac
volunate se cogi non posse; in ea tantum opinione decipi se passus, and
monitorem, quem etiam audiuit, hoc vno loco requirens, qui scriptis, ac
doctrina totum terrarum orbem instituisset. Cum hac ergo praeparatione,
munimentoque Conclaue primu^ ingressus, cum officij causa Patres Amplissimos,
vt occasio sese dabat alloqueretur, and salutaret aliquos, admonebat, ne sibi
clauum Ecclesiae traderent, qui genus duceret a maioribus aetate longaeuis, ac
viuacissimis: periculum subesse, ne Pontificem viderent nonagenarium. Altius
haec in aliquorum pectus descendere poterant, quam quae facete dicuntur, and
commode. tanta tum quippe res agitur, vt nulla prorsus vrbanitas omni vacare
periculo queat. Sed tamen ipse loquebatur ex animo, and per iocum illum a
deliberatione, si qua foret, serio Patres deterrere voluisset, quemadmodum
dictis disertissimis, ac re postea significauit. Nam and precibus a Deo inter
Comitia contendebat assiduis, vt se a tam edito fastigio procul auerteret; and
cum Cardinalis quidam, grauitate, doctrina, religione spectatissimus ei
diceret, in illo Conclaui, agi de ipso iam coeptum ad Pontificatu^ euehendo,
suamque propterea in opus tam salutare diligentiam, studiumque deferret, non
modo nullis hominem prosecutus est gratijs, veru^ etiam enixe rogauit, ne, si
saluum se cuperet, quicquam eiusmodi, sed alia omnia moliretur. quin
articulatim, ac distinct subiunxit, se profecto Principatum illum abnuere, and
sic esse paratum, vt ne stipulam quidem, quae tum forre iacebat humi, ad eum
consequendu^ honorem tollere loco vellet, aut commouere. Sed numqua^ in eo
clarior apparuit huiusce neglectus Imperij, quam cum suo quoda^ munere
perfunctus, quod Praefectos aliquos offendisset Regios, and Potentes and
Magnos; admonitusque a familiari per litteras, vt videret etiam, atque etiam,
ne quid ageret suis aliquando rationibus obfuturum, habere se gratiam amico pro
beneuolentiae significatione respondit, verumtamen ipso Sacerdotij principatu,
ad cuius adeptionem sui functionem muneris impedime^to futuram intelligeret
interpretando, nihil omnino se commoueri; immo diserte se Pontificem esse
nolle. si quid grauius minis illis intentaretur, Marcelli Ceruini se nepotem
esse minime degenerem, qui cum Cardinalis esset, Tridentum a Romano Pontifice
ad cogendum, regendumque Concilium allegatus, ne proposita quidem a Caesarianis
acerbissima nece deterreri potuit, aut impediri, quo minus officio satisfaceret
suo, idque perficeret, quod ab omnium Imperatore Deo sibi demandatum esse
intelligebat.

Commodum in hoc exemplum incidimus, quod non honoris tantummodo contemptionem
habet, sed etiam corporis, ac vitae. Demonstraturus enim extremo loco sum,
ipsam quoque vitam a Bellarmino fuisse neglectam, ac pro nihilo ductam; ne quid
restaret, quod ille infra se positum habere non videretur. Viro sapienti, ac
bono dolorem condonat A^istoteles de vitae iactura, sensumque in ip^o periculo
mortis accerbiorem: quia cum illi vita sit proba, cunctisque virtutibus
instructa, omnium intelligit maxim cum moritur, and quam excellenti bono
spolietur. Sed necesse non habuit istam ab Aristotele veniam accipere
Bellarminus, qui maiori cupidate flagrabat interrumpendae vitae, quam alij
producendae. Intellectum id quidem semper est, sed tum praesertim, ac maxim,
cum in morbo, qui fuit illi postremus, sieve caloris, aestusque viaquantulum
aberraret interdum a mente, sieve remittente flagrantia, sanitate vteretur
integra, nullae ab eo voces emittebantur aliae, nisi quae vehementer e vitae
statione deceslum efflagitarent* Nemini, qui suas ei preces apud Caelestes
offerret, non respondit, aequi se bonique facere tam pium officium, sed tamen
id vnum excipere, ne sibi vitam a Deo poscerent, quam funditus ipse repudiaret,
ac nollet. Quin ab ipso Pontifice Optimo, ac Maximo, suum ei studium inter
aras, ac sacra pollicente, illa lege, consilioque tam amplum se munus accipere
velle professus est, vt maturius, ac citius e corporis vinculis auolaret in
caelum, non vt ex eo mortis periculo liberaretur. Fuit illequidem in tota
valetudinis regendae ratione facillimus, nec vmquam grauius inter corporis
acerbitates, ac dolores est questus. sed vnus tamen eius aliquando gemitus
exauditus est, and expostulatio non leuis, cum septima post decubitum die
habere se meliuscule intellexit ex medicis, qua die domum se suam (sic enim
ipse caelum appellabat) commigraturum esse pro certo sperauerat. Illuxit
denique tempus exoptatum, cum admonitus, exiguum sibi vitae spatium superesse,
contineri non potuit, quin in summa illa confecti, afflictique corporis
imbecillitate pene semiuiuus, atque intermortuus ter ingenti, claraque voce, O
bonum nuncium exclamaret! Ne multa. commeatu^, ac viaticum peregrinationi
deposcit idoneu^: quod cum humi stratus, and sic in genua quemadmodu^ poterat
innixus excepisset, iteru^ lecto compositus, inter iucundissimas de caelesti
patria collocutiones, ac preces horam praestolabatur extremam. quae cum
aliquando tandem adfuisset, crucem extemplo complexus arctissime, ac velut illa
comite facturus iter humeris, colloque leniter acclinans, haud multo post sine
laterum vexatione, sine spiritus angore, sine deprauatione vultus, and
corporis, mortalitatem expleuit in terris, immortalitatem inter Caelites
inchoauit. vir omnino dignus, qui octogesimo circiter aetatis anno decendens,
tamquam acerbo praeriperetur obitu, sic omnium ordinum vocibus, and luctu
comploraretur. Populare prouerbium est, bouem vetulum non lugeri, in homines
been senes, and grandiores aetate conueniens; quorum excessus quia tempestiuus
esse videtur omnibus, amicorum luctu vacat, and comploratine domesticorum. sed
hoc dictum alioqui veru^, diuturno comprobatum experimento in Bellarmini funere
deprehendimus falsum, qui and tam senex ploratus ab omnibus est, and si ad
plures quoque prouectus fuisset annos, semper existimatus fuisset immature
decedere. Nimirum, vt vetus quidam poeta loquitur, Consules fiunt quota^nis,
and noui Proconsu^es. Sed (non dicam equidem quod apud eundem sequitur, Solus,
aut Rex, aut Poeta non quotannis nascitur. Rex enim quotidie nascitur ex
Regibus, and poetarum natio plus etiam quam vellemus, in Republica sobolesc^)
sed dicam inquam id quod ipsa res est, nec in idonea laud verebor inuidia^.
Solus Bella^mino similis ordinis amplissimi Senator, ita doctus, ac sapiens,
ita modestus, ac moderatus, religiosus, ac pius, ita Reipublicae salutaris, non
modo non quotannis nascitur, sed requiretur in annos plurimos, and longa post
saecula desiderabitur. Non tamen eius a nobis vmquam desideratur. Non tamen
eius a nobis vmquam desiderabitur auxilium, non fides, non Ecclesiae
patrocinium, ac tutela; cuius militantis ipse, dum viueret, tam praeclara
stipendia meruit, cuius ouantis, vita iam functus, and triumphum capit, and
obtinet gloriam. Excurrit ille nunc inter ^elices animas, Ambrosios,
Augustinos, aliosque mortis beneficio triumphantes, ac liberos: respicit e
caelo relicta, videt nos alta nocte circumdatos, and diuinis perfusam radijs
aciem promittit in spatia ^am vasta terrarum. Suas adeo parts intelligit esse,
pro Christiana Republica non iam amplius Columbae gemitum dare, quod scripto
libello fecit in lugentium campis, sed per aduocationem adesse, atque
intercedere; quod and praestitit olim viuens in terris, and nunc praestare
multo facillime potest in triumphantium Concilio collocatus.

FINIS.

