RESPVBLICA DE DECIMIS.

WRITTEN BY Sir William Cockburne of LANGTOVN Knight.



EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun Anno Domini 1627.

To the right honorable and my noble parts, My LORDS COMMISSIONERS appointed
for reformation of diverse abuses, and first of Tithes.
REason, by reason of some secreet surmising (believed by the weaker minds, and
fostred by the more particularie inclined) that no reformation annent that
matter of Tithes is intended, has employed me (as one, whose interest it
principally or rather only concerns,) Faithfully to report unto your LL. the
true mind of every several part of my composition: as I have received it from
him my over Lord directour and resumer of every particulare thought, not only
of every particular party in this business, but even of every particular
person in whatsoever business has potentia truly to think. But if any man
be curious to see my procuratory, let him search the hollow of his own
breast, there shall he find it.

THE MIND OF THE KING MY HEAD.
Our gracious Sovereign aims nowise to prejudge any man's right, nor to urge
any man further than what he is tied unto by Law: But only out of his princely
care, of my benefit intends a reformation of all abuses, and first of Tithes;
which is understood to be threefold.

First, the abuse of their dedication by him who only is proprietar thereof,
God, The tithes are mine, and I have given them to the Leuite, whereby is
easily perceived that the Pastors and Instructers in true knowledge, and the
worship of God, are [ ante omnia] to be sustained, entertained and maintained,
every man in his place or degree of employment, by whom the Church is builded,
and every particular person is formed a living stone for raising thereof, the
chief corner remaining, Christ.

Secondly, of vplifting the same, whereby the fruits of the ground are subject
to many inconvenients, partly by the sloth, and partly by the malice of
Tith-possessours the one being careless to separate the same from the stock
in due time, and the other maliciously refusing to do it in due time; whereby
the stock in these cold and Northern parts are subject to the hazard of many
inconvenients, by tempestuous weather: As also coming to Tithe, they bring
with them such a confluence of men and beasts, like locustes ouershadowing the
face of the Earth, running through every corn field, that the poor labourer
of the ground is not able to see the destruction of his fruits, his body not
being vbiquiter, and therefore cannot tell of what to complain.

Thirdly, by usurpation under the color of tithing to intromet with the
stock, or a great part thereof, against all reason, law of God, and man: And
for reformation of these abuses, Wills that the parties justly grieved, give
in their best ouertures unto your LL. of whose duetiefull care his Majesty
rests sufficiently assured.

THE MIND OF THE CHVRCH MY HEART.
THE Church is heerewith well pleased, for howbeit it be without contraversie,
that the Tith is the Lords, and by him given to the Levite: and therefore may
not unjustly be acclaimed by the Pastors, successors to their function,
having the charge of Gods Tabernacle. Yet considering that their office is not
naturally hereditarie, but by grace and election. And therefore their present
maintenance is only to be desired; since their natural successors (as they
are their natural successors) have no right to their spiritual possessions:
as the Levites, whose children were Levites, whereby all the Church goods were
ever possessed by Churchmen.

Again, considering that they are not restrained from purchasing possessions
amongst their brethren the Laics, as the Levites might not inherit nor
possess any possessions among the other Tribes, whereby the superabundance of
goods, if any they had; of necessity behoved flow back to their brethren the
Laics from whence it sprang: otherwise their commodities being great, and
their labor easy in purchasing the same, they might happily have conquered
all their brethrens possessions, and so twelve Tribes should be reduced in
one: And therefore since they are not thus restrained, they desire no more but a
competent allowance according to his Majesty's royal intention above specified.

As also, they are content that the superplus be in his Majesty's Power to be
employed for the public benefit of the Kirk and commonwealth, and for
recompensing in some sort of such particular persons as his Majesty out of his
royal disposition shall think himself in conscience tied to considder, in
respect of the form of their acquiring of possession of Tithes, howsoever the
right cannot stand in Law. But first of all they desire your LL. consider, how
nothing is more necessare for instruction in Knowledge, and the worship of God,
than the knowledge of letters, the first medium whereby a man, or rather the
Jmage of God potentiall, is reduced in act. And therefore it is very requisite
that every man be instructed in his youth in the first degree thereof, which
is reading, whereby he is not only able to see the ground of all their
doctrine [ the Scriptures] whereof they are the explicators, but even to see
them, and all explicatours thereof, in their best show from the beginning: and
so may become a noble Berean deserving preferment before the Thessalonian.

For this purpose it is very necessary, that no Paroche be without a reader
and instructor in reading; the principal entrance to true understanding. The
next degrie of letters, is the understanding of subtilities and school
questions, whereby the deep of Theology and Philosophy may be dived into.
This is not so necessare to be commonly instructed in every Paroch, Yet it is
very necessary it be sufficiently instructed within this Kingdom, whereby the
enemies of Gods flock may find to their fear not only barking but biting Dogs
keeping the Folds. For this purpose it is necessare that Colleges or
seminaries be erected and provided for, in some the most eminent parts of the
Kingdom.

Thus for the general overtures at this time when your LL. shall think good to
put the same in practice, J shall more particularly give ouertures [ de modo.]

THE MIND OF THE BARRONS MY BODY.
THE Barrons with all humility would beg this reformation, and craves no other
favor. For howbeit the heretofore unjust employment of tithes, may not
unjustly furnish them a ground to protest against all payment of tyths, and
desire a liberty to contribute among themselves for the entertainment of their
instructers: yet their hearts can never harbor such a thought, when once they
remember. First, how forcible nature forces from us that duty. For who is so
beastly minded or so sensually addicted, to the only care of his sensible part
that will not be content to count with himself till he can count no further,
and of all that count pay but one for the nourishment of his Soul? Now who is
able to reckon above ten? Who then shall be so beastly as to refuse one of
ten, except he be idem with the beast? what is more to be said heereanent, J
refer to the more learned Pithagorean.

Secondly, when they considder the antiquity of this duty which Cain and
Abel are thought by some to have paid by their offerings: but it is specially
expressed they were paid in the days of Abraham, where the authorities both of
the giver and receauer is notable, viz. the first Father of the faithful is
the giver, the receaver whereof is the Priest of the most hie God, without
Father, without Mother, without kindred having neither beginning of days, nor
end of time; not that he was without them all in respect of nature: but in
respect of his supernatural internal separation from all things carnal and
temporary to teach most high Mysteries for accomplishing the will of God,
wherein was his only confidence, delight and solace: and so the doers thereof
his only kindred, and therefore is likened to the son of God, who professed
the doers of Gods will to be his Mother, Brother, and Sister, he also is
called King of rightwysnesse; and after, his dwelling City is said to be
Salem, which is peace; for true wisdom is ever King of peace. But thirdly and
most of all, when we remember his divine majesty, by whom they are acclaimed,
who (as a type of that eternal Priesthood, whereunto the true Melch^sedecke
was internally separate) did externally separate the Levite, to whom they were
given for their entertainment alanerly. Or what was more, to be eaten by the
stranger the Fatherles or the Widow: and on no ways to be employed for their
further enriching than present necessity.

Those things considered, they even fear to think of witholding the same, like
as J think every man should tremble to intromet with the same, or intrometting
therewith, should dare to employ it for any private use, to enriching his
Children, or acquyring new possessions: but I leave every man to his own
conscience; for they (being co^scious to themselves, that the Tithes belongs
not to them) will none of them, howsoever they be used. And therefore I will
only proceed to their ouertures for reforming these abuses noted by our most
gracious Sovereign. Of these abuses concerning them in particular, the first
is by the sloth and malice of the Tithe possessours, and by the vnnecessare
confluence of men and beasts, the time of Tithing.

The first part of this abuse is in some sort already provided for, by that
statute. 22. Parliament 28 June. 1617. Act 9. But if your LL. think it better
that the Tiths be valued, and according to their valuation, every Heretour to
pay for his own Tith, J shall be glad to have it aggried upon. The second part
of ^^is abuse is easily helped, the vnformall form of tything being reformed.
For it carrys no reason that the Tith possessour, should (with the Tith corn;)
carry away also the strae, which belongs nothing unto them: for it is no
encresse to the owner, since it is ordained to rott upon the ground for
maintaining the same in the own strength: and is only taken from the ground of
necessity, for better collecting the corns: wherefrom being once separate it
is again sent unto the ground, which is thereby the better enabled to yield her
increase; whereof the benefit redounds as well to the Tithe as to the stock, and
so no man is loser. But if some object; the straw is used for fodder and
entertainment of beasts in this Country. J answer, in that same respect it
ought to be free of Tithe, because it is the food of the labourer for it
feeds the beasts that tille the ground: and there can be neither law nor
reason why either the hyre or food of the labourer should pay tith: especially
these by whose labor the tith it self is increased. Neither have I hereby
any design to stay the tithe possessour from leading his tithe in the sheaue,
being doubtful to have a good count thereof out of the laborers barne-floore,
a certain yearly valuation not aggried upon. They only desire, that the tithes
may be led, and set in the laborers Barne-yard, that when the corn is
separate from the straw, the straw may remain with the labourer as proprium
fundi. And for this cause, every man shall be astricted to lead home the
Tithe, to the use of the Tithe possessour; as also to furnish sufficient Barns
for threshing the same at needful times. So shall this confused confluence be
needless.

The third abuse is by usurpation.
For reformation of this abuse: they desire a declaration may be made what is
tithe, and what is stock, that a valuation of the Tithe with the stock may
also be more easily aggried upon. Now if any man in estimating of tithes, can
both say and think that the Tith is in value a fourth part of the land duty,
I would gladly hear his argument in reason, for J have no Logic to prove in
Arithmetic the tenth to be the fourth part. But if it shall be answered, the
tenth of the stock, and encresse will be the fourth of the free encresse, (for
without it be free it is no encresse.) To this J answer: the tenth of the
stock will be more than the half, if not more all the encresse: for if it
be lawful to tithe any part of the stock with the encresse, it is lawful to
tithe all the stock, and consequently, the oxen, horse, nolt, kyne, calfes,
yowes, lambs, and all must be tithed, since all is either stock or encresse,
yea, the very ground it self must be tithed, for it is also a part of the
stock. And this J hope being used but few years, the contestation for tithes
will expire [ ipso facto] Now as this is against all natural reason, so it is
without any special Law, for the law of Tithes is plain, Deuteronomy. 14.21.
Thou shall truly tithe all the encresse of thy seed, that the ground brings
forth year by year. By what law then is the tithe of the stock usurped? It
will perhaps be said it is a common practicke in our Judicatories so to
determine. But I answer, as it seems not good that the equity of every
practick should be narrowly searched unto* so it is less good that every
practick whereof the equity is not narrowly searched into, should be esteemed
a law for the common well. But of what reputation shall the practicks of
inferior Judges be esteemed, when they agrie not with the practick of the
supreme Parliament? For in public Parliament the practick is past, and a
declaration made of the validity of tithes compared with the value of the
land, read the statute. Ia: 6. Parl. 11. chap 29. where it is declared, the
tenth part of that duty paid for the rowme, stock and tyth should be given
to the tithemaster, and nine parts to the King ^^ Landslord or superior. Is
not this reason? or has any judge in the Kingdom greater authority, whereby
he may vilipend this practick, or proceed with another sort of valuation? or if
they will do, is not the sentence reduceable? since by the statute it is
plainly ordained That all the Judges and Ministers of his Majesty's laws
within this Realm, judge and decyde according to this statute, and no other
ways how often that question shall be moved. But I know some would build much,
or rather in effect overthrow all, by these subsequent words, In the case
foresaid. To the which I answer it lacks alanerly. But I will not trouble
your LL. to dispute upon such pen-dashes, whether they have been by accident,
or of set purpose, either adjected or omitted, since I doubt nothing your LL.
will easily perceive the very ordinance it self to be superfluous: for thus I
reason,

Every Judge imitating a just and equitable sentence judges rightly.

But every Judge judging according to this sentence, imitates a just and
equitable sentence, Ergo,

The Major is clear, the Minor shall be proven when J shall bear it
publicly denied. What necessity is there then of any ordinance for imitation
hereof? even as much as if a command should pass; That Fish should not live
without water, for the natural element of an upright Judge is equity, whereof
he is no sooner sensible but with a gaping greedy appetite he follows upon
it, thereby refreshing his spirits, and strengthening his powers against every
storm.

But it will be said the corns have been in use to pay tith both stock and
encresse. J answer, here is the abuse: if there be either law or reason for
it, let it so continue: But if there be neither law nor reason for it, reason
it be reformed. For every use, which was not so from the beginning requires
reformation; yea, sometimes although it be licenced by authority, as is
evident by that dispute betwixt our Savior and the Pharisees. Now it is clear
that this form of tithing was not in use from the beginning: for Abraham;
(whom, as we are faithful we claim for our Father* and therefore are tied if
not by Law, at the least by example to pay tithes) is said only to give the
tithes of the spoil. Like as also this use was never among the Jews, for
their Law is express against it, as is said. As for any use crept in of late
within this Kingdom: there was many causes for it, which now are not, and
therefore deficiente causa, deficit effectus. First that statute. Ja. 2, Parl.
14. chap. 82.

Ordaining every pleugh to sow a firlot wheat, half an firlot pease, and
forty beans, is nor as yet two hundredth year old: whereby it may appear
how small use there was for laboring for corns, some two, three, or four
hundredth year before; which all is but a small time, in respect of that time,
since tithing first began to be in use. Hence it is easily conjectured that
the first cause of this use, to tith corn upon the ground both stock and
encresse, was, because so small parts were labored at the first, that the
tith was not much regarded: as also some choice parts were only manurde, which
being fertile in themselves, both by nature and long rest, yielded such
encresse, as the stock and labor were forgotten by the labourer, rejoicing in
the good success of his new husbandry: whereas now the greatest part of the
manured grounds will scarce free the charges, if the air happen to be
tempestuous: and even in years of plenty, where the ground also is fertile,
the third of the grouth can hardly be made free to the Landlord.

The second cause, whereby this custom has been continued, was, the zeal of
the people; who were not only content to continue any custom, for commodity
of the Churchmen, but even to dispone their particular lands and heritages
unto them.

But this I hope is by Pandora sufficiently cooled; since men are now in
greater danger to be esteemed eaters up thereof, than to be eaten up with the
zeal of Gods house.

The third cause, and connexor of all, was, the small or no damnage they found
by so ouerseeing themselves for as all waters running to the sea, do neither
augment the same, nor diminish themselves. For as the Rivers return to go
unto the place, whence they came; even so, what they bestowed upon Churchmen
reflowed again unto themselves; their poor, their orphants, widows and
strangers all finding hospitality with the Church: whereas now the traveler,
at their ancient dwelling house, in stead of that hospitable welcome, peace be
with thee; howsoever, let all thy wants ly upon me; only ludge not in the
street; shall find nothing of what he wants, but peace or if he happen to hear
any noise, it shall be commanding him peace and without a piece to turn some
other way.

But suppose these causes were not removed: no voluntary oversight of any abuse
can enforce a perpetual obligation to continue the same.

It will be yet said, this custom has been long practiced in all countries,
and by all Judicatories approven.

But this is easily denied, for a great many parts, if not the most part of
Christendom, have never been in use to have the tithe of their corns drawn
after this form: yea, many parts are in use only to pay some small
acknowledgment, far short of the worth of the tithe, of their encresse, and
therefore, no further can be exacted of them according to the canon law,
Illae decimae necessario solvendae sunt, quae divina lege debentur, vel loci
consuetudine approbata, whereby it is evident that the most that can be
craved is the whole tithes according to the divine Law aboue-said: like as the
least that can be offered is the accustomed or ancient duty; neither will I
disagree from that (indeed) judicious note of Card. Bellarmine, saying, Sicut
consuetudo tollit legem, sic lex tollit consuetudinem. For it is very true
that the authority upon just and necessare considerations, may abolish the use
of paying less than the Law, and command payment according to the Law. But to
command any more, can never be done by any authority, at the least no
authority can command to pay more in name of tith than according to the law of
tiths. Much less it is reason that authority should suffer to be usurped and
brought in custom, more than the Law, and against all reason. This ( I am
sure) will cut off all necessity to value these tithes which of old has been
valued, and according whereto the possessour has been accustomed to pay: who
so list to detain the same according to the price; as by the particular
parties will easily be defended in any judicatorie, removing, sic volo,, sic
iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. From the rest, never more can be required,
but according to the divine Law abouesaid.

But I suppose this alleged custom has been indeed long universally
approuen by all Judicatories, and practiced by all Countries: then say I, there
has the more need of a reformation to be begun in some Judicatory, and in some
Country: and by what Judicatory more proper than this? since for this, and such
like, your LL. are conveened. Can any ordinance pass for the benefit of the
common weal, forcing a titular to set according to the valuation, that which
in Law he may justly lift without giving any count of the value thereof? and
shall all ordinances be neglected for remeeding that common evil used by the
titulars, vplifting that, whereunto by neither law nor reason they have right?
This were but to divide, not to remeed wrong. Now as here is the fittest
Iudicatory to begin this reformation, so is this Kingdom the fittest to begin
the practice thereof. Have we already proceeded so far in so fair a course, for
reformation of matters in substance, and now begin to stay at straes? shall
we continue an abuse, because it is the use of our neighbors? legibus non
exemplis vivitur. Shall we not know our selves? Was not the woman carried into
the wilderness upon the great Eagles wings there to be nourished till the
times should be perfyted? Was not this land unknown to the then, tyrannical
powers? or, if it was known, was it not known but as a desert, a wilderness,
yea, a wilderness where the Lion is King? has the Church then been so long
nourished among us? and shall we produce no evidence thereof to the World? or
shall we stay to produce any evidence, whereby it may be known, by whom we
have been instructed. Is not the Lion appointed the Worlds reprouer, and
refresher of Gods people? And shall he not first reform what is worthy
reproof in his own Forest? But if any man doubt thus to apply the text:
behold the testimonies of antiquity, whereby even stones are believed to be
metamorphosed into men. As for men to be changed into stones is easy and
common at the sight of a Gorgons head. Ovid, that never sufficiently commended
collector of antiquities, shows directly that from the North must come the
illuminators of blind Phinius, and the banishers of these filthy abusers of
princely food: which is more enlarged by that divine poet Ariosto. Does he
begesse ascriue unto the English Duke the horribly affrighting of that famell
faction, cruel tyrannizers over those without whom themselves were nothing or
worse? and (howsoever forsaken of his fearful friends) courageously going on
to the entrapping of Caligorant in his own net; howsoever reserved alive as a
not unfit drudge for building the walls of Jerusalem? the killing of Orillo;
howsoever easily dismembered yet always rejoyned by the power of only one
excrement of his head? The dissolving of the enchanted palace; how manifoldly
soever his shape at the first appear deformed, to the notably deceived
Jndwellers? Js without a ground ascrived unto him the banishing of the Harpyes,
noble indeed unsheathing his sword against them, but to small purpose till from
the sound of his horn they hid themselves in Hell. No surely, for it is most
certain that the solid subject whereupon all true Poets buildes, is laid by
antiquity they are the planets of Heaven (of whom the Sun is the chief or
rather the life) The lights of the earth. The revivers of the dead, the
renuers of antiquity, the revelators of Fate, the heralds of virtue, the
vncasers of vice. And howsoever to the vulgar eye they seem but erring
stars, yet the more learned astrologi^ does easily perceive ^ most sweet
harmony, most powerful effects with most solid conclusions: for, being all
conveened in their first house, all shall be found to aggrie in one: for the
daughter of antiquity is vna, poor vna who long must wander to seek relief
for her beleagured parents against that direful Dragon, till she find a S.
George a Britain by birth, but of fair^ land by education. Behold, with what
heavenly trumpets our commission is proclaimed. Shall we then the now winged
twines of Boreas begin to frieze for fear, when our shout is able to kindle
afreshe the powers of our Jason? shall the book of wisdom lie hid in the
pocket? shall the horn of truth hang mute on the Cassoke? Hou then; shall
virtue forseeing her slavery be able to escape the female yoke? how shall that
double statured Giant being stupefied with fear be forced to bear burdings
for building our walls? how shall superstition be shav^^ from the scalpe of
error? And how shall magnanimity tied in the dark be strengthened to burst
his golden halter? that Astolpho in paradise being taught by S. John, may
returneing restore the sight of Senapo, and wit of Orlando to the utter
vndoeing of Pagan-pride. Since thus we see for what we are borne, let us
couragiouslly follow our fate. Shall the poorest groom not spare to pushe his
fortoun? And shall we by destiny appointed the (...) of Gods house be abasht
of our office? No surely: since the Almighty has made us divulgators of his
Law, let the brightness of our face abash the more vulgar.

And now have your LL. sufficient ouertures (grounded upon Law, and true
reason) whereby custom may be reformed. But if custom be grown to a second
nature (which is too common in evil customs as the Prophet complains Can the
blackmore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. No more can you that are
accustomed to do evil, do that which is good) My passive body (...) comport
with the tims and so acquiesce; only protesting that which is now done be not
prejudicial to a better reformation, when the Planets shall look with more
myld aspect: Thus have I faithfully delivered my charge for your LL. ease, and
my own health. But if any man shall suppose me not to be what J profess: let
noble Arthegall whose presence J long for, and who at length I hope shall prove
master of this feast to the uncasing of Bragadochia, and restoring Guyon to his
horse and armor. Let him J say confront me with another, professing the same
name, but of a contrary disposition.

Then shall your LL. easily know,
Which of us twain are (...) snow.
Your LL. totum RESPVBLICA.






