A (...) FRVTEF^^ AND APPRO^^^^ Treatise, for the Artifici^^^ (...)that Malady
called in Latin (...) in English, the Evil, cured by (...) Queens of England

Very necessary for all youn (...) of Chyrurgery.

Written by WILLIAM CLOWES (...) Chyrurgions, in the year (...)

Imprinted at London by (...) Allde. 1602.

The Epistle to the Reader.
WHen I considered with my self (courteous and friendly Reader) the grave and
wise saying of Tully: that Honor maintains Arts, whereby men are greatly
addicted to study: So, as it is said, if a man look into the course of this
world, and into human affairs, ye shall find that such Arts as serve the
peoples necessity, and have their necessary use in the common wealth, have
been greatly esteemed, and the Professors thereof highly rewarded. Amongst a
number of which lawdable Arts and Sciences, let us make our consideration of
Surgery, the maintain^^ and restorer of our healthes: For it is a most true
received opinion amongst worthy writers, that Surgery is (indeed) an
ancient part of Physic, as it appears by Jacques Guillemeau of Orleans
ordinary Chirurgian to the now French King: who avouches, that before Physic
was invented, created, or found out, Surgery was practiced, and sufficiently
known in all places: as it appears (says he) by the testimony of Homer, in
the second book of his Ilyades: who wrote the valiant enterprises, and travels
of Ulysses, as did T^^tus Liuius, the worthy acts and monuments of the Ancient
Romans. Moreover, it is said, that Apollo for his skill, and Aesculapius his
son, were honored (as Gods) of all the worthy Grecians, Podalerius and
Machaon the two sons of Aesculapius, were held in great honor and
reputation, at the siedge of Troy, under A gamenon, Captain of the Grecians.
Moreover, Hippocrates the paragon of all ages, was highly esteemed by the
Athenians: Erasistratus, of Noble Saleucus: Diocles, of Antigonus: Oribasius,
Julian: Dioscorides, of Marcus Antonius, and Cleopatra: who followed the wars
over Aegipt, Parthia, Armenia, Persia, India and Siria: and all to augment and
increase their knowledge and skill. Last of all the said Worthyes, I here
nominate Gallen, who is called the light of all good learning: and he also was
greatly honored of Traian the Emperor, and he followed the wars with (...)
Europa: I had here likewise thought good to have spoken somewhat of
Paracelsus, but I must consesse his Doctrine has a more pregnant sense, then
my wit or reach is able to construe: only this I can say by experience, that I
have practiced certain of his inventions Chirurgicall, the which I have found
to be singular good, and worthy of great commendations. How be it, much strife
I know there is between the Galenistes and the Paracelsians, as was in times
past between Ajax and Ulysses, for Achilles Armor. Notwithstanding, for my
part I will here set up my rest and contentation, how impertinent and
unseemly so ever it make show: That is to say, if I find (either by reason or
experience) any thing that may be to the good of the Patients, and better
increase of my knowledge and skill in the Art of Surgery, be it either in
Galen or Paracelsus; yea, Turk, Jew, or any other Infidel: I will not refuse
it, but be thankful to God for the same. How be it, I will in no wise meddle
with their Infidelity, though I embrace their knowledge and skill in humane
verityes and inventions, be it either in Physic or Surgery, or any of the
other laudable Sciences. Now I will discourse no further, until a more fit
opportunity be offered: But very briefly I mean here to demonstrate and
deliver unto the friendly Reader, the cure of a certain unnatural tumor or
abscesse, called in Latin, Struma: of the Arabians, Steophala: but generally,
in English, it is called, the Kings or Queens Evil: A disease repugnant to
nature: which grievous malady is known to be miraculously cured and healed, by
the sacred hands of the Queens most Royal Majesty, even by Divine inspiration
and wonderful work and power of God, above man's skill, Art and expectation:
Through whose Princely Clemency, a mighty number of her Maiestyes most Loyal
subjects, and also many strangers borne, are daily cured and healed, which
otherwise would most miserably have perished. For many of them (their poverty
was such) were not able to pay but a very little or nothing at all for their
cure. And so I here conclude, that as God by his divine gifts, does cure this
Strumous Malady: so also of his great goodness, he does give Artificial gifts,
for the curing of the said Infirmity. But whereas Artificial gifts do many
times fail thee, do his divine gifts take place and reuaile: as after more
at large shall appear.

William Clowes, one of her Majesty's Chirurgions.

Tho: Bonhami, in Medic: Doct. Exastichon: In laudem Authoris.
CLVSIVS es dictus, melius sed APERTIVS esses:
Clausa aperis, alios quae latuere prius,
Regalisquam mali causam, auxiliu^quam RECLVDENS,
Doctus Apollineae porrigis artis opem.
Multi Asclepiadae frustra hanc petiere coronam,
Solus habe, palmam hanc tradit Apollo tibi.
FINIS.
Gent. in commendation of William Clowes his book.
BY long experience and by practice great,
Time has affoorded to this painful man
A helpful cure, which heretofore to treat,
The greatest Clerks have doubted how and when.
To cure the same give Clowes due praise therefore,
That has performed this and many more.
But yet conceive, this is not Clowes his cure,
Our Sovereign Lady, and his Mistress Queen:
Seems well content her man may put in ure
So much as she affoordes; as may be seen
By Clowes his scope, the rest she challenges,
As Queen anointed and by Royal birth.
Then Physic yield; give place Surgery;
The Rational and Practicke for this pain
Are both a like: her Peerless Majesty
Heals by God alone, Art is but vain.
This she performs, to write I must surcesse,
Her hidden skill no pen can well express.
How much then are we to the high God bound,
For sending us this Princess here on earth?
Within whose breast, such helps are daily found,
As heales her subjects at the point of death.
She cures, she cares, she saues us all by skill:
She hurts none, but helps with loving will.
Live, live for aye: what humor leads me?
I began to write in William Clowes his praise;
Her only name has drawn my quill I see.
And daunted so my sense by sundry ways:
That like as Zenxis shaddowed his intent,
With some conceit, so I the same way went.
FINIS.
Thomas Parkin Chyrurgie professor.
THe happy sacred hand, of our dread Sovereign Queen,
The Princely loving zeal, of her most Royal heart,
Throughout her highness land, her subjects al have seen
To cure, to help, to heal, our care, our harm, our smart.
To God all glory for her Gracious Reign,
To her all blessings, that on earth remain.
And thanks, and thanks to Clowes, for this his zealous toil,
In searching out the light, of Chyrons hidden skill:
And for the love he shows, to Countries native soil,
To practice, find, and write, for all instructions still,
Let Clowes be loved, his fame and him defend,
Who, what he proved, the same for us has pend.
FINIS.
(...) practitioner of Physic and Chyrurgery.
LET him give thanks, that has not else
wherewith to gratify
His friend, that gives so great a gift
to cure the Strumacye.
Nor that alone he comprehends;
his helpful remedies:
Dissolve hard Tumors, cold Inflations,
Fluxes and Nodosities:
Approaching age makes wisdom in his tongue,
His heart gained Art, when yet his years were young.
He Chimicke Art disclaimes to know,
yet Ladanum he shows:
And many good collections more,
(his pen does here disclose)
The quintessence of his whole life,
in gayning skyll consumed:
He grants franckly to thine use,
with Science sweets perfumed.
Future times shall praise his meditation,
And him repose in Heavens consolation.
Base ignorance bids me conceal,
mine own unworthiness:
True love to Art compelles me more,
Teschewe ungratefulness.
Impute my faults t'affectionsforce,
and his well deserving,
That spends his sprites and restless hours,
in man's life preserving.
The long experience and good Art of this our Clowes,
Deserves rightly more reward then Laurel bows.
FINIS.
AN INTRODUCTION, With an Apology or answer to certain malicious back-byters.
IT is certainly affirmed, and confidently reputed and holden, of diverse worthy
Physicians and Chirurgians, both Ancient and such as have flourished of late
years, which have entreated of the Cure of the before named dolorous Malady:
and they all by one uniform consent and voice, conclude and agree, that it is
a Glandulus Tumor or swelling, hard, knotty, and kyrnelly, having their
beginning and growing, contrary and besides nature, and is engendered of gross
matter and Phlegm: And (as says Iacobus Ruffus) they are most commonly
included within their peculiar Cistis, filme or skin, as is Steatoma,
Atheroma, and Meliceris: which aforesaid skin is known to be engendered of a
cold congealed, tough, glewish humor or substance of the Kirnels, whereof a
skin is made which compasses them about: Howbeit I have seen (and also it
is a most experimented truth) that some kinds of these Phlegmaticall
Abscessions, when they have been besiedged as it were, or beset with vehement
dangerous accidents, as hereafter shall be declared, which in continuance of
time have bin ye cause they have grown corrupted and immovable, or fixed
unto the parts adjoining: whereby after there has bin separation made, there
has not bin found any bladder or skin at all, notwithstanding the great care
and diligence that then was had.

This most miserable infirmity (says Paulus Aegineta) does situate or seat
it self in the fore part of ye neck and under the Chin: also on the sides of
the cheeks, and sometime spreads it self upon the breast, and under the
Armepits, and Groynes, and some be deeply lodged a far off in the slesh, and
also do oftentimes possess the great Veins and Arteryes called Carotides: And
those that are thus vexed and subject to this troublesome Infirmity, are for
the most part Phlegmatic persons, greatly given to overmuch Idleness and
slouthfulnes of life, and are addicted to excessive and inordinate eating of
gross and Flegmaticke meats: which manifold Malady, I have also found by
experience, that the Cure thereof stretches it self beyond the bounds of
other ordinary sicknesses and diseases. Cornelius Celsus likewise says, that
Scrophula is a Tumor, in the which are certain kyrnels engendered of matter
and blood, and do most chiefly grow in the fore part of the Neck, and in the
Arme-pits, the Groyne, and in the sides, and has bin found in Women's breasts.

Vigo a man (for his learning and experience in this Cure, and in many other
great Infirmities) as it appears, was wonderfully graced with the good
opinion and favor of the time wherein he lived, and since his death greatly
honored by diverse learned Writers, and many other men famous in Physic and
Chyrurgery: He also says, that Scrophula takes the name of Scropha, which
signifies a Sow, that is a Gluttonous and Phlegmatic beast* and it grows
in them by reason of their overmuch eating. There be other some again which
say, that it is called Scrophula, either because that Sowes which give suck be
subject to this disease, and that is by reason of their greedy eating: or else
because the Sow that gives Milk brings forth many young ones at once.

Now here it is to be further noted, that Vigo does not promise or warrant
always, and to every one a certain absolute Cure, but does (as I, and many
other also have done) ascribe the praise and dignity thereof unto Kings and
Queens of England, and of France: In deed I have oftentimes read, and I have
also been credibly informed by Master Francis Rasis, and Master Peter Low, two
of the French Kings Chyrurgians, that the French King does also Cure many
Strumous people, only by laying on of his hand, and saying: God make thee
whole, the King touches thee; or, The King touches thee, the Lord make thee
whole.

It is further said, that this disease happens not always Hip: Aphor. sect.
3.
unto young children, which be subject to much crudity, and raw humors by
voracity: but likewise unto middle aged persons, of a stronger constitution;
and also unto very old folks. Many therefore imitating Vigo and other of our
Sages, and grave learned Forefathers, do affirm that these Scrophulous
Tumors be the less dangerous to be cured by the Art of Chyrurgery, which
is taken in the beginning of the sickness, so far forth as it will please
Almighty God to give a grace and blessing to our labors. But undoubtedly, if
it be of any long continuance, the Cure thereof may prove very hard and
difficult: yea, if it be in the bodies of young persons: But in old folks I
have observed very sildome, that they do receive any curatio^ perfectly, by the
Art of Surgery. I meant, that it is then above my learning and weak
capacity to cure the same, if the disease be confirmed, having certain occult
and hidden, hard, knotty, kyrnelly swellings, (being deeply lodged and placed
in the flesh) but especially about Trachea Arteria, or the wind Pipe, or near
the Nerui Recurrentes, or amongst the great Veins and Arteries before named:
these (indeed) I hold to be for the most part very dangerous to be
attempted, for fear of violating or touching the said principal Vessels,
either by incision or Caustic remedies, which often times bring with them many
unfortunate Symptoms or injurious accidents, as hereafter more at large shall
appear.

Also, it is hard to cure a noisome, corrupt and malignant vlcerous Struma,
which does many times degenerate into incurable, Cancerous and rebellious
Phistulous Ulcers: Likewise, I hold it for a certain truth, that the Cure is
not to be attempted by the Art of Surgery, if a man have it by inheritance,
and so naturally borne from their Parents: These kinds of Scropholus
abcessions do rather presage a Divine and holy curation, which is most
admirable to the world, that I have seen and known performed and done by the
sacred and blessed hands of the Queens most Royal Majesty, whose happiness
and felicity the Lord long continue.

But since the barrenness of my learning, and wit is such, and that my memory
will not afford me, here orderly to set down in few words, that which I
do conceive and understand, touching this my determined purpose, for the Cure
of this heinous Malady: which, in the Pilgrimage of my practice and
contemplations, I have most diligently observed, not only by mine own self,
with such portion of knowledge as the Lord has endued me withal: But also I
have been a diligent and a painful obseruer of the labors and practices of
others, being men of great knowledge and sound judgment in the Art: Wherefore
to make here manifest, the cause which has pricked me here forward to leave
my other affairs, and so to draw me from my ordinary practices and studies,
being more beneficial for my maintenances, is not that I go about hereby to
impair the credit or reputation of others, being more ancient Professors. It
is (the Lord God knows) far from my true meaning, they are those whom I
love, honor and reverence: Neither do I here ambitiously go about with the
sweet impression of fair promises (greater then my ability is) to teach and
instruct, or curiously to set down, a better and perfecter way of curing this
heinous Malady (then others more learned men before me) I may not well say so.
Nevertheless, he hardly may be accounted for a good Soldier, which has
learned no more then his Captain has taught him: or a barrensconce, that has
no inventions in it: But I will confess here the only cause, (why I have
enterprized, or taken upon me to write of this forenamed Infirmity) is I
protest, a token of my love and diligence toward all young Practisers of this
noble Art of Chirurgerie, (howsoever otherwise, a painful and tedious travel
unto me.) Notwithstanding, I could in no wise satisfy the expectation of
certain of my unfeigned friends, but that I must make here a true and brief
rehearsal of my own observations and knowledge, touching the cure of the
foresaid Evil, which a long time I have practiced. How be it, being sorry to
minister An Apology to answer certain reproachful back-biters.
offense to any, by reason of publication hereof. Notwithstanding, I have been
credibly informed, and also it is unto my self well known, there be some
whom I little suspected, and less thought upon, would have been so wilfully
bent, without just cause to give occasion of offense, and did seem as it were
to repine and mislike of this my enterprise: and as it were, did partly reject
my knowledge and judgment, concerning the Cure before named: and in the
presence of certain persons of good sort, brake out with ambitious curiosity,
and said I was not capable of the Theoricke of this my Subject, and so wanted
knowledge of my self to publish these matters, which I have here taken upon
me in some measure to perform: and thus went about, not only to discredit
me, but likewise to put me to utter silence, as though I had spent all the
days of my life in the rude woods or wild Forest of Ignorance. Which thing
as it grieved me to hear, so in manner it forced me to answer: Let these men
sooth themselves (I say) never so much, they are known to be of no such deep
learning nor exquisite Literature, as they would make the world believe:
Howbeit, if it please these envious men to speak and judge of me with equity
and right: it is well known to most men, He that will use Chyrurgery must
needly follow the wars and attend on forrain^ Armies. Hipo. Lib. de. Medic.
that I have studied and practiced this worthy Art of Surgery, sithence the
4. year of her Majesty's Reign, Anno Dom. 1563. Where, first I served in her
Highness wars at New-hauen, under the command of the Right Honorable Ambrose
Earl of Warwick. Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, then Lieuetenant of
the Army and Forces in those parts. After with service being ended and before, I
was appointed Chirurgian, to serve in her Majesty's Navy in her ships Royal,
and also in other men of war: within a small time after, I was employed in the
Hospitalles in London, and there practiced the said Art of Surgery for
certain years, until I was sent for unto the wars in the Low Countries, by
ye Noble Earl of Leicester: and further, commanded by her Majesty, with all
speed to repair unto the said Earl, where I continued for the space of 9.
Months: and since and before I have had conference, and also often practiced,
with the best and skilfullest Chyrurgians, both English and Strangers, within
the City of London and else where: and now as it were, partly ouer-worne with
years and Services. Nothwithstanding, by her Majesty's favor and good liking
(whom the Almighty long preserve) now I am sworn and admitted one of her
Highness Chirurgians. And therefore in all reasonable He that pitch does touch,
shall defiled be with such
likelihood, I am not so barren or gross witted, and unlearned in the Art,
as some have termed me to be. And ye shall further understand, it was not
long before, it pleased some of them to say, they had graced me with the good
opinion they had of me: and moreover stood in the gap of my defense against
other such, which then were also sore troubled with the Flux of a foul mouth,
and used me at their pleasures for their common Table talk, with scoffing,
fleering, and deriding above manners and modesty. The same being told me, me
thought it was a strange alteration: howbeit, I did take their good speeches
very kindly, and so would have done still, if it had pleased them to continue
in the same good opinion of me, or to have bin silent. But it is truly said,
Hanibal knew well how to subdue the Romans, yet he knew not how to entertain
his Victories. It is not enough for a man to have begun a good work, unless
he still preseuer and continue in the same: Wherefore I will here abreuiate my
speeches, wishing to God, that this my labor were so perfect, that I needed not
to regard the curious examination and censure of any adversary: neither will I
detain you with many more circumstances, but here acknowledge my own
unworthiness. And therefore I beseech thee friendly Reader, in a word to suffer
me with patience to signify unto you, that I do not here peremptorily go
about to teach or instruct such persons which are already grounded in the
principles and knowledge of this Art: But my only meaning is to direct my
whole course, according (as I have observed) the best learned have heretofore
done in all times and ages, that is unto the Junior or younger Chir^rgiens: when,
as it were, have made but an entrance into the practice of the said faculty,
whose skill (peradventure) is as yet not so profound, that they are able to
search or obtain ye knowledge out of strange tongues, so far fourth that
they cannot possibly in a short time come to the highest of that knowledge,
which they heartily wish for. Indeed, it is (I suppose) impossible in the whole
course of man's life, even unto that Period, which (of the Learned) is called
Man's Age: that he is able without great care, study and much diligence, to
labor commendably, and with a good conscience to work in the Vineyard of
Chyrurgery: yet I know there be many young Students in the Art, will be
always ready, and most willing to discharge their duetyes in such matters as
they shall take upon them to deal in, whether it be in this kind of cure, or
otherwise. And also will be very careful, not only for conscience sake, but
even by a natural desire, to seek to increase their skill and necessary
knowledge, and therefore it is truly said: the good intent of such honest and
well meaning persons, requires a favorable acceptance, which is as well to
be esteemed, as the performance of them that be best able. And these will be
ready to manifest the same by yielding some fruit of their painful labor and
diligence: And now I will leave off discoursing, and begin to speak of my
determined purpose, and to make the same more plainly known, which I have
heertofore kept secret unto my self: howbeit, the greatest secret that is, may
no longer be called a Secret, when the whole multitude is made acquainted with
it.

THe Cure of the foresaid Evil is manyfolde: to wit, inwardly and out wardly,
and is performed by two special remedies: the one Medicinal, and the other
Isntrumental, without the which few good works or Cures in Chyrurgery can be
brought to perfection: The reason is, because in this Cure, the uncleanness
of the body is such, which feeds the matter of the disease. Therefore, first
of all the matter must be purged, for as it is said, the root of all the Cure
is ye well purging of the body, whereby Nature is the better enabled to expel
and unburden her self of many had and unprofitable humors. And now (by the
favor of the learned) I will therefore begin with remedies Medicinal,
according to the manner of Method, published by Calmatheus, one whom amongst
many other learned men in Physic and Surgery, I have observed most
diligently, as it were a Day Star or Christallin clear looking glass,
following him with fervent zeal and earnest desire: by reason (as it seems
unto me) he was not ignorant in any thing that might make for the truth of his
writing, chiefly for the Cure of the foresaid Evil. Yet (I protest) I am no
such deuote favorite of his, or any other man's whatsoever, further then justly
they have deserved: which is the only cause that has moved me to have a
reverent estimation of him and all other learned men, whether they do remain
beyond the Sea, or otherwise abide with us at home.

NOw follows the manner of Method, by Physical Struma.
remedies for the Cure of Struma, or the Evil which our Kings or Nueenes have
and do still Cure: the experimental proof thereof I have often times seen
effected: wherefore I will be short, and presently proceed unto the first
intention.

The first Intention Physical by Inward means.
THe first Intention (after Calmatheus) in the 12. Chap. of his book, for the
general cure of Unnatural Tumors, is that the curing of this disease called
Struma, does consist in Diet that dries moderately, and heateth and
attenuateth the humors: Hunger is profitable, and fulness is hurtful: Sleep
and Idleness are evil: exercise before meat very good: the use of Sulphur or
Alume water, is very good and profitable.

The second Intention Physical by Inward means.
THe second Intention is the use of breaking, attenuating, mundifying and
opening Medicaments; as are these Remedies now following. viz.

Recipe. Rad, Ireos. Cort. Sambucj.

Boiled in white wine, then add unto this decoction, a quantity of Ginger. For
this decoction breaks, attenuateth, opens and mundifieth dolorous Tumors:
so does it also provoke urine, with in this affect is a special matter.

The often use of the Pills of Hiera simplex is much commended to cast out
Phlegm of the stomach and guts.

But if so be that thou will purge the whole body, thou shall use the Pills of
Agarico Coccis: if thou list to dissolve and cast out Phlegm, these Pills
following must be taken, viz. Pillulae de Sagap: de Opopan, de Elleboro, de
Euphorbio. The Physicians in times past commended the powder of Turbith,
Ginger, and Sugar, of each equal parts: The Doses whereof was to two Dragmes.

The third Intention Physical by Inward means.
THe third Intention is the use of this powder* which does consume (as they
term it) the Antecedent matter, which it does as well by his manifest quality,
and (as they say) by a secret property.

This powder does consume Phlegm, by little and little.

. Rad. Aristo. Rotundae. An. i. Raphani. Spattulae foetidae. Fol. Pimpinell.
An. ii. Pilosell. Rutae Maioris. Scrophulariae. An.. ss. Philipend. Semen
Anisi* ii. Zingiber. i. Turbith* Optimi An. iii Seen Orient. Saccari Albissimi.
iii.

Make all these into powder, and let the Patient take every day in the morning
a Spoonefull, with white Wine, or the water of Broom.

Guido takes the forenamed powders, and boyleth them in white Wine until
half, and gives every third day one quarter thereof.

Galen approoueth and commends the use of Theriaca Vetus, Athanasia et
Ambrosia. The use of Aurea Alexa^drina for the co^forting of ye stomach, is
very good. Also it is said that Theriaca Athanasia do both resolve, break and
digest humors, being compact and gathered together in the profundity of the
body.

Mercurialis says moreover, that about the purging of children (which is
diligently to be observed) the state of P^rging of children after Mercurialis.
children is weak, that it must be handled with very gentle medicines, and
rather to be often repeated, and more easier then to minister any strong
Medicines: therefore the belly shall thus be mollifyed.

. Mellis Rosatj.. iii. Misce. Decoctionis fructuum.. i. Foliorum Senae.. ii.
ss.

But that the humors may be prepared, it must be done with this Medicine.

. Folior. Scrophulariae Ana. M. ss. Plantaginis. Betonicae. Menthae.

Make a Decoction according to Art, and then take of the said Decoction. j.
Syrupj Rosatj recentis, Oxymel. simplisis Ana.. ss. Mingle these: When the
humors be prepared, they may be purged with this Medicine.

. Agaricj Trochiscat.. j. Squinantj. gra. ij.

Steep them in Betony water and strain them and put thereto.

. Mellis Rosatj solutiuj.. ii. Electuarii de Psylio.. i. Decoctionis Cordialis.
i. Polipodio.. ii.

Thus much as concerning this brief note, or compendious Method of the
forenamed Authors, which may very well serve for a very fit President or
beginning to the rest that follows:
Now it remains that I make here also report of the singular and rare
efficacy of our manuel operation thereunto annexed and belonging, with the right
use of the topicall or outward remedies, which is to be externally applied. The
reason is, because it is referred unto the skillful Chirurgians manuell or
handy working, for the Cure of this great Infirmity, which does outwardly
affect the superficial parts of the body.

For (as says Iacobus Ruffus) that to the perfection and accomplishing of the
foresaid Cure (called, The Evil by the King, or Queen Cured) he does reduce
it into six Intentions Chirurgicall, as follows. The experimental verifying
of his excellent skill in this disease, as also in many others, is by diverse
worthy men often times commended: which Malady does vex and trouble most
pitifully the common sort of people. Iacobus Rufus his 6 Intentions
chirurgicall, by outward means.


1 The first Intention is, In Attritione, et Compressione. 2 The second
Intention is, In Discussione, et Resolutione. 3 The third Intention is, In
Suppuratione et Maturatione. 4 The fourth Intention is, In Incisione et
Extractione. 5 The fifth Intention is, In Corrosione et Mundificatione. 6 The
sixth Intention is, In Obligatione et Evultione.


ALso (after Fuchsius and other learned men) it is accordingly to be understood
as follows: who also has written of these Phiegmaticall or Glandulous
abcessions called Struma.

If (say they) these abscessions that be seated in the strong parts of the
body, and because they are not yet old and inueterate, having a thin Cystis
that covers them: these are to be appeased and consumed, and after dried up.

The first Intention Chyrurgicall by outward means.
NOw I will set down Examples and Instances for the Cure of the said Malady,
the which I have observed and gathered (as hereafter ensues) for the
perfection and accomplishing of the before named first Intention, if the
strength and ability of the Patient will serve and admit the same. Then one
chief thing (as you are before told) is, that the Patient do keep athin and
sparing diet, which is the efficient cause belonging unto Physic. The reason
is, as I have noted, that those which are thus affected, have always a great
inclination to a gross disordered liberty of feeding: Therefore the Patient
must be sustained with such meats, as are agreeable to Nature, and to eschew
such meats which make gross Juice: and not (as it is said) to lay gorge upon
gorge. And further ye shall note, though it be said before, that abstinence
is greatly to be commended: yet you must consider it is not meant, that Nature
should there by be enfeebled, or overthrown, and that especially in weak
bodies, great care must be had: But only to keep all possible abstinence,
that is to eat and drink sparingly and measurably, only to preserve the
strength, and to satisfy Nature: I mean, that it be such as is agreeable to
the strength of the Patient, and greatness of the Infirmity.

Likewise it is said, the often use of purging and bleeding on both the Arms,
is profitable. Also, it is auailable to use Frictions, Rubbings, Boxings, and
Blisterings is much praised after purgings, for it stops the flowing matter
(being applied upon the head) by revulsion or drawing back, and causes
euacuatio^. Moreover, it is said, yt to discuss these kinds of Tumors which
are found in mooueable parts, and superficially lodged near unto the outward
parts, A plate of Lead is most familiar therefore, especially in young persons,
by reason of the raritye and softnes of the skin: It is thought unfit (by
diverse learned men) to blister Childrens heads with Cantharides, it has been
seen to cause much pain Mercurialis co^demnetia this course, rather
commending Flamula louis, or such like.
and pissing of blood: but to do it by aduisement, either with Mustard or with
Nettles, is good.

Also, many learned men, of a certain knowledge and sound understanding, have
in their books greatly commended a plaster made thus: Recipe. Old dried
Goats dung, Honey and Vinegar, being decocted at an easy fire, to the
consistence of a plaster. Also, Doves dung mingled with Honey, has the same
effect. So is it by me also well approved, this plaster called Oxicroceum,
whose composition is not far to be sought for.

. Cerae, Picis, Colophen, Croci. An.. iiii. Terebinth, Galbanu^, Ammoniaci.
An.. j. iiij. Mastici, Olibanum. An.. j. iiij.


Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and powder that which is to be powdered, and so
make a plaster according to Art: Also a plaster of Figs baked and spread, and
so applied upon Struma is approved good.

Likewise, Oleum Cucumiris Asininus, dropped into the ear, on that side where
the Struma is, is most effectual to disperse and dissolve.

In like manner, is generally commended Emplastru^ de Ranis cum Mercurio, to be
appropriate and respective in this Cure, to consume superfluous humidity,
engendring this disease.

Howbeit, upon a time a certain repyning envious man, being full gorged with a
malicious railing spirit, being proudely given (in the gall of much
bitterness, with many scandalous words, and bragging comparisons ill beseeming
his person) reported that the aforesaid plaster De Ranis was dangerous unto
the patient; and said, who so did hold the contrary opinion, it was Such is
the impudency of bold blindness.
erroneous, foolish and deceiptfull: by reason (quoth he) of the coldness of
the Quicksilver: and boldly did seem to maintain the same, with a number of
very spruse terms, and picked phrases, like as young Children use to do, when
(in mockery) they counterfeite a strange kind of language, and forsooth placed
them as it were in Geometrical proportions, as though he had bin the only Son
of Archime des that great Geometritian. In deed it is a most true saying: That
fish which is bred in the dirt will always taste of the Mud: And I told him
that I never yet found any more coldness in this Plaster, then there is heat
in a painted fire. But this I do speak upon mine own knowledge, that there
is as much difference in Art and Judgment, between this odd fellow (which
would seem to be a second Aesculapius) and a man replenished with true
knowledge indeed, as is between a Master Cook and a Scullian of a Kitchen.
Howbeit, he said also, that his skill was such, that if a man were wounded at
York, bring him the weapon that hurt the Patient, and he would cure him
(forsooth) by only dressing of the weapon, and though be never see the
Patient. As certain as the Sea burns. And now here I will surcease to speak
any further of these matters, for I regarded not such sayings, since it is
truly said; Every man must yield an account, both of his case, and of his
labor. Themistocl^s, a Captain of Scientia no^ habet inimicum nisi ignorantem.
the Grecians (as Historians make mention) supposed it better to be en^yed of
the malicious, then to live in Idleness and baseness of mind, without doing some
good for the benefit of his Country and Common wealth, wherein he was borne and
bred.

Now to the second Intention, and so in order with the rest as they do lie,
and offer themselves unto us.
The second Intention Chyrurgicall by outward means.
THe second Intention Chirurgicall, is the right use of those remedies which
do mollifye, discuss and consume great abscessions, which are not yet hard
and inueterate.

And that the same is true, may easily be gathered as follows. And for that I
would have this second Intention made plain (as much as in me lies) and also
familiarly known unto the studyous Reader: I do therefore say, It is meet and
convenient, that those Medicamentes which are to be used, be of the Nature and
property to molifie and discuss, and so to open the powers of the skin by
euaporating, breathing and scattering abroad, and make thin the gross matter
and Phlegm. Then for the better performance thereof, without further
discoursing, I will here presently set down (as it were) a Storehouse of
diverse and sundry Montanus supposes these Strumous Tumors sometime to proceed
from Melancholy
approved Chirurgicall remedies, necessary for the curing and safe healing of
the forenamed Strumacie and Phlegmaticall sickness: The which from time to
time I have by experience (the Mistress of all Aries and Sciences) carefully
observed, and faithfully also collected out of the famous writings of sundry
worthy Authors, as also out of the fruitful labors, of diverse men famous in
experience: whose painful travails and studyes, have (at this day) most
excellently refined this worthy Art of Chyrurgerie from Barbarism: otherwise
it is greatly to be feared, a number at this day had not been so skillful and
rich in knowledge, and otherwise, as they are said to be. Therefore we ought
not to think any study, pains, or travail too great, wherein we hope of much
benefit to our patients, and also profit and commodity to our selves: And here
I must needs say, (according to my poor ability) I have my self been very
industrious for the common benefit, and good of others, truly to set down
diverse approved remedies of mine own collection: wherein (to my knowledge) I
have not in all this whole discourse, published any superfluous and vnapprooued
remedies, or otherwise kept back any worthy secret I had: but as did the
Evangelical and heavenly woman mentioned in ye Scriptures, who presented into
the Lords Treasury al ye wealth and substance she had. Notwithstanding, I have
read ye men in times past did with great care and diligence consecrate and keep
secret (as a precious treasure unto themselves) al such chosen and peculiar
remedies, with they had experienced and approved for the curing and healing of
any dangerous malady: and (as it is said) bound themselves by oath one to
another, not to bewray their Secrets by their books or writings. Howbeit, I
more regarding the public vtility and good of posterity, did with great care and
diligence consider with my self, what profit can there be to any man to bury
his labors in the lake of oblivion, or otherwise to hide it in the den of
darkness. And although I know the matter here spoken of, may seem a paradox
to some, and so of small worth: nevertheless, although I am none of the
greatest Clarks, yet I know it will be more auailable, then some happily do
make account of. For which cause I have labored with as much perspicuity and
plainnes, as possible I could, to deliuet the truth of my honest and faithful
good meaning, so far forth as God ha^^ enabled me in knowledge, skill and
memory. Wherefore I mean here presently to make public and open testimony
of the same, though now and then I make a little digression, and swerve from my
matter, by reason of certain Crosbyters, who have heertofore (behind my
back, and to my face also) not a little abused me: Howbeit, I will here
conclude this discourse concerning this Second Intention Chirurgicall, and do
confess and considerately affirm, that there is but few men's labors at the
first made so perfect, but that in process of time and further consideration,
they may be bettered, corrected and amended. Yet I cannot but much marvel,
that wise men now a days are grown to this pass, that they do so seriously
follow exorcismes and the Illusions of certain Charms of Clowtes and Rags,
which is very inhumane and barbarous; never practiced, neither written of, nor
allowed by any learned Phisitio^ or Chirurgian that ever I yet heard or read
of. Howbeit, the world is (as it were) led in a stringe and carried away to
believe these vanities, which make a shadow or show of verity for the safe
curing of diverse maladies, and sildome (they say) miss not: But I know the
contrary is true, for I have cured both old and young persons, when these
Charmers of clowtes and rags, with their incredible operations have failed
them, and proved flat foolery and absurdities. But to leave this new Leach
craft, with their doting inventions, I will here speak of diverse remedies very
respective and appropriate, for the cure of the before named infirmity, as a
president and example for young practizers of Surgery to follow. Now unto
the said Second Intention, which is first to set down those special remedies,
whose properties are to open the pooers of the skin, and to soften the hard
parts by inse^cible transspiration.

A choice and special mollyfying and resolving plasster, and serves well for
the curing of this greeuance: As my self have many times approved. Iacobus
Ruffus.


. Serapini. iiii. Ammoniaci. iii. Bdeilij. i. Galbani. i. Euphorbij. ii.


Let these be dissolved in good Malmesey, and then add thereunto.

Ol. Lilior. An. i. Ol. Amigdalar. Propoleos. iiii. ss.

Mise, fiat Implastrum.

Another. Clowes.


. Galbani. An. iii. Ammoniaci. Picis Albae. Cerae Citrinae. iiii. Ol. pedis
Vaccini. q. s.

Misce.

I do many times instead of the Dyle, take the Marow: Then what profit does
ensue, time will approve the same.

Another. Haly the Abbot.


. Farinae fabar. An.. v. Farinae Hord. Liqueritiae, An. x* Rad. Althaeae.
Picis. Cerae Albae. An. x. Adipis Anserini.

Let there be added the Urine of a Boy, and of old Oil q s. And so boil it
to the form of a Plaster.

Another. Banister.


. Gum. Ammoniaci. lb* ss. Rad. Brioniae in pull. i. Turp. Mineralis* i.
Cinnabrij. x. Cerae. ii.

Let the Gum Armoniacke be dissolved in Vinegar, according to Art^, and
after made up in rowles. Among a number of his memorable deeds, which he has
left unto the mind and memory of posterity, this his Plaster deserves great
commendations.

Another. Mercurialis.


Mercurialis commends a Plaster made of Lyme and Saltpeter, of each like
much, being mixed with Barrowes grease. q. s. But such remedies are too strong
for Children, least it cause Agnes, and hurt the soft and tender flesh of their
bodies, (chiefly about the Neck) it is to be avoided. Moreover* I read* that
to make a Plaster of Nitrum and Lyme, of each a like quantity, and of
Cardamonium and Fenygreeke 4. times so to much, and with Honey make heeroof a
Plaster.

Aetius* says, when Struma begins in children, they must be molifyed and
dispersed: And for mollifying in children is approved this remedy following.

. Diachylon. iiii* Oesypi. i. Radicum Ireos iiii. Pulueriset.

Misce.

Another.

Recipe. The Lees of white or red wine, and of strong Vinegar, of each a
quart: Mallowe leaves 4. good handful: Boil them till the leaves be tender,
then stamp the leaves, and put them again into the said licour, with half a
pound of sweet butter: of barley meal and of bean meal, of each a good
handful: Of Linseede and Fenigrek of each 4. ounces: Of the powder of red Rose
leaves one good handful* Of yolks of Eggs 3. or 4. an of Saffron the weight
of 3. d* fiat cat ap las.

I might easily bring in a confused number of other remedies to the same end
and purpose, out of diverse learned men's writings, which here to repeat were
needles, and to no great use, since I know these may suffice: Wherefore I think
it good to pretermit the nominating of the rest, etc.

The third Intention Chyrurgicall by outward means.
THe third Intention is, to ripen, open and cleanse such Phlegmaticall
Corruptions and Vlcerous Apostumes, which do pertain to Suppuration: This
needs no long discourse, since it plainly appears, that these troublesome,
hard kernelly swellings, be found so rebellious* that they do resist all
emollientes and Diaphoreticall remedies before named: by means whereof it can
not be dissolved and consumed as we happily would, or do desire. For which
causes we are further constrained to alter our course, with due consideration,
that is to wit: Not to leave the Patient helples, but to use stronger
Medicamentes, I mean Suppuratiues, as is before said, such as whose property
is to bring superfluous humors to maturity and ripenes, by these and such like
Emplasticke remedies, which (as it is said) do by the closing of the pooers of
the skin, augment the natural heat, whereby the matter so enclosed causes
the generation of matter or Pus. But I must confess, I have not often times
seen these hard Phlegmaticall abcessions easily brought to suppuration. The
matter being once cold, dull, Clammy, hard and knotty, and deeply seated, and
of a long continuance in a body, whose skin is gross and thick, and the
matter hardly compact: These kinds (I have found) do sildome come to maturity
and ripenes, unless (as Cornelius Celsus says) the said Tumors be mixed and
made of matter and blood. And Trincauel reports, that some of these Nota.
Tumors that have ^eate in them, do ripen and come to matter and suppuration:
But there be others that be more hard, and do resist suppuration, and then
they come nearer unto the nature of a Scirrhus. Now it follows that I set
down those approved remedies, being in vulgar use, serving for suppuration,
which are long ago ratifyed and well allowed of, by a uniform consent, both
of old and late writers, which were men of an industrious capacity, and of a
most rare and exquisite knowledge in the Art. And first I will begin with
Johannes de Vigo, one of the chief Fathers, and true Patrones of al good
learning and knowledge in the Art of Surgery: As it (in some sort) may
appear by Master Bartholmew Traheron, which first Translated. Vigo in the
English tongue. In his Epistle Dedicatory (whose judgment therein I do
acknowledge) he says: that although Nota.
Vigo were not brought up in the knowledge of the Tongues, yet through his
singular wit, long experience, and diligent study, he has invented and set
forth, more notable things in the Art of Chirurgerie, then any other
heretofore: and I think says he, nothing can better testifye the cunning of
this man, then that he continued so long in Rome, in such a company of pocky
Curtezans: neither Priests, Bishops, nor Cardinals excepted, as it appears in
his Book: for where such cariones been, the best Egles will resort, etc.

A Maturatiue Plaster. Vigo.


. Radices Althaeae. Ana. lb. ss. Capit. Liliorum.

Let these boil in a sufficient quantity of Water, and after being stamped,
put unto them of Garlic and white Onions roasted, under the coals of each.
iij.

Ol. Liliorum. An. ii. Butyri. Pinguedinis porcini. An.. ii. ss. Anserinae.
Farinae Tritici. An. q. s. Fenigreci.

Make a Plaster at the fire, adding in the end, the yolks of two Eggs:
There be some (I know) do^ little prize or value this Plaster, but I do
acknowledge it to be an infallible remedy.

Another. D. F.


. Radices Bryoniae. lb. ss. Ceparum. No. ii. Rad. Althaeae recentiu^.. iiii.
Fol. Maluarum siccarum. p. i. Hidropiperis. M. i. Ficuum. An. j. Passularum
Enucleatarum.

Boil them well, then add unto them.

Fermenti. An. ii. Axungiae suillae Insulsae. Euphorbij. pull. i.

Misce et fiat Emplastrum secundum artem.

This plaster works miraculous effects in this Cure.

Another Plaster. Paulus Aegineta.


. Mirrhae. x. Ammoniaci Thymiamatis. vii. Visci Quercini. viii. Galbani. iiii.
Propolis. i.

Misce et fiat Emplastrum secundum Artem.

A Maturatiue Cataplasme.

Recipe. Rye-bread lib. i. White Onions and of Lilly Roots, roasted under the
Ashes, of each 4. Ounces. A Bryony Root, and Figs boiled in Malmesey, of
each 6. Ounc. Fenygreke and Lynseede, of each 3. Oun. Barlye meal and Bean
meal, of each 4. Oun. Oil of Roses, Camomill and Wormwood, of each 3. Oun.
Honey 4. Oun. The yolks of 4. Eggs hard roasted. Saffron the weight of 4. d.
Boil all these together to a laudable consistence, and apply it thick unto
the grieved parts, morning and evening warm.

Also I read in Johannes Libaulty, his Book Entitled This medicine
Mercurialis allows likewise. cap. de Struma.
Le Meson Rustic, and also in other Learned Writers, that the dung of a Cow
heated under the Ashes, betwixt Vine or Colwort leaves, and mingled with
vinegar, has the property to bring Scrophulous swellings to ripenes, etc.
Nothwithstanding, if all these chance to fail, then have recourse to that
which follows in the Fourth Intention, which is perfomed by Section or
Incision, when we find the matter before rehearsed, unfit to yield either to
Resolution or Suppuration, etc.

The fourth Intention Chyrurgicall by outward means.
THe fourth Intention of these Strumous Tumors, which are not cured by former
remedies (and yet are gentle, obedient and tractable) is to cut them off, and
then to pull them out.

In the use of these outward incisions, this scope ought chiefly to be
regarded, that is: to be very circumspect in your handy operations, attempted
and done concerning the cure of this great Malady: That is, the apertion or
opening by launcing or Incision of those glandulous Tumors. For as it is said,
blood is the treasure of life, and habitation of the soul: Moreover, it is
surely very hard and difficult, especially when there is in the affected place,
either Nerve, great Vain, or Artery, etc. Therefore such persons as are to
endure this painful action, ought to have much patience, and to be of a good
courage: Then it may be the better attempted and done by a cunning and
skillful Chyrurgian: which there is no doubt, but he will be so provident, that
nothing shall offend. How best, it is not necessary or sufferable over
curiously to search and attempt the cutting them out by Incision: For that many
of them are subject to violent and inordinate bloody Fluxes, and other evil
accidents, which doubtless will much amaze you and hinder your handy
operation: I mean, when these Tumors be desply planted, and secretly lodged
amongst the great veins and Arteries called Carotides, or otherwise near the
Nerui recurrentes, which is often times the cause that some be come
speechless there by. And it cannot be justly denied, but that these Incisions
have often times been attempted with a lance by our Ancestors and
Forefathers. But amongst a number of those worthy men, Wickar being a man of
good knowledge and skill in the Cure of the foresaid Evil, his counsel is,
that before we do attempt the said action by Inscision, the Patient be first
laid upon his Bed, and so both his feet must be strongly iyed unto the bed
poasts, his head and both his hands must also be fast held by men of strength,
and skillful in holding: In such sort as we do in cutting those which have the
crooked or wrye necks. And he that is chosen to be the Operator of the said
action, must prudently and wisely (says Vigo, and other learned men) consider
the greatness and smalnes of the said Tumor, which must be incised and cut from
one length of the Tumor to an other. Then by little and little, separate, divide
and undermine the whole Cistis round about, to the very bottom and roots
thereof, not rashly, nor by violence, but orderly by degrees, separate with your
fingers, and other serviceable instruments, as you use to divide ye forenamed
Wennes called Steatoma, Atheroma and Meliceris: And confessed it is for a
certa^^^^, that if any portion or part of the said Cistis or bag, chance to
remain behind, and not clear taken away by the roots, it will (doubtless)
breed and increase again: But to prevent such greeuances, me thinks I cannot
speak too sufficiently thereof: wherefore, if any part remain behind, then lay
upon it the powder of Mercury precipitate, or (if that be too weak) add to
it of Alumen Combust, or Vitriolum Album combust, of each equal portions:
notwithstanding I believe, and confidently hold, that the work of your hands
is the best instruments you have to trust to, and to relieve you in this
distress.

Moreover, Mercurialis he further says these words, Mercurialis.
for the curing and effecting of this matter: First (says he) choose some
light place, and let the Patient lie on his bed, for in sitting he will soon
sound: therefore bind his legs together, and after bind them to the Bedside,
and let one hold his head fast, and then the Chirurgean taking the swelling in
his left hand, let him make an Incision, either right or straight, or somewhat
crooked, on the neck under the Jaw-bones, until he come to the matter
enclosed in the Bladder, which is sometimes one and single, as in the lesser
swellings, and sometimes double, like the Myrtle leaf in the greater
swellings: So that conveniently (either by the fingers or other Instruments)
the Bladder may be by little and little separated, and drawn from the next
parts, together with the matter enclosed in it. But take good heed that the
Bladder be not cut, because it is hardly drawn away, and much hinders the
Cure, and the evil will come again: But if any such thing chance, it were
good to consume it with eating Medicines. Great care must also be had, that
neither the Arteries, veins, nor notable Nerves be hurt, but by little and
little gently put it aside* Yet it in the cutting some vessel be divided, and
the issue of blood trouble and hinder the work: then apply some meet thing to
stay the blood, and so come again to your work: For if the lips of the
I^^^sion he inflamed, and the swelling or Stru^a be not safely dissolved away:
then lay on a Stupa beaten with the White of an Egg, and such things as be
good for stopping of blood. After, apply Medicines that will a little concoct,
and then use abstersiues, and next such as causes flesh to grow and heal up
the scarre.

The fifth Intention Chyrurgicall by outward means.
THe fifth Intention is, those which are immovable, and deeply rooted
within, Corrode them about and cleanse them thoroughly. I grant it tolerable
and very convenient, to use in this Cure the due applycation of Potential
Cauteries, such as whose propertye and service is to corrode the flesh and the
skin, and may with very good circumspection very safely be attempted, being
administered upon a body that is of a reasonable constitution, and in such sort
that his strength is able to hold and endure the same. A(...)re I will make
further demonstration thereof, that is tosay: that your Cautery benot applied
upon any Sinnewy part, neither upon the great Veins nor Arteries, for that
these be accounted indeed principal and chief vessels: Also you must
consider the quallity and quantity of the Causticke you do administer, for
that some are more violent and stronger then other, and some will run and spread
more then another.

Jacques Guill^mean Chyrurgian unto the now French King which now is: says,
truly it is not necessary, nor allowable to apply the Caustic upon the ends
or beginnings of Muscles, for if your Patient that is to be Cauterized, have
an unsound and sickly body, you must first of all be sure before you
administer the said Cautery, to Phlebotomize and purge him: The reason is,
least in the Cauterized parts, there chance to come concursion, or gathering
together of humors. Also, it is further said, that a small part of your
potentiall Cauteryes, does and will work as forcibly on a soft and tender
body, as a great quantity thereof will do upon a strong and gross obdurate
person. Over and besides, the greater abcessions are to be Cauterized one way,
and the lesser an other way, and that with good consideration. And here to put
you in memory, that you must be very careful and circumspect in defending the
parts round about the said Tumors, for fear (as I have said) that your
Cautery do run and spread too far abroad: for the which cause you shall
strengthen, fortifye and defend the foresaid affected parts, that is to say: by
inuironing and compassing it round about with some repercussiue Medicamentes,
lest the grieved part (which by long infirmity is become thereby sore weakened
and enfeebled) and may so bring with it great swe^^^^g and other evil
accidents: And therefore it is not with (...)od cause, that the parts grieved be
rightly ordered and defended, whereby you shall be sure the better to effect
your intended purpose without the said perrill or danger but with the highest
commendation in preventing the evil that otherwise might ensue: which reasons
always enduced me to lay round about the Cauterized parts, some special
defensive, as is this, or the like hereafter following. A good defensatiue.


Reci. Emplastrum Diachalcithios dissolved in Ol. papaueris et Ol. ros.
whereunto is added Ouorum albumin. et Aceti. ros. An. q.

Et fiat Emplastrum.

This done, then presently go about with your Causticke, to root out all the
whole Schrophulous and hard kernelly substances, either with the common Kuptory
or Causticke, which in this case best contenteth my mind: the making hereof I
do not here set down, because it is so commonly known.

Howbeit, there is an other Causticke, which (as it is reported unto me by a
skilful Chirurgian) does work without any pain, or very little at al. The
reputed Author thereof is said to be a famous practizer in Surgery, dwelling
at Mountpelier in France. I must needs think reverently of the Author of this
Caustic, hoping his mind was not such to delight himself with publishing of
untruth: But if it do indeed work without pain, the mystery thereof is
far above my reach. A good potential Cautery:


Rec. Lixiuij Saponarij. lib ij. Vitriolj Romanj. iij. Mercurij sublimatj. j.

Made into very fine powder: in the end of the boiling put in of Opium 2.
drams. Misce et fiat Trochiscj.

You shall further note, that if at any time your Causticke do happen not to
work so well and sufficiently to your mind, as happily you would wish it
should do, then apply the same Cautery again: but you must first make Incision
along wise, upon the middle of the foresaid Escharre: Then put in some small
quantity (that is, so much as you suppose will penetrate into the profundity
and very roots thereof) for it does behooue a provident and wise Artist to
prevent and see all eminent danger in ye doing thereof, and the^ by Gods help,
ye may safely in a short time root out these hard Strophulous Tumors. For (as
I have said) unless the root be clean taken out* this Malady will grow and
increase again. But if there chance to approach any painful accidents (as
I have known and seen to follow in sundry persons) then with speed remove
and take away the same: which done, ye shall procure the fall of the Eschar,
with Vnguentu^ Populeum: or else with Vnguentum Rosarum, or sweet Butter. And
to apply upon it Emplastrum Diacalcitheos, or Emplastrum Deminio. So after all
the Escharres be removed, then if there be required mundifying and clensing,
these following are vulgarly used, as Vnguentum Apostoloru^, called of some
also Vnguentum Christianoru^: which Unguent in this effect cannot be bettered:
and Vnguentum Egiptiacum, and sometimes to mix two parts of Vnguentum
Apostolorum, and one part of Vnguentum Egiptiacum. Also, Vnguentum Apij, is
available in this Cure, viz. Vnguentu^ ex Apio.


Recipe. Succi Apijet Plantaginis. An. ii. Farinae hordej et Orobj. An j. ss.
Terebinthinae, j. Mellis, iij. Mirrhae iij.

Misce et fiat Vnguentum.

If you add to this Unguent the yolks of Eggs and Mercury Praecipit. it does
work much better. Also the powder of Mercury praecipit. is good of it self,
and if you will have it work more forcibly, add unto it of Alum combust
according to discretion. With these foresaid remedies you may continue until
there appear pure and quick flesh: then it follows to use Incarnatiues, and
Agglutinatiues, with other medicamte^s, fit for consolidation.

Thus having sufficiently entreated of the fifth Intention: now it remains
for a full conclusion, to present in order last of all, the sixth Intention, as
follows.
The sixth Intention Chyrurgicall by outward means.
THe sixth Intention Chirurgicall is, that in those Strumas that are fastened
but to a thin and flender root, you shall bind them about and pluck them
out. This last action (as it appears) is very easily performed by a skillful
Operator or cunning Chirurgian: neither does it require any great curiosity,
but a decent and artificial strong binding, meet for the plucking of them out
(as it is said) by the roots. In which action you need not fear any great
perrill of Flux of blood, but that it may easily be restrained with my
restringent powder, published in my last book of Observations, which has (of
a number of good Artistes) a friendlye acceptance: If it chance through the
ill disposition of the body, any dolorous accidents do happen to follow, then
mitigate the same (says Wicker) with stupes wet in the white of an Egg, and
oil of Roses: and afterward if there grow filthynes, let it be cleansed with
those remedies before rehearsed: then no fault being committed through
negligence or want of skill, you shall no doubt with good success, finish this
last Intention. But amongst a number of excellent remedies for the curing of
this evil (after the parts be thoroughly cleansed from all annoyances) this
Plaster following has all the properties, that is prescribed in these kinds
of remedies before named: Which noble Plaster I obtained of one Isack a
stranger borne, a famous Incisioner and Licentiate Chirurgian of London, who
for his excellent knowledge in his Art, was called beyond the Seas, The golden
Master or Doctor. M. Isackes Plaster.


. Bdellii, et Ammoniaci. An. i. ss. Lapidis Sanguinalis, lapidis Magnetis. An.
i. ss Aristolochiae rotundae, aloes Hepaticae. An. iii. Olibanj et Masticis.
An. i. Lithargirij arge^t. et lapidis calaminaris. An. iii Corallj Rubjet albi.
An. ii. Lumbricorum in pull. j. Succj scrophulariae. vj. Colophoniae. lb ss.
Terebynthiae Venetae. iiij. Cerae Albae. xii. Olej Hispanicj. An.. iii Olej
Hipericj cum gummis. Olej Laurini Camphor. ss.

Misce et fiat Implastrum*

With this Plaster only I cured a Bricklayers Daughter near London, of
diverse bad Scrophulous Ulcers in her neck and throat. Howbeit, there be some
(who are as it were so nose-wise) that forsooth they can not abide to read any
medicine, that is of a long composition, be it never so precious. Contrariwise,
there be others again, that will not endure to read a short composition, be
it never so well approved: for they plainly say, there can be no great
matter of worth in them: And thus they are as variable in their opinions (for
want of true Art and judgment) as the Camelions be in their colors. Quot
capita tot sensus: so many heads so many opinions. Now here I will forbear
any further to discourse of this Sixth Intention Chirurgicall, but I will set
down certain Observations for the Cure of this grievous Malady by me
perfected, as follows: least otherwise happily it may be said, He that
tells a long process or boasting tedious tale without some proof, must
needs require credit, either for his long boasting tedioustale, or else for
some special Authority that is in his person. But as for boasting amongst wise
men, it can win little credit.

An observation.
A Few months past there was sent unto me by a Gentleman of Essex, a certain
husband man, being about the Age of thirty years, who was molested (for the
space of six months) with certain outward swellings, or unnatural Strumous
Abscessions: some of them were great with notable hardnesses, some mean, and
some smaller, being for the most part packed and heaped together, but yet
moved too and fro, hither and thither: For the which he was first purged (with
great moderation and aduisement) with the pills of Euphorbium and Trochisce ex
Viperis: or the Pills of Vipers, and he did take many times Theriaca
Andromachj, and kept a very slender diet withal: after he was well purged
from gross and raw humors, then I applied upon his neck and both his
shoulders 3 great cupping glasses, and so did draw blood and humors in good
quantity. After the application of this kind of Boxing or Ventoses, then
presently I applied upon his swelling this Unguent, and these Plasters
following.

Recip. Colewort leaves, green Leekes and blades: of water Betonye,
Motherwort, the less Plantine, The vngue^t singular good to consume all
scrophulous Abscessions.
Daysie leaves and Flowers, Maltows, Nicotian, and Pelitory of the wall, of
each a handful: Beat and shred these herbs very fine: then add to these
foresaid herbs of Wine Vinegar lib. ii. of Hogs grease and sweet Butter, of
each lib. ii. of oil of Almonds lib. j. a young Fox, of earth worms, and shel
snailes, of each lib. i. Let all these lie infused and buried in horse dung the
space of a month, then boil all together till the watrynes be consumed: then
strain it strongly, and heerewith morning and evening anoint his neck very
warm, for half an hour together: Then applied I Emplastrum de ranis cum
Mercurio: and at other times, Emplastrum Dyachilon maius, et de Muscilaginibus,
of each equal portions: and by this way and order of curing, he was by me cured
and safely healed within the space of 40. days.

Another observation.
Another observation of a Master of a Ship.
Upon a time there was brought unto me a certain Master of a Ship, by a Servant
of mine, called Robert Coulter, a man who (for his knowledge and skill in the
Art of Surgery) was greatly esteemed of diverse Nobles, and worthy Persons.
This Master of the Ship was mightily infected with many Vlcerous Strumaes in
his neck, throat and breast, with much out-growing flesh, loathsome and
unpleasant to behold: his hard swelling exceeded in number, magnitude and
greatness: he had a crasie and unsound body: his mind much troubled with
pensiveness and melancholy fancies. Therefore being loath to admit any thing
needful, or commit any thing hurtful, I did take the advice and counsel of
a grave and learned Physician: who prepared and purged his body from much crude
and raw indigested excrementall humors, with the Pills of Sagapenum de
Agarico Coctiae. An. ss. Misce. In like manner he did set him down a good
regiment of diet, which was thin and sparing and light of digestion. He also
forbad him eating and drinking at unaccustomed hours: also he did refrain
those meats that were gross and tough: as Beef, Milk, fried Eggs, hard
cheese, all pulse and nuttes, and other meats which cause thick Juice: Also
he did appoint him after his first purgings every morning and evening for a
space, to receive this drink following, which procured him to avoid much
Phlegmatic raw humors, especially by Urine. A drink to procure Urine.


. Apij Rusticj et Eupatorij. An. M. i. Soldanellae. M. ii. Petroselini
Macedonici. An. M. j. ss. Herbae Trinitatis. Mellis com. lib. ss. Gingiberis.
ss. Vini Albi et Aquae com. An. lib. vi. And of fine Mythridat.. iii.

But be sure ye gather the herbs when the Sun is on them, and boil them
to the consumption of the third part, in an earthen pot nealled and close
covered, so that no air go forth: when it is cold, strain it and keep it
in clean vessels.

And for that this my Patient was subject to much Restriction of his belly: he
did also admit him to forbear the foresaid drink, and to drink of this
Laxatiue decoction a quarter of a pint at a time, which he received first in
the morning, and at 3. or 4. of the clock in the afternoon, and last in the
evening. The purging decoction.


. Sarsaeparillae. iiij. Rad. sassafras. ij. Ligni sancti. iii. Epithymi. An. i.
Hermodactil et Stechados, Seminis Anisi. i. M. L.
Liquerisiae. ss. Senae Oriental. ii. Saccari albi. lib. ss. Mithridati. i.
Vini albi. An. lib. viii. Aquae com.

Boil them unto the third part, and last put in your Senae and Mithridate, and
let it not boil much above half a dozen walmes. Et fiat.

Local remedies.
Now for that his Ulcers were many, and subject to a botte distemper, for that
cause he might the better admit blood letting, being also a man of a grown
age, therefore I took the more quantity thereof. Then next I proceeded with
the Cure of the beforenamed malignant Ulcers, and did first bathe or wash them
for a good space with Hydromel (that is, Well-water and Honey boiled together)
by reason of the hot distemperature, and did subdue the whole Scrophula,
following Vigoes direction: after Incision I did put again of the Causticke
into the middle of the Carnosity, which deceived me not, and so after caused
him to avoid much noisome matter and filthiness: Then after I did mundifye them
with Vnguentum Apostolorum Mesuei, and of Vnguentum Aegiptiacum An. Oun. 2.
Oleum Ouorum, Mel Rosarum An. Oun. 2. Lapis Calaminaris preparat made into most
subtle powder. Misce et fiat Vnguentum.

I found this aforesaid Unguent very commodious and profitable in this Cure,
and did continue with it till I perceived pure and quick flesh: then I did
also constitute and ordain these two remedies which in their operation for the
cure of the said Struma, is approved profitable.

Recipe. Saccari Plumbj.. ss. Ol. Ouorum lutorum. ij.

Misce.

This place will not admit me here orderly, to set down at large, those great
cures which I have seen healed by other Chirurgians, of whom I obtained the
knowledge of the foresaid remedies: And I have also with the same, cured and
healed many of the like cures, but especially in the curing of fraudule^t
Ulcers in Ano. the said remedy being Artificially made and prepared according
to the Chymistes Art, the subject is only Plumbj rub. et Acetj fort. Also I
have thought it good to set down the manner of making the foresaid Ol. Ouor.
that is: take 20. or 30. Eggs, more or less, and let them be sodden very
hard: which done, lay a side the whites, and reserve only the yolks, so let
them be well labored and beaten in a clean mortar: then put them into a Frying
pan, and cause the^ be well fried, continually stirring them, till it come to
an Oylye substance, and after press it forth according to Art.

Recipe. White Varnish.. ij. Lytarge of gold. j.

Put the Varnish in a little broad earthen Pan, being made flat and well nealed,
the bigness of a great Sawcer, and strewe in the Litarge by little and little,
and stir it together every two hours, and it will in the end come to a
certain hardness, in such sort that you may beat it to powder, and strew of
this powder upon your Pledgets, for the cure of ye outward Abscession, which
likewise troubled him greatly, being so hard, nody and knotty, so that I feared
they would have degenerate into a Scirrhus, but I did mollify and dissolve them
with these remedies following. A special molifying and dissoluing Cataplasma


G. Kebble.
Recipe. Turnips and Lilly roots An. lib ss. boiled in strong Ale or
Malmesey, q. s. which being boiled very tender, then strain gently forth the
lyquors, and beat the root very well in a stone mortar, and add thereunto
Bean meal and Barley meal, and Ote-meale, of each a handful: then take the
liquors that the fore named roots were boiled in, and add thereunto Marsh
Mallow roots two handfuls, of Fenygreke and Lineseede, each of them a
handful. Let these stand infused 12. hours, then boil it to a thickness,
and so strain it strongly. Then take of this Mussilage lib. ss. and add to it
also Oil of Lineseede and sweet Butter An. q. s. and of Saffron the weight of
4. d. Then boil all together to a consistence. Et fiat Cataplasma.

Also, I often used Emplastrum de Ranis cum Mercurio et. Emplastrum Dyachilon
maius, Emplastrum de Muscilaginibus, as is before named: And thus I cured this
Sea-faringman, and so continued (to my knowledge) 11. years: in the end he
dyed in the last voyage with Sir Frances Drake.

An Observation of a Maid, whose friends supposed she had the Evil before
rehearsed, when I was but a young Professor in this faculty and Art of
Chyrurgerie.
An observation of a Maid dwelling at Yalding in kent
ABout thirty years past (as it were in the minority of this my practice) I did
observe there was brought unto me (by a Preacher, then being Vicar of Yalding,
a town in Kent) a Maiden about the age of 22. years, having a strong and
able body, and of a reasonable good constitution, who was supposed to have that
Evil, called Struma. Ye shall understand, this Vicar was a man that did
practice both Physic and Surgery: this Maiden was a long time troubled
with an Ulcer in one of her legs, and a great swelling in one side of her
neck: which Maladyes, the foresaid Vickar did take upon him to cure and heal:
how be it, in continuance of time he grew weary of his work, and told a
neighbor of his, called Master Eden (a Gentleman dwelling also in Yalding)
that the Maid his Patient (as he supposed) had the Queens Evil (which
Gentleman's Daughter not long before I had cured of the same:) The said
Gentleman persuaded the Vicar not to spend time too long, but to cause her to
be ^^^t up to London to me, whose counsel presently he followed, and the
Vicar and the Maid and her father consulted together, and came to me to
London, By the advice of one M. Arche^ boule and Beeden Chirurgians of London.
and showed me her grief, and the continuance of the same. So after diligent
view taken by me, I found it was not the Evil (as he supposed) but a sort of
crude and raw humors, flocking together in her neck, with a putrifyed corrupt
Ulcer upon her right leg, and so I told him he was deceived in her grief. Then
they went their way and asked further counsel, which all were of my opinion.
Then they came unto me the next day, and I did undertake the cure with the
counsel of one Doctor Spering a grave and learned Physician, who prescribed
her an order of diet, with convenient purging. It is to be noted, he gave unto
her in three several boxes, three sundry purgations to be taken at three
several times, set down in writing very plainly, as might be devised. In
like manner I delivered unto them all such local remedies as was fit for both
her griefs: amongst the rest I noted in writing, that the first thing she
should use unto the Ulcer on her leg, was Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, which I made
very strong, and of a high and thick body, for that I would have her spread it
upon pledgets somewhat thick, and after to proceed with other meet remedies.

But note what ill hap followed by the Maids carelesnes, and too much
negligence: In the morning after she came home to Yalding by 7. of the clock,
and took one of the 3. Purgations which the Doctor gave unto her to take, she
set it upon a stool by the fire, where she meant first to dress her leg:
in conclusion (by great oversight) she laid the Purgation to her leg, and
did eat up the whole box of Aegiptiacum, which was nere 2. oun. and (as she
said afterward) it was very untoothsome and loathsome in tasting. All this
while for two hours space she felt little working of it, but did begin in the
end greatly to burn, and did complain in her stomach, throat and mouth, and
casted extremely, and also shortly after purged down very greatly, and thus
continued for the space of one day, and one night before she sought for help.
In the end, the Vicar was not to be found, but stayed at London, then they sent
unto Maidestone to an Italian Physician called Santa-Cilia, Santa-Cilia.
and he being given to understand by them, that by means of a purgation, she
was in a great burning heat in her body, and purged and vomitted too
abundantly, and so wanted sleep greatly, for the which he gave them a
prescript unto the Apothecary: but first that they themselves should apply her
with butter-milke, and new milk, and some good fat Mutton brothes: and to
help to stay her purging, he counseled them to give her to drink oftentimes,
Red-wine and Conserve of Sloes together, and to procure her to sleep with this
potion following. A potion to procure sleep


. Diascordij. i. ss. Diacodij. j. Aquae Cardui Benedicti.

fiat potio.

But this did small pleasure. The next night he sent her this ensuing. Another*


. Diascordij.. iiii. Philonij Romanj.. i. Aquae Cardui Benedicti.. iii. Sir. de
Succo Lymonum.. i.

Misce.

With this she had some comfort, but not to that purpose they looked for: so
after the third night, in the next morning they sent with all speed to my
house in London with a letter, of the great danger she was in, and the
Physicians bills with all what she had done: and presently I sent it to D.
Spering, who was greatly grieved to hear of it, and said he was sure there was
some extraordinary matter in it, for the purgations he sent would never bring
her into such danger. The^ after he had well considered of the matter, and
present danger that might ensue, he prescribed forth with that his
Apothecary should make first, for to cool and quench her great and extreme
thirst, and to help her to her tasting again, this Iulip which was thus made.

Rec. Barley Water lib. iiii. Conserve of red Roses and of Barberyes, of each 2.
Ou^: Whereunto was added 20. drops of Oil of Vitrioll. Misce.

And then she did drink for a space, which wrought to good effect in cooling
of her, and so brought her to a good taste again. For the staying of the Flux
of her Belly and Vomiting, she took of this Electuary at diverse times a day,
the quantity of 3. Oun. at a time. The making hereof is as follows. An
Electuary to stay great Fluxes in the Belly.


Recipe. Bol. Armoniacj Orient. j. Cynamomj. j. Cloves and Nutmegs roasted.
An.. ss. Macis. j. Sanguinis Hominis, dried in the Sun, and made into fine
powder. ij. Corticis Balastej. j. Of white Paper shred into a number of small
pieces: of Sorrel seeds, and of Plantine seeds, dried and made into fine
powder, of each. j.

Boil these in 12. Oun. of Sirupe of Vinegar, till it come unto the thicknes
of an Electuary, etc.

He gave also unto her the first night, a Pill of Ladanum, only to procure
sleep and quiet rest, and caused her to be covered with many clothes, and so
procured sweat: Thus within an hour and a quarter she fell a sleep, and
rested quietly until mine of the clock the next morning, and never casted nor
went to the stool: and (being awaked) confessed she was greatly refreshed,
and felt no pains at all till toward night, and then she casted a little, and
went now and then to the stool: for which cause she took her fore said
Electuary. She earnestly required to have an other Pill, but the Doctor gave
his direction to the contrary, and would first see how Nature did dispose her
self: so the night following she rested but little, how be it a great deal
better then before. Then the third night he gave her the second Pill, and
after that she never vomitted or purged disorderly again: the excellency of
these remedies is above belief and incredible, that I have done and seen done
by these last worthy remedies, both by Sea and by land The seventh day after
she had received her unfortunate Purgation of Aegiptiacu^, then speeches was
made by me to see the Ulcer of her leg, but they regarded it not; in the end
she opened it, and found it almost clean cured, then she commended me, and
so did her friends for this my excellent remedy: but she said would never take
the like Purgation again, for a thousand pound: thus she was cured by Fortune
and not by Art. Then I required of her, where the Boxes were, that the
Purgations and the Vnguentum Aegiptiacum were in? she said she threw them both
into the fire: For (said she) the Purgation had a filthy taste, and was so
clammy, and so sticked to her mouth and teeth, that I had never so much a do
(said she) to get it down my throat. Then I perceived she had taken the
wrongthing, and it was the more apparent by reason of the blacknes of her
teeth, and the stains of her clothes wherewith she had often wiped her mouth:
and also by staining of the Basins and the dishes, wherein she had so often
times vomitted. After this I stayed with her tendaies, til her leg and mouth
was perfectly cured, and then we were royally paid, and thus went to London
to the Doctor, and told him what had happened, that she had eaten the box of
Aegiptiacum, and laid the Purgation to her leg, whereat he was greatly
grieved: and much controversy in speeches was after between the Doctor and
the Maids father, but in the end they were made friends.

Now I will set down the composition of the said Pill of Ladanum, which I
obtained of a very dear friend, being a precious Jewel, as it is used:
otherwise, (as I have said in other of my writings) the best Medicine that is,
is no Medicine unless it be in the hands of a skillful man.

The true manner and making of Ladanum.
TAke of Opium, first sliced thin and then dried in an Earthen platter, one
Oun. and a half. of the gum of the root of Henbane 3. Oun. Make the Gum thus.
Gather the roots of white Henbane in March (the Moon being full) and dry
them in the shadow: after slice them and boil them in good white Wine: (the
roots being boiled until they be very soft) pour off the wine, being full of
the tincture thereof, and press strongly the roots, the licour (being by
filtration cleansed from all dregs) in an earthen broad pan upon warm ashes:
Vapor away the moisture until the tincture of the Henbane roots come to the
consistence of Honey, which is very sweet and pleasant. After this, take all
these (being beaten to powder) of the seeds of white Poppy one Ounce, of
Mummia one scruple, of Cloves and Cinnamon, of each 2. Ounces, of Louage roots,
Calamus, Arcmaticus, Galingale and Ginger, of each one Ounce, of Castorium,
black Pepper, Cubebs and Saffron, of each half an Ounce, of Ladanum and
Benjamin, of each 2. 3. Put all these together in a glass having a narrow
mouth, which will hold a pottle, and pour in so much good and strong Aqua
Vitae as will be above them four inches, then with a Cork and a piece of
Leather stop it, and let it stand until the Aqua Vitae be of a dark red
color, shaking it three times a day in ye glass: the Aqua Vitae being full of
tincture, let it be poured off and strayned, and so much again be poured on,
do this til the Aqua Vitae can draw no color. Then take all the tinctured Aqua
Vitae, and in Balnea Mariae in a great glass body, distill it until the
tinctures do come to the consistence of a Syrope: Afterward pour them in a
broad earthen glased pan, and on warm Ashes by evaporation bring them to the
consistence and body of a Pill, which Malax with 2. drams of the oil of
Cloves, let the mass be kept in a clean glass.

The Dose is from three grains to five, to procure sleep, to aswage the
pains of those that are troubled with the Collicke, with the Plurisie, with
the Stone, and with the Gout: to stay the Cough, the Flux of the Belly,
spitting of blood, and Defluxions of humors, etc. It is said, it were as good
for a Chirurgian that follows the wars, either by Sea or Land, to be
without his right hand, as to be without these remedies last rehearsed. My
self have known cured Diverse cured of Dysenteria, or the bloody Flixe and
other Fluxes of the belly.
of Dysenteria, or the bloody Flix, and other Fluxes of the belly in a Ship
(being upon the coaste of Indyes) forty Mariners and Soldiers at one time, and
not one of them all perished, by the discreet administration of the said
remedies by servants of mine. Within the City of London also there be alive
at this present day, which were cured of the Flux of the belly, by the
forenamed remedies, when they were supposed of many to be past all recovery, by
reason also of the long continuance and their extreme weakness withal: And
here I wish the like good success unto others (which I my self have had
hereby) that is the only cause I have here made so large mention thereof.

A most miraculous Cure, healed only by the Queens most excellent Majesty,
when neither Physic nor Surgery could take place or prevail.
AMongst an infinite number (which I have known daily cured by her Highness, of
the foresaid evil) this cure following is worthy of great admiration: there
came into my hands not many years past, a certain Stranger, borne (as he
said) in the Land of Gulicke near unto Cleaueland. This Stranger had been in
Cure a long time before he came unto me, with diverse skillful Chirurgians, both
English and Strangers, being then greatly molested and sore troubled with
diverse pernicious Cancerous Fistulous Vicers in certain places of his body:
likewise he had many knotty swellings or abscessions, gathered together upon
heaps in the fore part of his neck, near unto the Winde-pipe, and some in
the binder part of the neck: and also amongst the principal and notable
vessels, viz. the great Sinews, Veins and Arteryes, and therefore could not
without great peril and danger be safely taken away, either by Lance or
Causticke remedies, by reason of their near knitting together, and were also
very unfit, to be brought to suppuration. The cause was, they were for the most
part engendered of dull and slow or tough slimie matter, for the which I craved
now and then the aduyce and counsasle of diverse learned and expert Physicians
and Chirurgians, only to prevent and avoid those pernicious dangers that
oftentimes do follow: Howbeit, (in conclusion) notwithstanding all our
turmoiling, much care, industry and diligence, with the application of most
excellent medicines (very remediable and appropriat for that cure) yet was his
grief rather the worse then better. For look what way soever we took with
approved medicines, some mild, some vehement, and some stronger (which by
natural reason and common sense, were very good and commendable) yea, and
which brought oftentimes all his Ulcers to be very near whole: Yet upon a
sudden (without any just cause to us known) his sores did putrifye and break
forth again, with much loathsome filthiness, so that I feared his Ulcers
would gangreniz^, by reason of the concursion and vigor of the unexpected
accidents, so that his disease wearied us all. In the end, after he had been
twelve or thirteen months in my cure, perceiving we all mist of our expected
hope and purpose for the curing of this Infirmity: And likewise himself being
ouertyred with extreme pains and grief, so that oftentimes he be wailed his
own great misery and wretchedness: for which cause he went his ways, and came
no more unto me for any cure: but by the counsel of some of his own
countrymen and friends, made means (unknown to me) unto other of my fellows
the Queens Majesty's Chirurgians, which are in place of preferment before me.
Who pitying his miserable estate, upon a time (amongst many others) he was then
presented unto our most Sacred and renowned Prince the Queens most excellent
Majesty, for the cure of the said Evil: which through the gift and power of
Almighty God, by her Graces only means laying of her blessed and happy
hands upon him, she cured him safely within the space of six months.
Hereby it appears it is a more divine then humane work, so afterward upon
a time I did meet with him by chance in London, but I did not wel-know him,
his Color and complexion was so greatly altered and amended: And being in very
comely manner attired, otherwise then before I had seen him, and he told me
who he was: Then I asked him how he did with his grief? he answered me, I thank
God and the Queen of England, I am by her Majesty perfectly cured and healed:
and after her Grace had touched me, I never applied any Medicine at all, but
kept it clean, with sweet and fresh clean clothes, and now and then washed
the sore with white Wine: and thus all my griefs did consume and waste clean
away. And that I should credit him the more, be showed me the Angel of gold
which her Majesty did put about his neck, truly a cure (as I have said)
requires divine honor and reverence: And here I do confidently affirm and
steedfastly believe, that (for the certain cure of this most miserable Malady)
when all Arts and Sciences do fail, her Highness is the only Daystarre,
peerless and without comparison: for whose long life, much happiness, peace
and tranquillity, let us all (according to our bounden duties) continually pray
unto the Almighty God, that he will bless, keep and defend her Sacred person,
from the malice of all her known and unknown enemies, so that she may for
ever reign over us, (if it please the Lord God) even unto the end of the
world, still to cure and heal many thousands more, then ever she has yet done.

Amen.
An History and observation of a Gentleman which sent for me, to cure him of
the foresaid Evil, but it proved otherwise.
Upon a time I was sent for to a Gentleman, lying in a Marchantes house at
Broken-wharfe in London: after I was brought into his presence, he did forth
with give me to understand, yt he was greatly polluted and molested with much
impurity of corrupt and rotten matter, with great exulceration in his throat,
being of a filthy and carrionish savor: also the Almond of his throat was
greenous and painful unto him, and meruailously swollen: for the which cause (he
said) he entertained (a little before) one D. Simonds, a very learned and
Judicial Physician, who (as he reported) did administer a diet to him for
certain days, but it appeared he was smally relieved thereby. And further he
laid open unto me, that of late there was commended unto him a New-come
Stranger, who (upon report) was supposed to be ye only Phoenix It is truly
said, give a man a name to be an early riser though he lie in bed till noone,
it is no great matter.
of the world, for his rare and exquisite knowledge in Physic and Surgery:
I answered the Gentleman, that those speeches were so absurd as nothing could
be more, for (said I) it is impossible for one man to have all knowledge in
himself, but it is truly said: One man may know, that which another knows
not. Well quoth he, I perceive I have taken a wrong pig by ye ear, and so have
brought my hogs to a fair market, and therefore I know not what to say: and I
doubt me I shall find a woeful experience, of that he has practiced on me: And
therefore said, he I pray you let me have your good help in curing of me, for
preue^ting further danger. Indeed he is more to be esteemed that preuenteth a
danger before it does come, then he that does cure it after it is come; Well
said he, the first time he had given me a little Physic, he did very boldly
corrosiue me in two several places of my throat, and yet nevertheless I
received no profit thereby, but he has tormented me greatly: So in the end he
prayed me to unbind his grief, where the corrosiue was applied, which was
directly upon the outward part of the Amigdales or Kernels of the roate of the
tongue, but as good hap was, he being a fat man, the Caustic wrought not too
deep: also he showed me diverse nodosities, knobs and knottes upon his shin
bones. Then I told the Gentleman it was not the Kings Evil: when he heard me
speak these words, he was in a wonderful rage, and did swear like a mad man.
By the way ye shall understand, that this gentleman's vices exceeded his
virtues, he was a man known to be as unconstant and uncertain as the
weathercock: won with a feather and lost with a straw, today a friend, to
morrow none: at one time he would magnifye his Physician and Chirurgian (as it
were) above the heavens, and for the wagging of a rush, he would discredit
them and dispraise them again, down to the pit of hell. But to return unto
my matter, from whence I have a little digressed, forsooth in all post have
this good Gentleman would needs have me ride into the Country to his house
(being fifty miles from London) to cure him there: But I told him, it was not
possible, for that I was daily to attend upon the Lord Thomas Earl of Sussex,
then being Lord Chamberlain unto her Majesty. In the mean space there came in
his Physician and Chirurgian whom he reported before to be matchless, and
without comparison in Physic and Surgery: but the case is altered, for now
he did again, most bitterly revile him, for mistaking of his grief: I must
needs say, his Physician was a man of a courteous inclination, and partly after
speeches had, he did confess his error and ouer-sight: yet he said he had
been a professor of this faculty forty years, and indeed he had the
testimonies of many great towns and Cities beyond the Seas, of diverse whom
he had cured of the Kings Evil: To judge and judge aright, Where ignorance is
clad in learned weed, Small help is there to be had in time of need.
(as I told the Gentleman) he did nothing of set purpose to abuse him, for
truly he was learned, though a had Physician and a worse Chirurgian. How he
it, the worst I liked in him, was for that he boasted, and said he was a
Chirurgian naturalized, and so borne a Chirurgian: truly I told him it was a
reason as naked as my nail: For be it granted that his Father might be a
good Chirurgian (as him self reported to us) what is that to the purpose, if
his Son be found a counterfeit* It is a true saying, the best Apple will
grow to be a Crab, unless some good fruit be grafted on the stock: But
indeed I do know there be some whose Fathers were good Chirurgians, and so
be their Sons likewise, but how comes it to pass they be so? Truly the
reason is, they were like unto their Fathers, men careful and painful in
study, and of long experience. But otherwise, for any one to suppose or dream,
yt the Art comes to a man by succession, because happily his Father was a
good Chirurgian, it is a Paradoxicall opinion, very foolish, absurd and
fantastical: Other the like speeches he had to this end and purpose, and
thus we ended, and so I took my leave, and left them altogether. After I was
gone, they fell out with great and unseemly words: whereupon the Gentleman
caused his men to set his Physician down in a Chair, and then with a pair of
Tailors sheeres, one of his men played Barba tonsoris, and so did Cut off his
fair beard, and shore off the hair of his head very unseemly, being a man of
his years, and so put him out of doors, without any consideration for his
pains and Medicines he had bestowed upon him: but what became of him
afterward I have not heard. Then he sent to D. Simonds again, and told him
how his new come Phisitia^ and Chirur: had abused him and desired him of all
friendship to help him presently to some cunning Chirurgian, to cure him forth
with if it were possible, and that with speed: After some talk, the Doctor
remembered himself, and told him he would send him a neighbor of his, one Ma.
Story, a Chyrurgian of S. Bartholmewes Hospital, and a man (said he) well
experienced in his Art. After he was come home to his house, he did converse
with his neighbor M. Story, and told him what manner of hasty man the Gent.
was: therefore he willed him, saying, before you meddle with him make your
bargain wisely now he is in pain, for he is but a bad play master, and
therefore follow this rule. Accipe dum dolet, cum sanus soluere noler.

As cunning as Master Storye thought to have been, he could not get one penny
out of his purse, not in six days after he undertook to cure him, until
Master Story was going away, and said, sir I cannot go to the market with
words, but the Gentleman would not hear on that side. Then the Doctor went
with Master Story, and told the Gentleman: Sir if you ride your horse all day,
and give him no meat at night, and so again all the next day, you may be
sure you are like to go a foot the third day. Indeed I remember a pretty
saying of one, whose words in effect were these: When a Physician or a
Chyrurgian comes to a man that lies sick, and is in danger of death, yet
by his judgment and skill, promises with Gods help, to cure him of his
griefs and Maladyes: then the sick Patient greatly rejoices, and presently
compares him to a God: But after, being somewhat recovered and perceives good
amendment, then he does say, he is but an Angel, and not a God: Again, after
he does walk abroad and falls to his meat, truly he is then accounted no
better then a man: in the end when he happily comes for his money for the
curing of his grievous sickness, he now reports him to be a devil, and so
shut the door; Non est inuentus; come when I send for you. To conclude, and
now I come again to speak of Ma. Story, after he had been coming and going,
twice a day for eight days space, he gave him certain money, with a world of
fair promises, so far forth as he would perfect his Cure at his house in the
country: But according to the old saying in Latin, Mel in ore verbalactis fell
in corda fraus in factis, as by the sequel shall appear.

At much entreaty he consented, and went down to his house in the Country:
when he came unto the Gentleman's house with him, he told Master Story
saying: I have a Storehouse of diseases and impedimentes in my body, and so I
have not led a Saints life: as he confessed very strange and far from all
good, to this end (he said he spoke it) whereby he might be the better
instructed to make his cure the more certain: Then he told the Gentleman he
would be loath to begin a thing when the end is doubtful and dangerous, and
unto him before altogether unknown: And therefore desired him to send for some
skillful Physician or Chirurgian, for further counsel to his good. Then he
did swear and stare, that he did not bring him down to expostulate and make
Lectures unto him, but he said he did understand by M. D. Simondes, that he was
able to perform greater cures then his was, without the counsel of any other,
and fold Master Story he should not depart alive out of his house, if he did
not perfectly cure him. I trust (said Master Story) you will not (what soever
you say) commit so foul a fault in your own house, whereby may follow unto you
such dishonor: Howbeit, Master Story was greatly troubled in mind, and seeing
no remedy, he endeavored himself with great care and industry, to attempt the
said Cure, according to the Gentleman's own request, which was with the
Unction: but first he prepared and afterward purged his body, and opened a
vain, and after very discreetly he did administer the Unction at several
times, until he did see and perceive it had wrought sufficiently, and to
Master Stories own good liking, and so meant to have ceased. But this monster
in humanity (contrary to all Art and reason) compelled Master Story to
administer the Unction once again, saying his body was strong enough to endure
it. Howbeit, within three days after, he did begin to sing a new song, for
strange and unexpected accidents immediately did follow: A great and an
inordinate Flux of vicious and corrupt humors passed out of his mouth, with
much acrimony, burning heat and sharpnes, by reason of the putrefaction of his
gummes, with an horrible stinking savor and a Fener accompanying the same:
Then he and all his people about him, were in great doubt of his recovery,
saying to Master Story, my grief (I fear me) will prove insanable and
deadly. Master Story said he hoped not so, for you may thank your self of this
extremity: Then secretly (doubting he should dye) he sent an old trusty
servant of his to London in all post haste for me, with a Letter subscribed by
a wrong name, and by his man 20. Angels. After I had perused his letter, and
understood in what a bad case he was, I prepared all things necessary, and so
with all expedition rid poast away with his guide. But when I came into his
house where he lay, I did not know him, his disease had so altered the
natural shape of his face: at last he revealed him self unto me, and said,
Master Clowes, I have sent for you, hoping you will save my life, I have been
abused by counterfeit bungling botchers, for one told me I had the K. Evil,
and another, I have the Fr. P. but what soever it is, I pray you bend your
endeavor Some say, It is not good to speak the truth at all times.
and diligence, that with all convenient speed I may be brought to my former
health, which I know (said he) rests in the skill of a good Chirurgian. After
I understood what he was, I repented me of my coming, and wished my self at
London again, and his 20. Angels in his belly. To proceed, I told him he
was not without danger, and therefore I could not make any warrant of his cure,
but the best I could do he should be sure of: then this cankred chuffe looked
on me like one that had lately come out of the devils slaughterhouse, and
said: if he dyed under my cure, there were in his house, that should take
account of me before I went. Then I told him, if he or any of his durst touch
or abuse one hair of my head, it would be dearly answered. But before I
proceed any further, you shall understand, I was informed by one of the
Gentlemen's men, that M. Story was kept in obscurity (and as it were in a close
prison.) So upon a sudden, about 10. a clock at night, this Gentle. sent a
swash buckler of his own training up, who was unto him (as it were) the very
light of his eyes, and one that served him in a number of bad matters: He came
to M. Story and caused him to rise out of his bed, and bad him prepare to ride
toward London, for he said he had ordained horses for himself, and you M.
Story, etc. I will soon be ready to attend upon you, said he, but first (he
said) he would feign have taken his leave of the Gent: but this Royster told
him it was in vain, his Master had no pleasure ^^^the ^ght of his person: So
they took horse, and toward London they did ride, until they came into a very
great wood far from any house or town, and in the midst of the wood he
forced Master Story to alight, with many scoffs and scorns, and being very
bark, left him to shift for himself, where he wandered up and down all the
night, with great fear, sorrow and care, till it was day, and then in the end
he came into London hye way, and so being ouer-wearyed, rested him self for a
space, and in the end went to his house in London. After, when this grissie
ghost (his man) came home, in the morning he informed his good Master, how he
had dealt with Master Story, whereat (though he being sore and sickly) yet he
smiled, and greatly rejoiced at this bad action: which I did hear, and full
well understood though I said little, whatsoever I thought, but mark hereafter
the end of the Master and the man: and now I come again to my own
proceedings, that is. The morning after Ma. Story was gone, I administered unto
this Gentleman a Glister, made of new Milk, Sugar and Oil of Almonds, which
could in no wise have been lawfully prohibited, by reason of the great
restriction and torments of his belly, for he had not a stool in five days
before. Now I suppose some upon a spleen, will object against me, and say,
that I go (here and in other places of this book) beyond my latchet, in the
publishing and administering of phisical remedies, unto my Patients: But I must
crave pardon to answer with favor this objection, for be it without offense
spoken: I say, where the learned Physician is not to be had, be it either by
sea or land, far or near, I will the^ use al honest and lawful means, bath in
Physic and Surgery, to the uttermost of my knowledge and skill, before I
will any way permit and suffer my Patient to perish for want of all help.
Notwithstanding, what soever is said and spoken to the contrary by any
malicious adversary, I assure my self, the grave, wise and learned will not
take offense at these my sayings, but pass it over with modesty and silence,
Secondly, though he were weak, by reason of his extreme sweates, pains, and
burning heat of his mouth, throat and whole body, for which cause I did let
him blood on the Caephalica vain, on the right arm, that was, 4. Ounc. of
blood in the morning, and 3. Ounces of blood more at four of the clock in the
after noone the same day. And thus by intermission of time, I took away 7. Oun.
of very corrupt and impure blood: this done, I used frications, and I set
strong cupping glasses upon his shoulders and hippes, and at sundry times I did
administer unto him certain comfortable cordials: And then with excellent
Gargarismes and Lotions, I brought away many foul and filthye Askers from his
mouth and throat: thus within the space of six days, he did confess some
little ease and amendment, by these inward and outward medicaments. And at the
full end of 18. days after following, I made him perfectly whole, in the mean
time he did cogitate (as it were) and bethought with himself, how cunningly
he had dealt with his two former Chyrurgians, and did greatly rejoice in this
sending them away unsatisfied. Then I told him, it was to Master Stotyes great
detriment, and hurt unto his body, and hindrance to his living being a poor
man: but he would not hear on that side. Notwithstanding, it is a true
saying: It is an ill wind that blows no man good; I mean, happy is he that
comes in the declination and ending of a Cure: and so I let him alone with
his humors, since my reasons was not of force to persuade him: howbeit, in
conclusion he used me very kindly, and willed me to go abroad with him, to see
his Rivers, wherein were many goodly Trow^es and other fine fishes, and after
showed me his mighty high woods, and a number of Heronshew-nestes: But truly,
I took as much pleasure at the sight thereof, as Jack an Apes does when he
has a whip at his tail. After all these sightes, he returned to his house,
and by the way he said, Master Clowes, I will hold you no longer with me, but
I will send you with my men to London, for I must confess I have stayed you
longer time then I meant to have done: and in conclusion, he gave me 20. pound,
and promised me to rest my assured good friend during his life. But to
conclude, I note his unfortunate end, whereby it presaged he was borne under
some unlucky Planet or Cross day. For within few years after, he took
occasion to ride abroad, as at many other times he used to do, but in
returning home to his own house, it was said, he entering into a Lane, and
attempting to open a great gate, suddenly his horse started aside, and fled
away, He lived wickedly and dyed miserably.
whereby the Gentleman fell from his horse unto the ground, and there suddenly
brake his own neck: So his horse ran home, and he being left behind, the
servants went and sought for him, and found him stark dead, and his neck
broke: Thus far of the end of the Master, now to the end of his man, which he
appointed to be Master Stories guide, the only Phoenix, whom to dearly loved,
but not for his good conditions. Within a year after his Ma* came to his
untimely death, (whose end was only to God foreknown and prefixed) this
swaggering fellow did suddenly grow into great misery, and so upon a time he
came to London, and there I saw him: presently he craved of me some relief,
for he said; for want of service he was brought into great poverty: Indeed I
must confess I had small devotion unto him, but yet I gave him some what to be
rid of his company: thus he went his ways, saying he did hope it would be
better or worse with him shortly. Indeed it was reported that not long after,
he did consort with a crew of his old companions, and they together immediately
robbed certain Cloathiers of the west country, and being al taken, were at ye
Assizes hanged on ye gallows at Ailesbury A fit Pulpit for such a Prophet.
or there abouts, for the said fact. Thus (friendly Readers) you have heard (as
it were) the tragical history of the foresaid Gentleman and his man. The cause
which has moved me to publish the same is, to forewarne al young practisers
of this faculty of Surgery, being indeed truly called filius Artis, to
beware and take heed how they go, and where and with whom they go,
especially into strange and unknown places, and unto me^ of such extraordinary
and strange qualities, which make but a jest and pastime at the abusing of any
man, be he of never so much worth, honesty and skill in his profession.

An observation for the Cure of Struma, performed by me upon a woman dwelling
in the County of Essex. 1602.
AMongst others that I have cured this present year Anno 1602. there repaired
unto me, a woman being about the age of thirtye years, dwelling in the County
of Essex, three miles from my now dwelling house at Plasto, in the parish of
Westham, within the said County: which woman was a long time molested and
troubled with certain Carnosityes and hard Strumous swellings under her
Chinne, some mooueable and some immovable: the which woman I did take in
cure, for the said infirmity, and after speeches had, I persuaded her that she
would permit me to take her Strumous swetlings away by Incision, but it fell
out she showed her self faint-hearted, and so unwilling to suffer that action
by Incision. Notwithstanding, she having an ardent desire and affection to be
cured by me, was very willing to endure and abide the force and painful
working of the Causticke, which was performed as follows.

The incredible operation of this simple Causticke now following is above
belief, being indeed made but only of the powder of new quick burnt
Lime-stones, as they come out of the Kill, and of Soap well mixed together, An.
q. s. Here some peradventure will say, it is a great vanity in me, to commend
a remedy which is well known already, (it will do that it is prescribed for)
but I will leave to answer such objections, and will proceed with matter of
more importance, that is to wit: After I had well defended the parts about,
then I applied upon these swellings, the aforesaid Cansticke, which she
reasonable well endured, for the space of three hours: and then I removed it,
and in place thereof I applied other medicaments, only to mollifye and loose
the Askers, which was made by the said Causticke, and also I gave with her (of
the same remedy) home to her house, to dress her self with all: where she
remained for the space of five days, in the end ye shall note, she returned
again to me, being very faint, pale and ill colored, thereat I much
maruailed, to see so sudden an alteration: then I demanded the reason of her,
she answered and said it was by reason of the bad sent and ill savors of the
Askers, and of the filthy corrupt matter, which did run from the foresaid
Cauterized Strumous swellings, that greatly offended her stomach, and by
reason of the sensibilitie of the grieved parts, which were sharp, mordant
and biting, and that (...) and further, the confessed in the end, that He was
(...) with o^ilde, which troubled her greatly, all which ^onses being
considered, I very much (...) an vn^^^ely birth, but I told her she was much
to a blame, that she did not acquaint me there with, before (I took her in
cure. Howbeit, God did so open my knowledge and understanding, that all things
fell happily out, better then we looked for. So after, I appointed her to be
dressed twice a day with convenient remedies, and then by the use of some
metalline instruments, only to apprehend and to pull out part of the foresaid
Strumous swellings. So, according as I have said before, those which are
Masters and Professors, chosen to perform the like operation, ought indeed to
have a Lions heart, a Ladies hand, and a Hawks eye, for that it is a work of
no small importance. Then by the applycation of these two noble compositions,
being irreprooueable and most iudicially penned, and of great truth and
probability in this cure, that is Vnguentu^ Apostoloru^ mesuae, and Vnguentum
Aegiptiacum, with other worthy Agglutinatiues and drying medicaments, often
times before named, and thus she was perfectly cured within the space of 10.
weeks. Friendly Reader, ye cause chiefly which has moved me to publish this
observation amongst the rest, is partly (as I have before said) to render some
fruits of my labors, studies and time spent, which as it may here appear,
is no afternoon man's work, as some rake-shames and belly Gods have falsely and
slanderously so reported: but the troth is I have carefully labored here,
also to admonish every young practiser of Surgery, which is rightly called
filius Artis, that he in no wise attempt the like cure, upon any woman with
child, without some sage advise: for great was the troubles and dangers that
was like to have followed, but happily were they prevented through the help of
Almighty God, etc. Now here I will forbear any further to discourse herein,
but I will set down certain Prescriptions worthy of observing, which I have
gathered out of Pliny, (a most worthy writer) for the cure of the fore named
Evil, the which I will here set down word for word, as follows.

The cure of the King or Queens Evil, after Plinius Secundus description.
THe blood of a Weizell is good for the Wennes called the King or Queens
Evil, when they be exulcerate and do run: so is the Weysell it self s^d in
Wine, and applied. Provided always, that they run not by the occasion of any
launcing or Incision, made by the Chirurgians hand: and it is commonly said,
that to eat the flesh of a Weizell is as effectual for the cure: so are the
Ashes of a Weizell calcined upon the fire made of Vinetwigs, if they be
incorporated with Hogs grease. Item, take a green Lyzard and bind it to the
sore, but (after thirty days) you must do so with another, and this will
heal them. Some make no more a do, but in a little box of silver, keep the
heart of a Weizell, and wear it about them. If a Woman or a Maid be troubled
with the Kings or Queens Evil, it were good to make a Plaster or Linament of
old shell Snailes, and let them be stamped shelles (...)lly such as be sticking
to the roots of shr^^^^es of bushes. The Ashes of a Serpent Aspis calcyned are
likewise very good for this disease, if they be incorporated with Bulls Tallow,
and so applied. Some use Snakes grease and Oil together: also a Linament made
of the ashes of Snakes burnt, tempered with Oil and Wax. Moreover, it is
thought that the middle part of a Snake (after the head and tail be both cut
away) is very wholesome meat for those that have the Kings Evil: or to
drink the Ashes, being in the same manner prepared, burnt in a new Earthen pot
never occupied. Marry, if the said Snakes chance to be killed between two
Cart trackes where the wheel went, the Medicine will work much more
effectual. Some give counsel to apply unto the affected place Crickets dug
out of the earth, with the moulde and all that comes up: also to apply
Pigeons dung, only without any thing else, or at the most tempered with Barley
meal, or Ote-meale in Vinegar: likewise, to make a Linament of Mouldwarpes
ashes, incorporate with Honey. Some there be that take the Liver of a Moule
crushed and bruised between their hands, working it to a Linament, and lay the
same to the sore, and there let it dry upon the place, and wash it not in three
days. And they affirm that the foot of a Moulde is a singular good remedy
for this disease: others catch some of them, and cut off their heads, stamp
them with the moulde that they have wrought and cast up above ground, and
reduce them into certain trochesces, which keep in a box or pot of Tin,
and use them by way of applycation, to all Tumors and Impostumes, which the
Greeks call Aposthemata, and especially those that rise in the Neck: but
then they forbid the Patient to eat Porke, or any Swine, during the Cure*
Moreover, there is a kind of earth. Beetles, called Tauri or bulls, which
name they took of the little Hornets that they carry, for otherwise in color
they resemble Tickes, some term them Pediculos terrarum or earth Lice: these
work also under the ground like Wantes, and cast up moulde which serves in a
Linament for the Kings Evil, and such like swellings: also for the Gout in
the feet, but it must not be washed off in three days space. Howbeit, this is
to be noted, that the medicine must be renewed every year, for the same moulde
will continue no longer in virtue then one year: In some, there be attributed
unto Beetles, all those medicinal properties which I have assigned unto
Crickets called Grillj. Moreover, some there be, who use (in manner and cases
before said) the moulde which Antes do cast up. Others (for the Kings Evil)
take up as many Maddes or Earthwormes in number, as there be Wennes gathered
and knotted together, and bind the same fast unto them, letting them dry upon
the place, and they are persuaded that the same Wennes will dry and consume
away together with them. There be again, who do get a Viper, about the rising
of the Dog-starre, cutting off the head and tail, (as I said before of the
Snakes) and the middle part between they burn: the Ashes that come thereof,
they give afterward to drink for three weeks together, every day as much as
may be comprehended and taken up at three fingers ends, and thus they cure the
Kings Evil. Moreover, there be some which hang a Viper by a Linen thread,
fast tied somewhat under the head, so long till she be strangled and dead, and
with that thread bind the Wennes or Kings Evil aforesaid, promising unto the
Patient assured remedy thereby: They use also the Sowes called Multipedae, and
incorporate the same with a fourth part (...) be of that opinion, that this
Oy(...) or (...) sufficient to cure an(...) whatsoever. Aet^us also says, if a
man should ^^te a Viper, it is a most notable thing: whose authority others
also ^^^^ followed in administering unto Strumous persons Trochiscos Viperinos,
or the Pills of Vipers, with good and happy success. Also it was said, it was
the experience in times past of countrymen, that if any had eaten a Snake, he
should be delivered from Struma. Thus much touching Pliny his manner and order
which he has published, for the Curing the Kings or Queens Evil.

The conclusion.
ANd thus (friendly Reader) it were a great argument of folly and shameless
impudency in me, worthy to be laughed at, once to think that I could here any
way instruct the learned Phisitia^ or Chirurgian, in the Cure of the Kings or
Queens Evil, before named. I am not so full of childish toys: but if I were,
I do full well know they might by their provident wisdoms and learning
easily circumuent me, though I do confess, I am not altogether insufficient
to perform this enterprise I have here set down and taken in hand. The only
cause why I have done it, is (as I have before said) for the benefit of all
young Students of Surgery, who have a long time expected the coming forth
and the publishing of this Book: whose honest zeal and affection toward me,
has induced me the rather to set forth the same. But before I would attempt
it without good advise, I did first entreat diverse Physicians and Ch(...) a
(...) uerance, in perusing and examming the same) of whom I have had a
fa^^urable acceptance: And this I did of purpose, ^^^^ some might (otherwise)
^y ^umbling blocks in my way, only to ^mpeach these my painful labors and
trauel^. And so I do make a final end, acknowledging as I did in ye beginning,
That the gift of healing, is the gift of God: howbeit, I do not here presume,
or once take upon me to enter into the high cure of the said Evil usually
called Schrophula, in such wise as God has given divine and peculiar gifts
unto Princes* but my full intent has always been only to direct the true
pathway of Artificial gifts (with God of his great goodness gives to men of
Art) knowledge and skill in Physic and Surgery, with is performed and done by
the application of interiall and exteriall medicamentes, appropriate and
approved profitable therefore. For it is a true saying: God has created
medicines of the earth, for the relief and comfort of man; and it is said: He
that is wise will not refuse it. And thus last of all, I thought it not
impertinent, heer^ to divert and digress from the matter, and wholly attribute
all divine honor and reverence, for the great cure of the forenamed Evil, (by
Gods gracious good gifts) unto our most prouide^t, wise and virtuous Princess,
the Queens most Royal Majesty: For whom (...)s all pray, that the Lord God
Almighty and eternal Savior will send her Highness still long and long to reign
over us, to our great toy, happiness and comfort, so that she may live long, and
many happy years and days, to hold up the S^^pter of this Kingdom, in Christ
Jesus. Amen.

The Lord of Hoastes, preserve these coasts.
Our gracious Queen defend:
And grant her peace may still increase*
Until this world shall end.
FINIS.

