The praise of London: OR, A delicate new Ditty, which does invite you to fair
London Cit^
I cannot rightly speak but in her praise,
Because she is the flower of earthly joys.

To the tune of the second part of Hide Park.


ALl you that delight in Pastime and Pleasure,
now list to my Ditty wherein I will show;
In London they will say there is good store of treasure
and that for a certain there is many does know,
Great store of silver and gold you may see,
with all things else pleasing as ever can be:
There are sine shows and glistering sights,
Then come to the City for your delights.
And yet there is many a Country Farmer,
perhaps in objection this Proverb may say,
The Country fruits they do help to adore her,
and make her seem like to the flowers in May:
True is the Country London does feed,
with such Commodities as there does need:
But as for renown true honor fights,
So London Town is the chief for delights.
You see how the chiefest are thither resorting,
and chiefly are there in the cold Winter time:
The City in Winter is better for sporting,
than it is in the Country in the Summer prime:
The Lords and the Knights and the Ladies so gay,
may there take their pleasure and go to a Play,
Pleasure it flows there day and nights,
Then come to the City for your delights.
The Country Gentles and swagering Gallants,
will not spare there money to see this brave place,
And if they want means they will sell their whole talents,
to see this brave City that is of such grace,
With a brave Gelding, a Hawke and a Ho^^^
will bravely come riding into this fair (...)
Meaning to see all the famous sights,
Thus they come to the City for their delights*
Likewise there is many a Country Miser,
that will spare an Angel, a Mark or a po^^^
And bring up his wife with him for to suffice (...)
and happily on her bestow a new Gown:
From one place to another about they will go^,
and many brave pleasures his wife he will (...)
This is the humors of country wights
They Will come to the City for their delights.
The Weauer, the Baker, the Brewer, the (...)
the Glouer, the Tanner the Butcher, the (...)
The Ioiner, the Cooper, the Sawyer, the (...)
the Tapster, the Hostler, the Clothier, the (...)
And many more Trades that here I might name,
that hear of brave Londons renowned high fa^^
All these prepare both day and nights,
To come to the City for their delights.
The Spanish, the French, the Turk, and I^^^^^
and so do the Gretians come thither also;
And likewise they do come from al parts of Holl^^^
but seldom there any will back again go,
The Germans come thither to vault and to da^^^,
whose names in the City do highly advance,
The outlandish Lords with Ladies and Knights,
Do come to the City for their delights.
The second part. To the same tune.


^^kewise you have many that catch some mischances
as they in the Country are at their play:
^he Maids and the Yongmen they love to have dances,
and yet without music they will pass time away:
^he Maidens indeed sometimes by mishap,
with playing and toying do soon catch a clap,
^hen to void blame and for their rights,
They come to the City for their delights.
^^ll well it is known such chanses come many*
the Carriers indeed bring up Maids to the City,
(...) when they come there it is unknown to any,
these Country Lasses, oh they are so witty:
^heres enough beside Tailors that serve for a cloak,
and help limping Vulkan to bear up the yoke,
^apid he binds fast in men's sights,
^^en come to the City for your delights.
(...) ^^^nt kept a Maid and she called her Mary,
and she was beloved of the Miller Tom;
(...) as she went out in an evening with Sary,
this Miller by chance unto her did come,
(...) the whole night until it was day,
Mary and Thomas together did play,
But thought it were night the Moon shined bright,
Whereby Tom and Mary did take their delight.
Within short time after her teeth fell to aching,
and she doubted Thomas had got her with child,
(...) was the poor Less in a pitiful taking,
and in her doubt she was no whit beguild,
^he safe was delivered and Thomas he fled,
this Maid was churched and the child was dead,
^he escaped all punishment by her fine flights,
and came to the City for her delights.
My Ladies fine waiting maid met in the dark
with John Bold the Coachman who caused her to stay
And she was invited by this gallant spark,
to learn a pretty canceited fine play,
What game they call it I cannot well tell,
but in short time after her belly did swell,
It made her offen fetch grievous sighs,
Yet she came to the City for her delights.
Thus you see plainly how that here is many
a gallant young Less to the City does come,
Although they be broken what is that to any,
there is some Maids come with the^ although a small sum,
They fit for the City as Bells for a Steeple,
for in London dwells many sorts of people,
Then come away you Noble wightes,
Oh come to the City fit for your delights.
Fair London is ready to entertain many,
you kindly are welcome and so you shall find,
But pray take my counsel and bring with you money,
and then you shall see they will prove very kind,
The kind hearted lasses will welcome you all,
and if you have money to pay what you call;
Come noble hearts where pleasure inuites,
Oh come to the City for your delights.
Thus in my conclusion all you that are willing,
to buy this new Ditty whereby you may learn;
Perhaps you spend many a penny or shilling,
upon many trifles which little concern,
Oh London is praised by all that her knows,
to be a place where joy and pleasure it flows;
You that have wits may live by your slights,
Then come to the City for your delights.
FINIS.
R. C.

London, Printed for F. C.


