POLITIQVE DISCOURSES UPON TRVETH AND LYING.

AN INSTRVCTION TO PRINCES TO KEEP THEIR FAITH AND PROMISE: Containing the
sum of Christian and Moral Philosophy, and the duty of a good man in
sundry politic discourses upon the truth and Lying.

First composed by Sir Martyn Cognet, Knight, one of the Kings privy Council,
master of requests of his household, and lately Ambassador to the Cantons of
Zwitzers and Grizons.

Newly translated out of French into English, by Sir Edward Hoby, Knight.

(...).

It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in Princes.

Psalm. 118.9. printer's or publisher's device DESIR N'A REPOS
1586



AT LONDON, Printed by Ralfe Newberie.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. 1586.

VNI SOLI ET SEMPER


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR WILLIAM CECILL, OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE
GARTER, KNIGHT, BARON OF BVRGHLEY, Lord high Treasorer of England, and one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
MY good Lord: it may seem in the conceits of the ouercurious, that in some
sort it fares at this instant with me, as it did sometime with the old
Philosopher Phormio: who amidst the most sumptuous entertainmentes at Ephesus,
which K. Antiochus made unto Hannibal in the time of his banishment from
Carthage, for a further delight and recreation was willed to dilate upon some
theme: and accordingly he took in hand to discourse of the duty of a
Captain, and to teach what was appertaining to the discipline of war: which
when he had finished, Hannibal being desired by the standers by, to deliver
his opinion of him, answered, that he had before seen many old men doat,
but never none more then Phormio.

Like blame then I may incur, in being thought too busy in dealing with
matters of Philosophy, a matter as contrary to my profession as the other was
to the Philosophers, and in me to be turned to the rashness of youth, what in
him was to the dotage of old age.

But howsoever these my endeavors may lie in the consideration of the envious
or ouercurious, with which two humors this age most abounds, yet if by your
Lo: they may be esteemed worthy of your honorable protection, I shall not
only think it my greatest happiness to have employed my time herein, but also
with the like opportunity and leisure shall be encouraged to wade into some
argument of greater pains and moment: having at the first entered hereinto
through the persuasion of a friend of mine, who being in the Court of France
the last year when the Author first published this book, sent me one over
highly commending the same, and praying me for his sake to spend some time in
perusing thereof, the which I was the more willing to perform, considering
how convenient it was, when through the thick mistes and vnhoalesome aires of
this solitary Island, I was hindered of other recreation, for the avoiding of
idleness, to betake my self to the contemplation of my study: and so only
that thereby the matter might be the better understood and carried away by me,
I bestowed pains in the translation thereof, which fully finished, has a good
while since lain by me, and longer, (knowing mine own weakness and
imbecilitie) had done, had I not lately been much pressed by my good friend
master T. D. to give my consent to the publishing thereof, as a matter
necessary, as he thought for the time, and especially for such as understood
not the French tongue.

The matter contained in the book may be (...)

A commendation of this work.
SIR, with no small contentation of mind, I have according to your request
perused your translation of Mounsieur Coggnets moral politic or rather right
Christian discourses, in commendation of Verity, and detestation of her
contrary. And as that honorable Aucthor made most grave election, to handle
such matter and subject as for this time and state of his Country was more
then necessary, so can I not but singularly commend your choice of this
stranger, and your endeavor to make him an English Denizon, thereby to
transport, and communicate with your country generally such precious wares as
will be found no less wholesome and commodious, then delectable and pleasant
to all degrees, but especially to the best and most noble. For although Princes
and great Estates have many felicious blessings, whereof private men can not
be pertakers, yet in this one respect is their estate more miserable, that
they seeldome or never find a faithful friend that sincerely will or dare
Auriculas teneras mordaci rodere vero. Whereby they reject often the unsavory
wholesome bitter medicine, that would reduce their health and preserve their
strength. And in steed thereof swallowe up the delicate sweetened poison that
finally works their helpless bane and mortal confusion. And therefore have
the wise Philosophers admonished Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other great
and honorable persons, that swymme in the Seas of felicity, by reading
Histories and moral politic discourses to inform themselves of such
matters, as their Parasites will not, and honest servants or freindes many
times dare not reveal unto them, thereby to escape the dangerous downfall of
impendant calamities, whereunto the greatest Princes are much more subject then
the most inferior private persons. Since then this treatise (containing a
Methodicall abundance of such godly grave admonitions for all estates) may
aptly be compared to a precious Posie of most fragrant flowers (compendiously
for that purpose gathered from infinite variety of foreign gardens,
Historical, Poetical, Politic, Moral, Humane and Divine, gravely,
discreetly and Christianly, conferred and applied) Deprive not your self of
dew praise and thanks, for publishing and emparting with your Countrymen so
rare a Jewel, whom you shall thereby also suspend in reverent expectation of
more honorable fruits to succeed this your first right virtuous blossoms: The
true ensigns and very original cause of right nobility: Whereunto with your
happy society of the Muses, I wish and very heartily recommende you.

Yours dutifully to command, Thomas Digges.

The Contents.
THat the truth is a virtue most praise worthy, by what it may be discerned,
and of that which hinders the knowledge thereof. Fol. 1. The definition of
truth and faith. Fol. 3. Properties of the truth, and how much it is
requisite in a Prince and Clergy. 5 Extremities in the truth, and how men may
speak of themselves, and of that which they understand, and that men ought not
to publish any writing, but of their own invention and to some purpose, nor to
attribute to themselves the honor of a thing well done. 7 Of fayning and
dissembling. 10 That the deed ought to be correspondent to the word, and to
fly hypocrisy. 12 That those which love the truth should show it by good
works, and of the means which do lead us thereunto, and of those which are
far from it. 15 How much true men have been esteemed and that all magistrates
ought to be so, and of the riches of Princes. 21 That it behooves to keep
promise, with instruction not to make it with ones disadvantage, and not to
give place to the importunate. 24 Examples of evils happened to breakers of
promise, and of that which depends thereupon. 26 Effects of the truth, with
exhortation not to change the statutes or laws, and not to dance upon holy
days, praise of Frenchmen, and a solution of that for which they are blamed.
29 Of the means to withstand inconstancy and lightness, and not to take in
hand war or fight without necessity, of the point of honor, that one ought
not to defer a good purpose, that the reading of good books gives
hardiness and prudence, that one ought not too hastily proceed in criminal
judgment, that one ought to fly evil and seducing companies with other
instructions to nobility, worthy to be noted. 42 That the truth finds good,
that which many fear and fly, and gives contentment. 51 Of the care which
men have had that youth might be instructed in the truth. 60 How requisite it
is to speak little, and not to blase a secret, with advise upon news
invented, and of that which is to be spoken. 61 That as well of friends as
enemies one should learn the truth. 68 That it is needful to read
hystories, there to see the truth which one is a frayde to speak, with advise
upon the reading of all books, and of the conquestes of Frenchmen, of the
means to keep them, and to assure a victory, of the duty of a captain, and
of that which is to be considered, in examples and alterations. 69 That one
ought not to suffer himself to be deceived by praises, nor be carried away
from modesty, and that honor depends upon virtue, with advise upon the
same, or upon the reproaches or lies of the people, and how much it is
requisite to command ones self. 74 That without the truth there is naught
else but darkness and confusion, and how much the philosophers have labored
to find it out, and how far wide they have been of it. 80 Of disguisinges
done to Princes, and what is their duty for their honor and quiet of their
subjects, and of the miseries of the wicked, of the observation of ordinances,
and of that which mainteineth or alters an estate. 83 That Princes ought to
have about them good councillors, which may not spare to tell them the truth,
and that their life ought to serve as a rule and instruction to their
subjects, not to grant to any unjust thing, of excessive gifts, an
advertisement to such as are in favor, of warnings, and that in all actions of
importance one ought to take council, without trusting to his own
sufficiency. 95 That one ought not to judge too readely of another. 108 Of
reprehensions, and force of the truth, with a description of detraction. 109
That anger hinders the truth, of the evils which it bringes with it, and of
the means to resist it. 113 Of the error of some authors which have praised
promise breakers, and the cruel, of punishments of such, what our gettinges
and dealing with the great ought to be, aduertisements to the readers, and of
pardonings. 119 The definition of lying. 127 The effects of lying. 128 The
punishments of lying. 129 That the perjured and plasphemers are detestable
liars, and the pains for them. 130 That lying, in doctrine is most pernicious,
and that one ought carefully to search for the truth. 134 That those which
defer their amendment, do wrappe themselves in a dangerous lie. 142 That
ignorance is a lie, and the gappe of great inconvenience. 148 That one ought
not rashly to borrowe money, nor answer for another man, for fear of lying.
153 Of lying ingratitude. 155 That lying has made Poets and painters to be
blamed, and of the garnishing of houses. 159 Of backebiters, mockers, and evil
speakers, and why the Comedians stage players and iuglers have been rejected.
161 That accusers, talebearers, false pleaders, and curious persons are of the
same brotherhoode of lying. 165 Of flatterers. 168 That envy is a miserable
lie: and of the means to remedy it. 171 How pride, ambition, vain boasting
and presumption are lying, and how all passions lead clean contrary to what
they pretend, and who may be termed men of humility, and of the mean which
conteyneth us therein. 174 That painting is lying. 183 That witches,
southsayers, sorcerers, and vserers, are replenished with lying and how a man
may exempt himself from them. 185 Of the punishments which have befallen unto
such as have given ear unto malicious surmises rejecting the truth. 190 That
we must avoid suits in law, because of the lying and cawtell of the
practisioners. 192 That it is a lying in Judges to receive presents, and what
exercise is to be required to be meet with avarice, buying of offices, and
covetousness. 198 That it is a lie, to be intemperate, drunk, excessife,
whoremonger, player, and idle, and to say that one would be in health, of
music and Physic, as well for the body as the soul. 209 What we ought to
judge of certain examples of lying. 225 Of the means how to render a nation
true and happy, and of the bringing up of youth. 227 Of certain points which
might be added to this discourse. 236 The conclusion. 245
Politic discourses upon Truth and Lying.
CHAP. I. That the truth is a virtue most praiseworthie, by what it may be
discerned, and of that which hinders the knowledge thereof.
AMong the virtues contained in moral Philosophy, the Truth has ever been
esteemed as one of the most praise worthy: Truth, a virtue most praise
vvorthie.
The which Plato called the fountain of all goodness; and S. Augustine in his
book of the City of God, ordains it as the King, and faith as the
foundation and pillar of Justice and all commen wealths: for so much as there
is nothing more proper to man, being formed according to the image of God, than
in his words and manners to approach him the nearest that he is able, and to
make his words serve for no other end, than to declare his good intent and
meaning, whereby he may be better able to inform his neighbor. Agathius
having written of the manners and religion of the Persians says, that they had
two gods (as Marcion, Marcion and Manichaeus heresy.
and Manichaeus the heretics have heretofore held) the one good, creator and
aucthor of all good, and of the light, whom they called by the name of truth;
the other wicked, aucthor of al evil, The religion of the Indians touching the
souls departure out of the body.
resembling him to darkness and ignorance. And Martyr entreating of the West
Indies, declares that a certain old man of the same country, praying the
first discouerer of them to behave himself courteously, showed him, that the
souls of men departing their bodies, passed by two ways, as also Philemon,
and Plato in his Phedon, and tenth book of his Common wealth has written. The
one dark and obscure, thorough which the souls of all cruel men wade
grievously tormented; The other shining, and clear, full of all happiness,
ordained for those that love peace, truth, and quietness. This the holy
scripture ought more deeply to impresse into us, having been hitherto very
ill considered of the Spaniardes, who for having exercised all their cruelty,
and inhumanitie which they were able to imagine against the poor Indians, The
cruelty of the Spanyardes.
for the most part have ended their lives most miserably, as such as have
entreated of this history more at large declare: and that the same Spaniards
counterfaiting as though they would instruct them in the truth, thorough their
wicked life and excess, have most estranged them from it, and of a most
populous country, made a most horrible desert. This truth is called a virtue,
because they that use to tell the truth do love it, Truth called a virtue.
and she has such a force, that wheresoever she is seen, she causes her
self to be the rather desired and loved. Now, since that our Creator, of his
pure grace, performs all the promises, which he has made unto us, in the
truth whereof consists our assurance, and salvation, we likewise ought to
make good whatsoever in our christian profession we have promised to him,
serving for naught else then our own good, quiet, and happiness. And leaving
all together the Philosophers dalyings touching the true mark and knowledge of
the truth, nor respecting their opinions, who have doubted of all things,
Common sense.
and held for certain that no man knew ought, seeing how senseless they
were, we will wholly cleave to common sense, the only mean between the senses
and understanding, and will think that reasonable, which we have seen, heard,
tasted, and felt, and so have recourse to each one in his science, The Sun 166
times greater than the earth, 6545 times greater than the Moon. l. 2. ca. 3.
contra academ.
as Lawyers and others, yield to Physicians in their art, and run to
Astrologians when they would understand by what means the Sun is one
hundred threescore and six times greater than the earth, and six thousand,
five hundred and five and forty times greater than the Moon, albeit there be
no appearance thereof at all: And will wholly follow the rules and maxims of
Divines, who thorough the very word of God declare his will and infallible
truth. And herein it behooves us to shun two faults, which S. Augustine
does think greatly hinders the knowledge of the truth, to wit desperation
and presumption. But most especially to have a great desire to know it, as a
treasor and true science, Prou. 2.
according to the exhortation of Solomon. And humby beseech at Gods hands,
that we may learn and understand it: and let us bend our selves thereto by
readinge of good books, and frequenting of Sermons and honest company, not
imagininge we see more then in deed we do see, following the lesson of our
Savior to the Scribes and Pharisees, in the ninth of Saint John, and in the
Chapter going before, where he said to his disciples: If you continue in my
word, John. 8.32.
you verily are my disciples, and shall know the truth. So must we hear
the word of God, as believing it and perseuering therein. For thorough faith
is our entrance thereto. In this respect spoke Saint Peter in the name of the
whole, in the sixth of Saint John: Master, to whom shall we go, thou have
the words of eternal life? John. 6.68.
And we believe and know that thou art the Christ, the son of the living
God. Saint Augustine likewise is of opinion that man's mind given to vice,
cannot be capable of the truth. S. Augustine.
Some have written that Saint Peter said, How the truth appears.
that God did not cover nor hyde the truth under a mountain, to the end that
none, but such as toyled far for her, might find her. But as with the
heavens he has environed the earth and the hills, so has he covered the
truth with the veil of his charity, whereby whosoever will knock at the
heavenly door, might easily enter in. Therefore it is a matter necessary, that
who so will love the truth, must first know her, and loving her, search her
out, and searching her, must knock at the gate of the heavenly love, our
Savior having promised, that Ask and it shall be given you, Matthew. 7.7. Two
principal parts in man.
Seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. And those of
old time have set down two principal parts to be especial in man, to wit,
his understanding, and his will: which being once corrupted, turn him clean
from the way of truth, and leads him into an infinite number of
discommodities and errors:

And all good things have this nature and property, that they be desirous not
only to be known, but likewise to be beloved, and coueted; and the
understanding does serve as a means to affection, to show what it should
most of all pursue, as hereafter we will more at large declare.

CHAP. II. The definition of the truth and faith.
What truth is.
CIcero writes that the truth causes us to speak assuredly without
changing of ought which has been, is, or shall be: and that it is a virtue
thorough which we are inclined to speak no otherwise then as we think. The
which definition Saint Augustine followed in his Book of true Religion,
addinge it further to be a true signification of the voice: Psa. 119.105 2.
Pet. 2.19. John. 5.39.
it is taken for the Gospel, and the word of God, the which as David, and
Saint Peter says, is A lantern to our feet, and a light, that shines in a
dark place. And our Savior says, that this truth shall deliver us from
the World, sin, and Devil, through faith, which we have in him, being
given us from God, for righteousness, 2. Cor. 1.30.
and sanctification, and redemption, who came into the world to accomplish
the truth of the promises of God; who is as Saint Paul says, 2. Tim. 6.16.
John. 3.16.
A light that none can attain unto, to the which Christ Jesus does guide us
being the cleerenesse of the world, and his reconciliation. It is likewise
taken for an inward integrity, and a rule teachinge to live well according
to the holy will of God. And when Ezekias desired there might be truth in
his days, Isaiah. 39.8.
it is interpreted, that thereby he meant the continuance of a quiet and
peaceable state.

And as the truth conformeth words, according to the meaning of the heart,
so does faith in the promises, being a virtue which makes our deeds
aunswerable to our promises, Faith.
and a habit through which we are inclined to perform whatsoever we have
promised. And our Savior in the Gospel of Saint Matthewe, saying, that the
weighty matters of the Law consisted in judgment, mercy and fidelity, by
this word of fidelity, Math. 23.23.
meant a truth, far from any disguising, and treachery.

And the Romans in old time dedicated a temple to Faith, the better to cause
the people to keep and reverence it. I leave to the Divines the definition of
Faith, which consists in the substance of that we hope for, and in the
knowledge of the good will of God toward us, John 6. and 8. Heb. 11.1.
of our reconciliatio^ and justification founded upon the promises freely given
unto us in Christ Jesus which quickneth the soul, and purifieth the heart,
Act. 15.9. Gal. 4.6. Ephesians. 1.4. Act. 19. Romans 8.1. 1. Cor. 13.2. 2. These. 1.3.
Mat. 6.8. Ioh. 14.1.
makes us the children and sons of God, causes in us a desire to walk
holy and unblameable, takes away the poison, and abateth the sting of death,
and engenders within us an amendment of life, ready obedience, and love
toward God and our neighbor, gives unto us the hope of eternal life, and of
obtaining what we ask at Gods hands, renders our conscience peaceable, makes
us to persevere in the good, gives unto us a boldness to address our selves to
the throne of grace, brings with it self a constancy and patience in all
adversities, and comfort us clean removing away all fear, anguish, and
vexation of mind. For this cause God is called by S. Paul in the beginning of
his second Epistle to the Corinthians: The God of mercy and consolation. 2.
Cor. 1.3. Ephe. 6.16
And in the sixth to the Ephesians, he does exhort us, to take upon us the
shield of faith, wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

CHAP. 3. Properties of the truth and how much it is requisite in a Prince, and
Clergy.
SAint Paul recommendeth this truth unto us as an especial and principal
part of the armor required to be worn by a Christian Knight, Ephesians. 6.14
and as a bulwark against all assaults. And most excelent is that saying in
the 8. chapter, of the prophecy of Zecharie, Zechar. 8.16. Ephesians. 4.15.
where he exhorts, Every man to speak the truth unto his neighbor: and
as the body bereft of the soul, is naught else then stinking carrion, so man
deprived of this truth, is no better then a very infection, and filthy
carcass. Plato.
For this cause Plato in his commonwealth, ordained for a law that above all
things, Zenophon. A king to be faithful. Aristotle.
the truth might be preserved. And Xenophon bringing in a good Prince under the
person of K. Cyrus, requires especialy that he be found true. This was also
the first lesson which Aristotle taught Alexander the great. Isaiah. 32.1.
And Isayah sets down a King to reign in Justice, and a Prince to rule in
Judgment, being as an hiding place from the wind, and as a refuge for the
tempest. And a bishop of Cologne, Frederick emperor.
declared to Fredoric the Emperor, that the bare word of a Prince ought to be
of as great weight, as other men's oaths, and that the truth ought to be his
chiefest ornament. The aunsweare which Charles the fifth Emperor, Charles the 5
emperor.
made unto such as would have persuaded him by no means to send back Luther,
Christ Jesus the son shining of justice.
being come unto him under his safe conduit, is greatly praised, saying that
though the performance of promises were clean banished the face of the earth,
yet it should be kept by an Emperor. John 14.6. John 8.45.
Our Savior also in many places of the Evangelists, commands us in any
wise to keep truth, and names himself the son of Justice, and the
essential truth. On the other side the Devil is called a liar, The Devil a
father of lies.
and the father thereof: to the end that every one, abiding in God, who is the
sovereign good, and having him for a father, Lord, Savior, and Protector,
might be found true: and that we should not serve so wicked a murderer, and
cruel deceauer, as Satan, and that we should abhor lying, Job. 24.13.
with which he only serves his turn to extinguish the light of the truth,
the only life of the soul. And Job says, that the wicked abhor the light,
they know not the ways thereof, nor continue in the paths thereof. The
Catholic Church is likewise called of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 3.15. Lactantius,
The pillar and ground of truth. And Lactantius calls it the fountain of
truth, house of faith, and temple of God, into which who so does not enter is
clean shut up from any hope of eternal life. For out of her is there no
salvation to be found, but even as it fared with them, that were without the
Arc of Noah in the time of the flood. Genesis 7.21.
And our religion has been founded upon faith, which depends of this truth
which alone has much more virtue than Cicero would attribute to Philosophy,
as in casting out of spirits, removing vain solitariness, Cicero.
delivering us from lusts, and chasing away all fear. For she teaches us the
true service of God, how to worship his mightiness, admire at his wisdom,
love his bounty, trust unto his promises, and rule our life according unto his
holy will. She clears and gives light unto the course of reason thorough
the knowledge of things: and guides our will unto the true good and takes
away the clouds of our understanding, as it is said the North wind does in
the air. And we daily see, that the afflicted and wretched innocent takes
his greatest comfort in that the truth is of his side. And this truth causes
that part of our understanding wherein reason lies, to rule, and our will, To
what the doctrine of the law tends.
affections and like parts willingly obey thereto and suffer themselves to be
governed thereby. And we may the rather be termed men, in near approaching to
God our patron. For all the doctrine of the law, Deuteronomy. 6.14.
tends to join man through holiness of life unto his God, and as Moses in
Deutronomy says to make him lean unto him. How man becomes happy.
For neither the world nor any other creature can make man happy, but he
alone which made him man. And thorough this truth are we delivered from false
opinions and ignorance, and in all actions she is the light to guide us from
stumbling, and brings forth all virtues. And since that the end of Grammar
is to speak aptly and agreeably; and the end of speech, society: of
Rhethoricke to carry all men's minds to one opinion: The end of all arts.
And of Logic to find out a truth amidst many falshoodes: all other arts
do likewise tend to this truth. And let us make our senses to serve our
understanding and that understanding of ours to serve him by whom it is, and
does understand. And since this truth is a light, her property is to chase
away the darkness, blindness, and ignorance of our understandings: and to
rejoice and comfort us, as the sun rising does to Pilgrims, Ioh. 3.19.
except they be such as our Savior spoke of, who love darkness more then the
light, which makes us to perceive what has been hidden from us. And men are
more afraid to do amiss by day, then by night, and we are better able to
guide our selves, and can yield a better testimony of what we have seen, as
our Savior said in S. John, we speak that we know, and testify that we
have seen. John 3.11.


CHAP. 4. Extremities in the truth, and how men may speak of themselves, and
of that which they understand, and that men ought not to publish any writing,
but of their own invention and to some purpose nor to attribute to themselves
the honor of a thing well done.
SInce that this truth is approved to be a virtue, All virtues hold a mean.
she ought to hold a mediocritie, and to be set between two vicious
extremities of either too little, or too much, as it is said of the rest of
the virtues, which make them selves more apparaunt in gayning unto themselves
by those actions which consist in the midst of two contrary vices, as does
the true tune among discords. The excess and overplus shall proceed of
arrogancy, pride, vaunting, disdain, and insolency. The defect in
dissembling, when one speaks less then in deed is, and so wandreth from the
truth, which reckons things such as they are in deed, without causing any
variance between the heart and the tongue, as if one should fit himself with
a garment which is neither bigger, nor less then it ought to be. Democritus
speech.
Democritus likewise said, that speech was but a shadow of the effect, as if
he would have said, that it ought simply to follow the plain meaning. And as
Euripides wrote: speech agreeing with the truth, Euripides.
is single, plain, without color, or counterfeit. And the light which
assisteth it, is a demonstration which manifests, whatsoever is obscure,
discovers the original, Plato. Method.
the end, the uniting, and difference of two extremities. And Plato called a
Method, a fire sent from heaven, which gives the light that makes the truth
known. Phocion was praised, Phocion.
because in few words he comprehended much matter; for since that all
discourse consists in words and the subject: the words have no place at all
if you take away the subject; nor the matter or substance has any show
without the speech. For we read in Ecclesiasticus, Ecclesiast.
that the mouth of the wise is in their thought: for we are to consider,
wherefore we speak, before what persons, What in speech is to be considered.
and in what time and place. And it seems that the truth does less vary
from the defect, and the ouerlitle extremity especially when a man speaks of
himself, as Solomon exhorts us to let another praise us. Proverb. 27.2
And we must take heed least led thorough glory and ambition we be ready to
give that unto our selves, which we ought to receive from other: if it be not
to turn aside a reproach, or that occasioned by the time, we might the rather
encourage and give heart to youth, and prick them forwards to enterprise and
atchieue, matters of virtue, and such things as are praiseworthie, and then,
speak of our selves the most modestly that we are able, not meant hereby that
we should conceal such benefits as we have received from others. August. upon
the Psalm. 85
As Saint Augustine in like sort reproved not the Christians for attributing
some holiness unto them selves, so long as it proceeded not from pride and
vain boasting, but only with intent to acknowledge the benefits, Not to be
unthankful for benefits received.
and yield due honor unto him which imparted his holiness unto us. And to
the end we should not be unthankful, we ought to confess such good turns as
we receive, and especially at their hands, that for our advancement bestows
them on us. And they have been ever blameworthie, who like Aesops Crow dress
themselves with other birds feathers, which being taken back again of the
right owners, they remain all bare; as we see in sundry writers of our time,
who in their books set forth many leaves, whereof other men be the true
aucthors, not perceiving the difference of the excellency of others writings,
how it causes that which is their own due, to look with a pale and wanne
countenance, never acknowledging ought to them by whom they have been so much
helped, albeit it be a great part of honesty, Plin. in his not, hist.
(as Pliny wrote to Vespasian) to confess those by whom we receive profit.
To this purpose I might allege, that which Vitruus wrote how Ptolomie, having
set up a most sumptuous Library in Alexandria, The Lybrarie of Ptolomie.
and furnished it with more then seven hundred thousand volumes, and proclaimed
great rewards to those which should make of the best invention: six of the
Judges awarded the price to those, which were most pleasing to the people, but
the seventh which was Aristophanes, adjudged it unto another, and showed, that
he alone deserved the prise, having composed al of his own invention, and that
the rest did but repeat what they had learned out of other aucthors, whereof
he brought a book of the same Lybrarie. Which was afterward approved by the
king and the rest of the Judges. It becomes one as ill, to speak of matters
he understands not; Not to speak of what a man does not understand.
as one day Appelles answered frankely to a great Lord, discoursing in his
shop about the art of paynting. The children says he, who grindeth colors,
as long as thou heldest thy peace, beheld thee attentively, as wondering at thy
brave apparel; but since they have heard thee speak, they begin to laugh and
mock at the discourses, which thou have made touching the shadowing of a
picture, and matters which thou have never learned. He said as much to a
shoemaker, passing the controlment of his pantable. And the carpenter
Apollodorus to Adrian the Emperor, speaking of Architure. And a Musician to
Antigonus discoursinge of Music. And the wise Captains, have ever observed
for a rule, not to attribute all the praise unto themselves, but to God or
their companion. As it is written of Titus the Emperor, and one Piton Fuius,
who being praised for a victory, he had obtained, answered, that it proceeded
from god, who made his hands but the instrument to serve him. Plutarque writes
as much of Timoleon and in the life of Sylla, how the gods were angry with
Timotheus an Athenian Captain, because he attributed his victories to his own
wisdom, and afterward caused al his actions to go clean topsie turuie.
Amasias puffed up with pride for the victory he obtained against the Idumeans,
now hit acknowledging it to proceed from God, and careless of the Prophets
reprehending him, 2. Chr. 25.17.
provoked the King of Israel, of whom he was overcome, taken, pilled and
slain. The like happened to Manasses and Amon. We read likewise that Minos,
Zoroastes, Laws and policy ordained from God.
Trimegitus, Carondas, Licurgus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and other lawgiuers, have
ever fathered their laws upon some God, the better to have them in
authority, nature teaching them that it apertained to God alone, to dedicate
their service, and that otherwise the laws would not be observed, and the wit
of man is too feeble, and his reasons too short to attain unto it. They in
like sort who attribute unto themselves the glory of any virtue, diminish so
much from the bounty and liberality of God, and do not bear that love,
honor, and respect unto him, which is due. The which the ordinary words in the
Bible have taught us, that God gives them into our hands; God is our victory,
he is a like strong in great or small number, The Lord will deliver us. The same
does the wise man write Prou. 16. The answer of the tongue is of the Lord,
and the Lord does direct the steps of man, Pro. 16.2.9. Phil. 2.13. 2. Cor. 3.8,
who works in us both the will and the deed, and al our sufficiency is from
him, as S. Paul says Phil. 2. 2. Cor. 3.

CHAP. V. Of faining and dissembling.
Counterfayting. Dissembling.
TO feign and dissemble, was ever condemned by Aquillius law, like lying and
deceit, as the civil law and Cicero declare it to be: and have ever been
esteemed parts unworthy of a man to make semblance of one thing, and execute
another. As Guichardin wrote of Pope Alexander 6. that he never did, Alexander
6. Duke of Valentinois his son.
what he said; and of the duke of Valentinois his son, that he never said
what he would do, and pleased themselves in counterfaiting and dissembling, to
deceive and falsefie their faith. And when the son had caused certain
Princes to be murdered contrary to his oath, the father laughing said, that
he plaide a right Spaniardes part. They both dyed most miserably. Frederick
emperor.
Frederick the Emperor desired that his counselors would at the entering in of
his court, lay aside al counterfaiting and dissembling. I have learned of some
persons worthy to be believed, that Paulus Iouius, Paulus Iouius.
demanded why in his Chronicle, he fained many things as false, and
dissembled the true, which thereby might breed his history to be suspected,
answered, that he did it to please his friends, and those from whom he
received pensions and rewards, and that the posterity might easily give
credit to the same. It is called fayning to make that to be which is not, or
that which is, not to be, or to be greater than in deed it is. And it is
dissembling, to make that which is not to be, Aristotle.
or less then it is. Aristotle, imputed counterfaitinge to an excess of
truth, and dissembling to the defect. The Lawyers calls that couin, when to
deceive another, a man makes semblance of one thing, and perfourmeth clean
contrary. Saint Peter in his first Epistle exhorts us to lay aside all
malice, guile, 1. Pet. 2.1.
and dissimulation. It is not meant for all that, that every one, nor at al
times, nor of every matter, should speak what he thinks. For it is wisdom
not to discover, but for some good respect, what we would not have known; as
if a man would preach all the gifts he has received from God, or the vice
or fault which by infirmity he is fallen unto, or discover to every one the
secret of his mind, he should be counted but a dizard. Every
counterfaiting done to the end to deceive an other is reproved; but if it be
to conceal a good counsel, fearinge least it might be prevented, then is it
not to be blamed, neither is it always requisite to make manifest what we
do conceive. Which has caused some Emperors and Kings to say, that he who
cannot dissemble, shall never reign prosperously. And the old proverb
means the same, that whatsoever is in the heart of a sober man, is found in
the tongue of a drunkarde. Our Savior in the gospel made as though he would
have gone further, Luke, 24.28. 1. Sam. 21.13. Great personages have feigned them
selves mad
but it was to stir up the burning desire of his disciples. And David faygned
himself mad to escape the hands of King Achys. And so have they written of
Solon, Brutus, and other very great personages.

CHAP. 6. That the deed ought to be correspondent to the word, and to fly
hypocrisy.
Speech a shaddovve of deades.
SInce therefore that speech is but a shadow of deeds, there must be such an
unity as that there be found no difference at al, for it is a very great
guile to speak otherwise then the heart indeed thinks. The Emperors
Tiberius, Emperoures of dubble heart.
Calligula, Nero, Domitian, Commodus, and some others, among an infinite number
of vices wherewith they were possessed, were most of al blamed because their
heart was double, doing clean contrary to that they said, and making a show
in the beginning of their reign to love the truth, Pertinax surnamed
Chrestologus.
did most of all corrupt it, by their vices, and enormities. The Emperor
Pertinax was likewise surnamed Chrestologus, that is to say, Tiberius:
well speaking but ill doing. And Dion wrote of the said Tiberius (who was so
called of a stream defiled and stained with blood) that he was wont to say
that one ought not to know the will of a Prince, and that he should show good
countenance to such, whose death he meant to practice. These men resemble those
which row in a galley, who albeit that they look toward the hinder part,
and beat the wave toward it, yet do they altogether drive forwards the nose.
And the Divines upon the 32. Psalm, and other places, Speak.
show that the analogy of this word Speak, in the Hebrewe phrase, imports
a signification both of speaking and thinking, to declare that we ought not to
speak otherwise then we think, Homer. Othon 4. Frederic. 2. Innocent. 3.
as Homer did write of Ulysses, that his speech proceeded from his heart; At
what time Othon the fourth, and Frederic the second, contended for the Empire,
Pope Innocent the third made fair wether with them both, and never the less
made a very solemn and eloquent oration of the agreement and unity which
ought to be among Christian Princes: but a citizen of Rome presumed to
aunsweare him, Holy father, your words seem to be of God, but your deeds
and practices which thereto are so contrary, surely proceed from the devil.
Guychardyne.
Guychardin and others write of certain Popes that they bended al their
forces, to nourish thorough sundry sleightes and dissimulations, the Princes
in dissension, and that they were more politic, then good, and under a color
of procuring peace, set them worse together by the ears. As Cicero said of
Augustus, when he made as though he would not accept the Empire, Augustus.
that his honest orations were not correspondent to his dishonest deliberation.
And if the speech of a Philosopher, as it is written, is a law which men
voluntarily set before themselves, to make their life conformable and
aunswerable to his doctrine, we Christians, which profess the true Philosophy
and holiness, as S. Peter has written, ought to shun the two extremities of
too much or too little, and follow the mean which is to do well, and speak
accordingly, vsinge our words, as garments well besytting the body. Why the
Lacedaemonians banished Chesiphon.
The Lacedaemonians banished one Chesiphon, for that he vaunted that he could
discourse a whole day long of any theme, that was put unto him: because that
speech ought to be so precious a treasure, as Hesiodus said, that it is not to
be used, Hypocrisy, an enemy to the truth.
but for necessity. Hereupon will I not forget to declare how dangerous an
enemy hypocrisy is to the truth. For yielding an apparaunce, and opinion of
all truth and holiness, it is inwardly clean contrary, and disguysing and
cloaking it self with a show of truth, it is within full of all wickedness,
cosinage and deceit. And as Plato wrote, it is a most extreme injustice, of
him who makes show to be just, and is not so. Dissembled equity double
iniquity.
And Saint Augustine writes that dissembled equity is double iniquity. For
this cause the Lacedaemonians condemned one that did open penance, wearing
hearecloth upon his skin for that thereby they discovered his hypocrisy, in
as much as it was wouen with pourpure. As Alexander said to Antipater that
outwardly he ware a white garment but it was lyned with purple. And it seems
that such men would make God a mean of their deceit, who beholds the
heart, and the pureness thereof. 1. Sam. 16.7.
And for this cause are they often punished. The holy Scripture does often times
call them painted sepulchers, deceauers, wolves, and esteems worse of them
then of publicans and sinners. A man might compare them to the Pottes of the
Apothicaries which carry an inscription in the front, of many remedies and
excellent drogues, but within there is either naught available, or else
peradventure some poison which our Savior reproched the Pharisees with, that
they cleansed the outside, but within was full of ravening, and iniquity. And
God in the 29. of Isaiah says: This people comes near unto me with their
mouth, Isaiah. 29.13.
and honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart far from me,
and their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men. The same did he
cast in the Jews teeth, Matthew. 15. Mar. 7. and in the 48. of Isaiah, You turn
your selves from me, and make mention of me but not in truth nor
righteousness. It is not without cause written in Job, The hypocrites hope
shall perish, his confidence also shall be cut off, Job. 8.13.
and his trust shall be as the house of a spider. Neither was it ill pictured
of him, who in the right hand put a tongue, and in the left drew a long a
heart. All deceites are likewise proper, as Seneca writes, to a base and
mischeeuous mind, and to be detested of an honest man. I would desire every
one that means to estrange himself from hypocrisy to consider, The duty of
man toward God.
his debt unto his creator, to wit, to imploye himself, and whatsoever is
given unto him, our being, our life, our senses, our speech, our actions,
briefly all that we have in us, or without us for his service. And that
contrariwise we turn all things to our selves as to their end. And if we make
a regyster of our life, what part thereof we give to God to whom all is dew?
And see how much we are moved, if a body do but speak evil of our friend,
and never regard nor care for blasphemies against God, or injuries against our
neighbor being his image? We deserve to be called the children of the earth,
as they were wont to call bastardes. For we do follow earthly things,
despising the spiritual, for which we were created. We must not think it
strange, Diogines.
if the Philosopher took a light at noone day to seek a man in the midst of a
press, for the greatest part serve to vanity and leasing, and no whit obey
virtue. And if our eye sight could but enter so far, we should find many
savage beasts hidden in some men, which make semblance to be virtuous, and
yet will not confess their fault to the Physician, who by their confession
should the nearer approach to justice, according to the opinion of Aristotle,
the Divines, and other ancient writers, which say, that the confession of
sin, is the remedy thereof. S. Basil praised the above said opinion of
Plato, Confession of sin a remedy. Ad pop. ho. 24. Psalm. 32.2.
touching the unjust that counterfayted to be just, and blamed that said in
Euripides that he rather desired to seem good then to be. David after he had
declared the happiness of them whose sins the Lord had pardoned and
covered, adds those in whose spirit there is no guile nor hypocrisy, with
which that faith which rests in the heart, not in bare countenance, has no
acquaintance.

CHAP. 7. That those which love the truth should show it by good works, and
of the means which do lead us thereunto, and of those which are far from
it.
Our Savior says, John. 18.37.
that they which are of the truth hear his voice, and so consequently obey
him; And saint John in his first Epistle after having showed our inclination to
sin, and that our savior Christ Jesus offered himself for our deliverance,
and that he is our advocate, and also that faith in the mercy of God, is
joined with a love and obedience, he adds that he wrote those things unto
them, that they sin not, and he that says he knew God, and does not keep
his commandments is a liar, 1. John, 2.1.
and the truth is not in him. For as Paul writes, we are delivered from
sin, to the end we should live to righteousness; Romans 6.18.
and their sins are forgiven that acknowledge and confess them, detesting
and shunning them, and hope for life eternal. And to this end as well the law
as the gospel tends that we live no more in sin, but enforce our selves to
follow truth, righteousness, and holiness. Yea the very world was created
for the use of men, that thereby they might glorify God. The promises were
given, and Christ Jesus came into the world to the end that by participating
his so great benefits, we should learn to obey God, whose people we are,
called of him in his Church, that every one should know how to possess his
vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, being
justified through him to the end we should serve thorough righteousness, and
not defile our bodies, being his temple. For The eyes of the Lord (says
Jeremy) are upon the truth. 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. 1. Cor. 6.19. Jeremiah. 5.3 James.
2.20.
S. James writes, that they abuse themselves, who boast that they have faith,
and show it not by their good works. S. Paul also requires that faith that
works thorough charity, for as much as the son of God appeared, to the end
that they which are his should be cleansed of all their filthiness: and
required such disciples, who renouncing them selves should follow him, not
searching any more their own pleasure, but to obey God, and dispose them
selves, to patience, long suffering, and all virtues. And we have been
delivered from the bondage of sin, Luke. 1.75.
to the end we should walk before God all the days of our life in in
holiness, and righteousness. And the grace of God that brings salvation
unto all men, has appeared unto us, and teaches us that we should deny
ungodliness and worldly lust, and that we should live soberly and righteously,
and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of
the glory of the mighty God, Titus 2.11.
and of our savior Jesus Christ. We be the temples of the holy ghost which we
must not defile, we are consecrated and dedicated to God, and are not our own,
nor darkness, but light in God, and therefore we ought to walk as children
of the light, and to live and die to the Lord to whom we appertain. And our
sanctification is the will of the Lord, to the end we should abstain from
all naughty desires. And S. John said in his first Canonical, that in this
the children of light differ from the children of darkness, in that they love
one another as members of one body, 1. John.
and that they who have hope of life, sanctify themselves, since their God is
holy. And if we love God, in respect of the benefits which we receive
continually at his hands, and believe that he is our provident father, it is
impossible but we should manifest this love by our obedience. David said,
Mercy is with thee O Lord that thou may be feared. Psalm. 130.4.
As if he would say that the foundation of the fear of God is to know his
great mercy. And in respect of the accord, which is between truth, and
mercy, they have ever been joined together, as in the Psalms, 25.36.45.117.
and 138. S. Augustine in his book of confessions writes, that accursed is all
our righteousness, De la. and vita be. 1. chapter 6.
if it should be examined and judged without Gods mercy. And saint Ambrose
faith, that a man should not glorify himself as just, but in that he has
been redeemed, not in that he was without sin, but in that he has pardon
for it, not that I should advance my self over other, but in that Jesus
Christ is my advocate toward his father, having shed his precious blood for
me: for he came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil, to
regenerate, and justify us: not to the end we should be unprofitable, and
without fruit, but to exercise our selves in all good works. First to the
end that thorough them, The effects of good works.
and the shyning of our light (as our savior said Matthew. 5.) God might be
glorified, we stand more assured of our vocation and election: and our faith
the more strengthened, exercised, 2. Pet. 1.10. Mat. 5.16. 1. Timoth. 1. 2. Cor.
9.2.
and embrased as Paul wrote to Timothe 1. Cap. 1. that likewise our neighbors,
by our good example may be moved and provoked to live well 2. Cor. 9. and
that we minister to the necessities of poor Orphans, Widows, and such as
have need of our succor, as members of one body. Mat. 10. and 25. and since
that faith purifieth the hearts as S. Peter says Acts. 10. what faith I pray
you can they pretend, that are full of filthiness, enmity and corruption?
and which are puffed up with passions and disordinate affections? This faith
ought to regenerate us, and make us new creatures, exempting us from
condemnation, and clothing us with the righteousness and spirit of Jesus
Christ. The which spirit can not abide in our hearts, but it must work, that
is to say, that it lights us, quickneth and guides all our counselles,
thoughts, words, and actions. What is faith, except we show it by our holy
conversation, mortifying our concupiscences, eschewing all vice, Gal. 5.22.
Ephesians. 4.4. 1. These. 5.22.
and applying our selves to all virtue, not only abstayning from that which is
evil, but from whatsoever carries any show thereof? Perseuering in this
exercise, even until the end of our life. Now if we have the fear of God
and a good conscience, how comes it to pass that we do not abhor any
more to defile our selves having been once cleansed? Cantie. 5.3.
I have washed my feet (says the faithful soul) how shall I again defile
them? Integrity of life required in a Christian.
For God having made an alliance with us, mutually requires of all his
children, servants and creatures, an integrity of life. And we must discover,
a melody, and accord, between the righteousness of God and our obedience.
And by this means we ratify the adoption, through which God has received us
for his children. And holiness is the chain of our conjunction which tyeth us
to God, to whom we ought to dedicate all our life as to the aucthor thereof.
And to say the truth, we abandon our creator, wantonly and disloyally, and
renownce him for our savior, when we deforme our selves in sin, Col. 3.1.
where we ought always to aspire to a heavenly life, and lay aside all
earthly affections, being raised up with Christ Jesus, as Saint Paul
writes: and even we deny with Jeremy that he has received the true
knowledge of God, except we put of the old man, which is corrupt in his
disordinate desires, to put upon us the new. Phil. 4.5.
And to the Philippians he requires, that our patient mind be known unto
all men. The Lord is at hand, let not us take care for ought, 2. Tim. 2.1.
but that in all things our requests may be made known to God by prayers,
and supplications with giving of thanks. Phil. 4.8.
And the peace of God, which passes all understanding shall keep our hearts
and senses in Christ Jesus. Moreover, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to
love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or if
there be any praise, let us think of these things. And he wrote to the
Corinthians in his second Epistle, Cor. 7.1.2
Since we have received the promises, let us cleanse our selves from all
fylthinesse of the flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in
the fear of God. Ephesians. 4.20.
And to the Ephesians: ye have not so learned if you have been taught by him,
Tit. 8.16.
as the truth is in Jesus. And he complained greatly to Titus, Mat. 7.20.
how they professed to know God, but by their abominable works deny him.
And our Savior says in S. Matthewe that by their work ye shall know them.
For such as follow not the good which they speak, resemble monsters, which
have but one mouth, and one tongue, but no feet nor hands at all. He does
therefore falsely boast to know the truth, if his life be not good and
correspondent. For the doctrine of truth is not a doctrine of the tongue, but
of life. And if for good cause, the Philosophers were wont to be angrye with
such as made profession of their art, which they called the mystresse of life,
and in the mean time turned it but to a sophistical babbling, and did ever
esteem wicked livers and such as were covetous not worthy to speak, (as the
Emperors Dioclesian, and Maximian wrote, that their profession and inward
desire belide themselves) how much greater reason have we to detest these
bablers, which only content them selves to have the Gospel at their fingers
ends, and in their life, rebellious and seditious clean despise the same?
Considering that the power and efficacy thereof, ought to pearce the very
bottom of our heart: and from thence to be showed in all our behauiours,
grace, garments, Col. 1.10.
and all other our actions and comportmentes as Tertullian did wright. We have
heretofore declared, how we ought to have this end before our eyes, to tend
to that perfection which God has commanded us, to wit an integrity, which
signifies a pure simplicity of the heart, void of all faynednesse, and
contrary to a double heart. Every one ought thus far to walk according to
his might. And it shall avail much, if to day surmount yesterdaye. And being
entered into the listes, we should enforce our selves to go out to the very
end, assured to obtain a very great prise. To declare perticularlie every
virtue, would be too tedious in this Chapter, but I will add that which does
most entertain and delight some men in lying, that is: that they be too much
lovers of themselves, and are very forward for their particular profitte,
Hindrances to the truth.
which does altogether blemishe their sight, and hinders them so as they can
not consider the will of GOD nor his promises. For whatsoever we deliberate,
covet, and poursue, ought to be joined with the good and profitte of our
neighbor. And we must not be stirred up nor moved with any pick, against
the law of Charity. Charity.
Saint Augustine in his first book of Christian doctrine writes, that he
lives excellently well, which the least he is able lives to himself: De
doct. chapter lib. 1. car. 23.
because the obseruaunce of the law, consists in the love toward God, and
our neighbor. And we read in many places of Cicero and others, that the
better a man is, the less he tends al his actions to his own profit, and
the more he does study to serve God and his commonwealth. Plato himself wrote
to Architas, Man is not only borne for him self
that man was borne for his parents, friends and country: in sort that the
least part of him remains to himself, and for this cause man is named a
civil and communicatiue creature. And as S. Paul wrote, Jesus Christ was
borne for us to the end that they which live should not live any more unto
themselves, but to him which dyed for them. And exhorts us no more to
purchase after our own profitte, but that which may concern our neighbor;
and that we be made rich in good works, which he calls a treasure and
foundation to come. In which doing we shall follow the paths of truth, Nilus
a bishop.
and shall be counted most happy, especially if we retire our affections from
uncleanness, from whence Nilus an ancient bishop said, a smooke proceeded
which blacked the soul with sowte. Two sorts of Christians
There be then two sorts of Christians, the one in name and profession only,
the other in effect. The first care not but for their body, honors, riches
and pleasure, without ought regarding the fear of God. The other with all
their affection dedicate themselves to God, at whose hand they take all in good
part, and despise the world loving God, and his word, and commandments:
Isaiah 52.
and of these Isayah writes that they which shall see them shall know they
are the blessed seed of the Lord: and in another place he calls a naughty
conscience a narrow bed, in which a man cannot well stretch out his body nor
lie at ease, for he which has a wounded conscience can never find out any
condition, place, or state that is not too little for him, and which may any
ways content him. Psalm. 4.1. and, 119.
This is the cause why David requires at Gods hand to set at large his
imprisoned heart, that is to say that he will do him the grace, to cause him to
have a sound and neat conscience. I will not here forget that as God is
honored by the good life of the faithful, God is blasphemed and dishonored by
our wickedness.
(according as the holy scripture witnesses) so is he blasphemed, and
dishonored thorough wickedness. And there is no doubt but the behavior of
Christians, have caused the Turks and Infidels even to detest the true
religion. Lopes a Spaniard and Beuzo a Millannese, and other that have written
of the history of America and the West Indies, have been constrained to
confess, The cruelty of the Spaniards toward the Indians.
that the cruelty, covetousness, blasphemies and wickedness of the
Spaniardes has altogether alienated the poor Indians from the religion, which
the said Spaniards gave out they held for true, who did not long enjoy those
goods, which by detestable means they had there gathered. And all men write,
that they were less worth then the Idolatrous Indians. The cruel handling of
those Indians and that which the Turk did to them of Asia, Africa, and part of
Europe, who lived as we do, the Turk notwithstanding being the farther,
Aduertisme^t to amend our life.
are set before our eyes as an example: to the end that we should change our
selves, and seeing the behavior of Christians and their obstinacy to vice,
we should look but even for such cursednesse and miseries, as we read they
have been enwrapped and fallen into. And we may well say that we touch even
near the end of the world already quaking and doting thorough old age, and
full of the wrincles of lying: which notwithstanding can not obscure the son
of truth, nor take away the light of them which fear God, which see, Godly
exercise.
and love the way which we ought to follow, to attain to life eternal. And
that we need not further wander, we must exercise our selves in reading of
good books, in prayer, fasting, and works of godliness. And as Xenophon
writing of the dewtie and office of an esquire, warns him above all things,
to beseech at Gods hand to make, his thought, speech, and deeds such as
shall be agreeable unto him, and contentment to all his friends, and
honorable and profitable to his commonwealth without molesting of any man; by
far greater reason the Christians ought to pray unto God, without
intermission, that he will teach them his will, and dress their paths, to
love and fear his name. When a man speaks of good works, it is thereby
meant such as are furthest from all superstition and hypocrisy, and proceed
from a faith woorking thorough charity, and a pure heart, Mat. 25 34. 2. Cor.
9.8. 1. Tim. 6.18.
witnessing the great bounty and excellency thereof, and profiting our
neighbors, referring all to the glory goodness and grace of God, which
brings forth in us good fruits, and gives unto us both to will and to
perform as saint Paul says, and crowns in us his own works.

CHAP. 8. How much true men have been esteemed and that all magistrates ought
to be so, and of the riches of princes.
IN Exodus Iethro counseled Moses, Exodus 18, 21.
to appoint rulers over the people, men of courage, fearing God, Who ought to
be rulers.
men dealing truly hating covetousness, and in Egypt, the chief magistrate
ever carried a picture of truth, hanging at his neck. The which Amian writes
also of the Druydes, showing that a Judge ought to carry it in his heart, his
Judgments, and all other his actions. And the tablet hanging with two chains
upon the heart of the high priest, (whereof mention is made in Exodus 28. Exodus
27.30.
and Numbers 3.) was called VRIM which signifies light. VRIM.
For the kings in all their actions of importance, demanded counsel of God by
his high priest, or prophets. Pythagoras, and Demosthenes, Pythagoras.
Demosthenes.
esteemed to be true, and to do good to another, the two most excellent
things that were given from heaven to mankind. And the same Pythagoras,
Pythagoras.
being demanded, wherein men were likest unto God, answered in truth. And it
was a sufficient reason for any thing he said to say, He said it. And the
great Thebane captain Epaminondas, Epaminondas.
was most especially praised because he loved the truth, and never made lie.
Pyndarus.
And Pyndarus praised him, as he did before one Pyttacus a Tarentine, Pyrrhus.
for that knowing much he spoke little. And albeit Pyrrhus was an enemy to the
Romans, yet nevertheless did he give this praise unto Fabritius, Fabritius.
that a man might as soon turn him from the truth and honesty, as the sun
out of his course. And the chiefest praise, Bishops in time past.
which hystoriographers give to Bishops in time past, is, that they never lied,
and in the Psalms, and Apocalypse, Zachar.
the saints were ever honored with this title, that a lie was never found in
their mouth. And Zachary praising Jerusalem calls it the city of truth.
Psalm. 38.56.135. Isaiah 54.
And in the holy scripture, this word of think, say, or promise, is
interpreted in God to do: because all which he thinks, says, or promises,
is surely executed and put in effect. Pomponius a friend of Ciceroes, was
extolled, for that he had gotten such an opinion to be counted true, that
every one trusted him, Demonar.
and referred himself unto him. Which was likewise said of Demonar in the time
of the Emperor Adrian. And our chronicles do greatly praise king John, King
John.
for that he was open, never making show of loving him, whom in deed he did
not. Titus Liuius, in the 5. Titus Liuius.
book of his fourth Decade, and fourth of his 5. made a great matter that the
Romans kept their faith exactly. And in the first book of his first Decade
he writes, that faith, and a single oath, (all fear of laws and
chastisementes not thought on) governed the whole City, Attilius Regulus.
to which he attributed the course of all their great prosperities. Attilius
chose rather to return back, to torments and death prepared for him,
Antiochus. Ptolome Epiphanes. Popilius.
than to break his faith. And when Antiochus would have usurped Egypt, upon
Ptolomie Epiphanes, whose protection the Romans had already taken upon
them, they sent unto him Popilius, who made a circle about the said Antiochus,
and constrained him before he departed to promise him, that he should
enterprise nothing, over their said pupil. We read of many other kings
and commonwealthes, that in their differences, referred themselves to the
people of Rome. Cato as Plutarke has written, having laid to Murena his
charge, Cato. Custom of the Romans
that he bought the voices of the people, the better to attain to the
Consulship, went here and there gathering his profes, and according to the
custom of the Romans, had on the defendants behalf, certain gardes, which
followed him every where, marking what he did for the better instruction of
his bill; These watchme^ would often ask him, if that day he meant to search
out ought, that appertayned to his accusation, if he said no then they
departed, whereupon is grown this proverb, when one tells a thing that
seems strange, this is not to be believed, though Cato himself should tell
it. And Pliny in his preface, describes the opinion was then had of his
manhood, and innocence, which says he caused Cicero to cry out, O gentle
Cato how happy art thou to have been such a one, that never man yet durst
presume to solicit thee in any dishonest cause, or contrary to duty? He
writes also of Scipio surnamed Asiaticus, Scipio Asiaticus.
for to have subdued Natolie, being called before the Tribunes, Gracchus being
one, whom he held for his enemy, that he had such an assurance in his speech,
that his very enemies were sufficient witness of his manhood. A good advise of a
liar rejected.
And in Lacedemon, when there was one that was known to be a dissolute person,
and a liar, and that he had proposed a very profitable advise, and necessary
for that time, yet was it clean rejected of the people. And the Ephores,
having chose^ a Senator that was very true, commanded him continually to
propose unto them like council, whereby they might restore their commonwealth,
as it were from an unclean and foul vessel, into a pure and neat. Cicero in
his oration he made for Balbus, makes mention of an honorable person, who
being called into the Senate at Athenes, to depose touching some matter, the
senators would by no means have him take the accustomed oath; knowing him to
be a virtuous honest man. Such an efficacy has the opinion of ma^hood, in a
personage accounted true. Artabanus judge of the controversy between Xerxes
and Ariamenes. Parliament of Paris.
Xerxes and Ariamenes in the great controversy which was between the^ for the
kingdom of Persia, referred themselves to their uncle Artebanus, to whose
judgment they stood. I could here reckon many foreign Princes, who in time
past have had such an opinion of the court of Parliament of Paris, composed of
grave, learned, and reverent counselors, chosen according to the right and
ordinances, that they have had recourse thither, as to a temple of justice. We
read of the Emperor Frederic the second, Lether money.
and certain kings of France, that they have been so greatly esteemed of
their subjects that in steed of fine gold they have received lethermonie,
others have borrowed great sums with good liking, which they have restored
again, as soon as conveniently they were able. This is the means which Cirus
shows, Cyrus. Zonare.
in Xenophon, and Zonare, to Cresus, Wherein a princes treasor most consists.

King Francis 1. Henry 2.
Princes true and keeping their promise beloved of their subjects.

King Pharamonde named Warmond.


whereby they may obtain what they will of their subjects: when they have once
gained an opinion to be accounted true he says likewise that their treasors
consist most in enriching of their friends, without caring for any other
gardes. We have seen, what credit by this means, the great kings Francis,
and Henry, obtained thoroughout all Europe, and what loss and dishonor such
have received as both before, and since have failed of their promise. I will
not here omit, how Pharamonde our first king was named VVarmond which
signifies truth. And a man is not able to declare what profit, and solace he
which is true, brings to every man, as ending of suits in law, enmities,
discordes, and other seeds of mischiefs dispersed through a country, by the
revealing of the truth which he discovers, Xenephon.
his words being received as an oracle. And Xenophon in his seventh book of
young Cirus, shows that the bare word of such a man prevails more, then
other men's constraint, threats or punishment: and gains more by his bare
promise then other do by their rewards. He says moreover that there is no
greater, nor more excellent riches especially to a Prince, then virtue,
justice, and greatness of courage, because such can nether want friends, nor
ought else.

CHAP. 9. That it behooves to keep promise, with instruction not to make it
with ones disadvantage, and not to give place to the importunate.
Faith^ of princes.
TItus Liuius, in his third book of his first decade, declares what great
damage ensues him who breaks his faith, and loses his credit; for the
society of men is only maintained by dew keeping of promises. And al good
Princes have esteemed, that their authority, Isocrates.
puissaunce, and safety depends thereon. Hereupon Isocrates wrote to King
Nicocles, that he should be found true of his word in all his promises: in
sort that one should give greater credit to his bare word, then to others
oaths. And the wise man writes in the Proverbs, that VVeldoing and faith
conserueth a Princes estate, but a lying talk becomes him not. Himself is
the only preseruour of faith among his subjects, and their debtour for
justice. Dion recites that the Emperor Marcus Antonius was wont to say,
Marcus Antonius. Faith once broken, of what importance. King Attalus
that it was a very lamentable thing, that a man's faith should be violat or
suspected, without which naught can be assured. King Attalus in his death bed,
warned Eumenes his son, to esteem fidelity, and the good opinion of his
subjects, the chiefest part of the inheritance he could leave him. And Sueton
praised Caesar, Caesar.
for that he kept his faith with his enemies, though they broke theirs with
him For as Cicinnatus said in Titus Liuius, a man must not offend, Cicinnatus.
Augustus.
led by an other man's example. And Dion reports of Augustus, that having made
proclamation, that he would give five and twenty thousand crowns, to
whosoever would present him with one that was the ringleader of certain
thieves, the same man presented him self, and obtained both the crowns and
his pardon. We read in sundry places of Titus Liuius, The Romans performers
of their promises.
how the Romans were ever very curious in maintaining their promise, and
Polibius being a Greek writes of them, that their very word was enough among
the Romans; and in Greece although they had Notaries and seals, oftentimes
they broke their faith, for which they were grievously punished. Joshua. 9, 20.
And in Joshua it is written, that he kept his faith with the deceitful
Barbarians, to the end, says he, that the wrath of God should not be upon his
people, because of the oath which they swear unto him, as it afterward fell
upon al them of the house of Saul, who were hanged for having vyolated their
own. And the Prophet writing in his Psalms, of such conditions as the
faithful ought to be endued with insysteth greatly upon this, that they keeepe
their promise, yea, though it were to their own hinderance. Cicero in his
offices shows by many examples, that ones faith is broken, When faith is
broken.
if one do ought to the detriment thereof, what color soever he will set upon
it. But that we should not run further hedlong into these inconveniences,
Seneca wrote that he which was not able to set light a sottish shame, is no
disciple of Philosophy; Which opinion Brutus was likewise of as Plutarque
writes. And it is an ouergreat fault in Princes, Remedy.
either not to dare to refuse, or too lightly to agree to whatsoever is
demanded of them: which they ought to endeavor to refourm, by custom
proceeding from lesser things, refusing greater. It is also required that we
promise not ought, which proves not to our advantage, or ought else that lies
not in our power, but diligently to take heed, that we suffer not our selves
to be enforced, Nice shamefastnes.
or led with a nyce shamefastnes, which many have, when they dare not
contrary, or refuse to grant what they are required: for which often times they
much repent themselves, Zeno. Notable examples not to grant that is unjust.
Rutilius.
as Zeno wisely did reprehend him, who was not ashamed to require a matter both
unjust and unreasonable. And Rutilius to one that found fault, that his
friendship was so light set by, as not to be able to obtain his request, made
answer, But what have I to do with thine, if thou would enforce me to do
contrary to al justice? Agesilaus.
And king Agesilaus, said to certain importunate persons, that a man ought not
to demand at a Kings hands, ought that were unjust: and being entreated by his
father to give judgment in a cause contrary to right, he answered him: you
have taught me from my youth to follow the laws, I will yet now obey you in
ought not judging against them. Alexander.
Alexander the great made the like answer to his mother, adding further, that
she asked to great a recompense for having borne him nine months: and
because of her ill carriage of her self, when Antipater (to whom Macedonia fell)
dyed, he prayed his subjects (as Diodorus wrote) never to leave the managyng
of affairs in the hands of a woman. The Emperor Frederick said to certain
his minions about him, Frederick.
that were very importunate to get into their hands some of the ancient
Domaine of the Empire, that he rather chose to be accounted of small
liberality, Sigismond.
then perjured. They write as much of Sygismond.

CHAP. X. Examples of evils happened to breakers of promise, and of that which
depends thereupon.
The punishment and vengeance upon such as broke their faith.
THE examples of such miseries, as they have run into which have not performed
their promises, ought to make us think their faults more strange, then we win
for. Titus Liuius recyteth of a Dictator of Albany, who was drawn in pieces
with four horses, for that he had broken his faith, and the city of Albe was
rased clean down, and Carthage dissolved into ashes, and the people of Capua
murdered, and kept in bondage. He makes likewise mention of sundry ostages
given in pledge for the better assurance of such treaties as passed thorough
the Volsques, Tarentines, and others, who were executed for the breach of
promise their people made. Zedechiah king of Judah, having rebelled contrary to
his promise, was led captive, after that, his sons were flaine before his
eyes, and had his own eyes put out. 2. Kings. 25.7
Caracalla, the Emperor having pursued the king of Persia, Caracalla.
Justinian.
contrary to his promise, was himself afterward slain. Justinian having
falsified his faith to the Bulgares, was sent into banishment. Cleomenes,
Cleomenes.
having made a league with the Argiens, seeing that under the assurance thereof
they were lulled a sleep, murdered and imprisoned some of them; nevertheless
not being able to surprise the town, which was defended by the women, ran mad,
and killed himself.

The king of Hungary Ladislaus, after certain victories obtained against
Amurates, made a most honorable truce, during which he suffered himself to be
persuaded by the Cardinal Julian, Ladislaus. Cardinal Julian.
Ambassador from Pope Eugenes to break it: which was the cause why the said
turk, had a most memorable conquest, and the said Ladislaus together with the
chief of his army, and the said Cardinal, were either slain outright, or
stifeled within the marshes. And after such time as he had thus falsified his
faith, there ensued an infinite number of mischiefs thorough out all
Christendom. And even so went it with us, after we had conquered Milan, and
Naples, for that we observed not duly the treatise which we there promised.

And for the like cause before that, happened the Scicilian Vespers, Frenchmen.
and for that we rather gave credit to Pope Clement the fourth, then to the
counsel of the Earl of Flanders, Adrian Pope
Pope Adrian took a solemn oath to observe the peace concluded with the
Emperor Frederick, and afterward breaking it, as he drank he was choked
with a fly. Alexander 6. Pope.
It came in like sort to pass with Pope Alexander the sixth, who took
himself such poison as he had prepared for the Cardinals he had invited to
supper: And to Julius the second, Julius 2. Pope.
who was wont to say that the treaties he concluded, was but to abuse and ruin
the one through the other. Andronicus Conneus, Andronicus Conneus.
clean contrary to his faith given to the infants of Emanuel, and to them of
Nice, usurped the Empire, but after sundry other ill happes, he was soon
after hung by the feet, and hewn in pieces. Loys Sforce, Loys Sforce.
uncle to John Galleace invested himself in the Duchy of Milan. He likewise
broke his promise made to King Francis; He was afterward carried prisoner into
France. Michael Paleologue, being chosen Emperor of the Greeks, Michael
Paleologue.
promised and swore, that he would render up the Empire into the hands of John
Lascaris when he should come of age, but notwithstanding he still held it. He
died miserably, and to his posterity ensued an infinite number of mischiefs,
and was occasion of the first beginning of the Turkish Monarchy. Charles duke
of Burgondy
Charles duke of Burgondie, having violated his faith, promised to the
Suissers, and before that to the Earl of S. Pol was vanquished, and all ill hap
accompanied him ever after. Hildebran otherwise named Gregory the seventh,
Gregory 7. Pope. Rodolph Emperor.
swear an accord, with the Emperor Henry the fourth, from whom as soon as
he was departed, he created Rodolph Emperor, who afterward was overcome by
the said Henry; and seeing his hand cut off said unto the Bishops: Behold the
hand which I did lift up, when I made the oath of fidelity to the Emperor.
And anon after he dyed, and the said Pope was deposed and put to flight. Which
ought to serve for an example to great personages to hold their promises. I
will not here forget what we have seen of our time happen to Christierne king
of Danemarke, who for having broken his faith given to his subjects,
Christierne king of Danemarke.
was deprived his realm, and afterward lived miserably, for all the succors
which he received from Charles the fifth, Emperor. Richard the 3. king of
England.
As also the histories recite of one Richard, who caused his nephews to be
murdered, and his neaces to be declared bastardes, to make him self king of
England: but he was afterward vanquished and put to flight by one as then
scarce known. I omit sundry examples, Boccace.
set forth by Boccace in nine books which he wrote touching the
misaduentures of notable personages, which every one may read. And could here
touch that which Plutarch writes of Catoes opposing him self, Cato.
to the sacrifices which they would make, for the victory obtained by Caesar,
against the Almaines, meaning that they ought to had delivered it for them,
whom he had outragiouslie wronged, and contrary to the peace, they had made
with the people of Rome, to the end to cast upon him alone, the fault they
had committed in violating their faith. And without searching of any further
examples, thorough the folliciting of Cardinal Caraffe, Cardinal Caraffe.
Troubles caused by religion.
sent from Pope Paul the third, and thorough other men's ambition, was there
broken a most honorable truce, and thereby a great war undertaken, which had
very ill success. I pass over in scilence the great calamities, ruynes,
dissipations, disorders, excess, losses, dissolutions, subuersions of states,
rauishments and mischiefs happened in Christendom since thirty years past,
thorough a dispensation, which men take, to vyolate their faith, promise, and
Edictes. And we have very great occasion to beseech God that he will give
remedy thereto, and hinder these defiances, evil fortunes, divisions, and
storms, which as yet are like to happen.

And albeit, that according to Bias opinion, How a man may dispense with a
promise.
no excuse is to be received, to make one able to break his promise,
nevertheless he ought not to be accused for a liar, who may not lawfully
keep it, for some just occasion, afterward happened unto him. As if a mad
man should demand the sword which he had given another to keep, or if a
more mighty man should oppose him self, or if by that means another would
attempt against his person, or estate which did promise, or if thee keeping of
his promise, New matters and strange, new and strange counsel. l. 6. de
iurieur.
should turn him to any great dishonor, mischief, error, fraud or any other
prejudice not to be recovered. For matters not already in practice, strange
and new, require a new counsel, according to the saying of the lawers, who
even dispense with a promise, after an oath taken. And often times men promise,
with an intent to accomplish that which lies not in their power, through an
indispositio^, or matter fallen out of more great importance. Judges. 11.30.
Alexander. L. placuit. L. de iudi. Necessity the mother of dispensations.
As the vow and promise which Iephthe made, ought to be otherwise interpreted.

And as Alexander did, having promised he would slaye the first that should
come out of the town, killed an ass in lieu of him that led her: as by equity
the rigor of a law is often times moderated. And ancient men have said,
that Necessity is the mother of dispensation. It is likewise excusable, if any
prejudice, or interest happen not thorough the not accomplishing of a promise.

CHAP. XI. Effects of the truth, with exhortation not to change the statutes or
laws, and not to dance upon holidays, praise of French men, and a solution
of that for which they are blamed.
IF the light of the truth take from us the veil which blemisheth our
judgment, The effects of truth.
we shall modestly behave our selves, without any color, or disguising in our
words, habites, or any other our actions: We shall know how we ought to
render unto God, al reverence, obedience, trust, prayers, actions of
thanksgiving, and praise with peace in our spirits: and how we ought to
honor, love, serve and succor all kind of persons: We shall be ready to obey
our King, his laws and Magistrates, and wisely to command over subjects: we
shall have sufficient of little, magnanimity, easy access, humanity, a
nature not dissembling nor fained, constancy in our counsels and enterprises,
with a resolution always to do that which our duty commands: we shall not
be dissolute in pleasures, nor insolent in prosperity, nor too much carried
away with our passions: we shall contemn death, and the dangers thereof, in
respect of a better life: we shall lose no heart in adversity, we shall
rightfully follow what either is to be chosen, or left, treading upon the
thorns of this life without pricking us, Ezech. 2.6.
and upon Scorpions without feeling their venom, as it is written in Ezekiel.
And would to God that al French men might so know the beauty of this truth,
that they might become amorous thereof, and altogether cast off their lying and
inconstancy, to the end they might no more be cast in the teeth, with not
performing their promises, and that the city of Paris might of every one be
called the city of truth, as the Prophet Zecariah called the city of
Jerusalem, Zecha. 8.3.
and according to his vision God, placed a woman in the midst of the Ephah,
5.8.
named Iniquity, upon the mouth whereof he cast a weight of lead, because she
should not escape. Or as Philip king of Macedon, assembled together the most
wicked persons and furthest from correction of al his subjects, and put them
into a town which he builded of purpose, and named it Poneropolis, that is the
city of wicked persons. Poneropolis, a city builded by k. Philip.
So that there might be sent and enclosed in some one place in France al such
as do delight in inconstancy, lightness, falshod, against promise and truth,
seditions, lyings, pilling, extortion, knauerie, cousinage, pernicious
inventions, murders, reproaches, and periuries; to the end that the rest might
live in greater honor, peace, reputation, and credit. Now standing not at all
upon the praise, which proceeds from the beginning and ancestors of
Frenchmen, not being pertinent hereunto, and may easily be seen in the
hystoriographers, I will thus much say for Frenchmen, that if we consider their
antiquity, Praise of Frenchmen.
piety, valor, manhod, courage, humanity, mercy, gentleness, dexterity,
quickness of spirit, and al other their virtues and perfections, they give
place to no nation under the Sun whatsoever, but rather excels it, as a
French man said to the Ambassadors of Rome in Titus Liuius. And there be
diverse grave writers, 1. Dec. l. 5.
and of good credit, which attribute unto them a gentle heart, Rhenanus,
Agathius, Odo, Regino. Chron. l. 1. v. 32.
favorable, courteous, religious, upright virtuous, loving one each other, and
keeping their faith more constantly, then any other people, and they have been
called the invincible and most noble. And if they have any imperfections at al,
as no man is without, yet are they covered with an infinite number of virtues:
for as much as reason causes them to tame, and subdue this liveliness,
promptnes, and heat which they have naturally. And histories are full of the
prowess of our ancestors, who with their victorious hand have run over
wel-neare the whole world, setting down orders and laws to all provinces,
there plantinge the memory of their name, and marks of their Empire. Italy,
which speaks of envy, has been well coursed and tamed and sundry other
countries as well in Europe as Asia, have hence been peopled and received
their governors. And an infinite number of Emperors, Princes, and provinces,
have had recourse unto them, for their own assurance, and have left behind
them most notable monumentes of their government and justice, to the profit
of many provinces. This would gladsomly, encourage me particularly to
declare, and make recytall of the most famous in all disciplines, and knowledge
of tongues and sciences, of a great number of Martyrs, which have suffered for
the testimony of the faith, of excellent Emperors, Captains, and souldiars,
that we might well compare to the most valiant that ever was, during the
very flower of the Romans and Greeks. I will not forget what Julius Caesar
in the sixth of his Comentaries, Frenchmen preferred before Almaine
and Tacitus has written, that the French men have far surpassed the
Almaines, in prowess, valor, and courtesy, and have ever had the first starte
of them.

Salust in the end of the war of Iugurth writes, that the ancient Romans,
and such as have been since, have ever had this opinion, that by their own
valor, they easily attained to the end of all other nations: but that with
the French men, they strove for their own safety, and not for honor. And it
is not to be red in all histories, of any people that has attained to their
valor, and dexterity, nor whose conquestes were more wonderful, expeditions
more remarqueable, and success of their battles more happy, and policy or
laws better ordained, or piety, bounty, and religion better, nor their
unity greater.

And there is no nation whose brightness is not darkened and obscured thorough
the high shyning of the glory of the French men. But to satisfy what the
said Caesar has written, Frenchmen blamed.
that Frenchemen are soudeine, headie, desirous of novelties, and deliberatinge
upon uncertain purposes, and coyners of affairs of importance, whereupon
they must needs quickly repent themselves.

Other historiographers strangers, condemn them of lightness; And the
Emperor Charles the fifth, said to the Kings Ambassador, the which before
that he had proposed to the Consistory of Rome, that he was nowise able to
assure himself of the French, because they began many things, but brought
nothing to end: and did no otherwise by their words, then by their garments,
which they disguised into so many fashions, as one day they were of one mind,
and tomorrow of another. And that a body could not believe ought except he
saw it done: and that if they did any good at all, it was by bounty, for the
great desire they had to draw others to their own advantage. And that they
had ever their foot, and their wit in the air, and their purposes more
changeable then the wind. And further discharging his choler at that time, as
the Ambassador him self told me, he greatly blamed the diversity and
changing of Edicts and ordinances, which we handle so ill, and publish so
lightly, that anon after we are constrained to change them: being a cause,
that they were so little made account of. And then in his passion he repeated
certain places, wherein he thought some words wanted, which speech of his
notwithstanding he afterward excused. And in truth Plato did not amiss
compare, Plato.
how many more tauernes, so many more drinkers: Laws not to be altered
The number of Physicians, the increase of diseases; The more account the
justice is made of, the more suits: So the more laws, the more corruption: as
daily experience does teach us, profiting us no more, then great variety of
Medicines does to a very weak stomach. And in the time of the Emperors
Caligula and Claudus, were many laws made, and yet tyranny and corruption
took never more place. If youth were well taught in Princes courts,
universities and schools, but constancy, gravity, and the truth, they should
be a great deal better received, and strangers would more assure themselves
of our promises: and then might we well say of France, as S. Ierom attributed
unto it, The counsel of the Persians.
that it were a country refyned, and purged of monsters. I will not here
sylently pass over to this purpose, that counsel, which the Princes of Persia
and Media gave to King Darius, as the Prophet Daniel witnesses, Daniel. 6.8.
Ester. 8 8. Diodorus. Demosthenes.
that he should be found true, and never change a law which was once made,
according to the custom of the Medes and Persians which alters not. It is
also written in the book of Hester: that the writings written in the K. name,
and sealed with the Kings ring, may no man revoke. Diodorus and Demosthenes,
tell of certain people, that no man might so much as speak of the change of a
law, except he wore a halter, with which he was hanged, if his opinion took
not place. So greatly in ancient time did they detest all changes and
novelties. Marseilles.
The citizens of Marseilles were much renowned by Cicero and Titus Liuius, for
that they remained constant in their laws, customs, and fashions, Paler. l.
2. chapter 15.
without changing ought, yea, and as a great treasor they kept their old
sword of justice in the smallest matters to show how much they honored
antiquity. And for the like constancy have the Romans received great glory.
Paulus Aemilius.
And Paulus Aemilius writes that the French men ever took great heed, that
naught in their laws and customs should be changed. And greatly was Lycurgus
praised, for that after he had brought the Lacedaemonians to receive his laws,
he made them all swear that they should alter no one iotte of them during his
absence; and after that never returned into his country again, which caused
it to fare much the better with them. For as Plato has written in the seventh
of his laws, and Xenophon likewise. Change, in all matters, except they be
mischievous, Plato. Xenophon.
is most dangerous, beit in the diet of the body, or in manners. And
according to the old proverb, A man should not awake a sleeping Dog. And
every known evil, to which a man is used, Change, a matter dangerous. Titus
Liuius. Aristotle.
is tolerable as Titus Liuius writes. And Aristotle in his Politickes,
shows, it is much better to bear with some imperfections and faults in
laws and Magistrates, if they be not too notorious then in thinking to change
them, to ruin a whole estate, which is as a great frame made of diverse pieces,
so joined and linked in together, that it is impossible to take away the least
part, but the whole shall feel it. It is greatly doubted, whether we ought
to receive a better law for a more ancient. For the principal matter which
makes a law to be obeyed, is custom which cannot be confirmed but by
continuance of time: so that alteration greatly weakeneth the force and virtue
of a law. Plato.
And Plato in his politiques, and fourth of his Common wealth, reprehendeth
such as by new laws imagine they may remedy mischiefs: and deem them
rather an occasion thereof, as if one cut off the head of Hydra, by and by
seven new spring up: Hydra.
and by change is taken away that respect and reverence, which we ought to
bear them, which once being lost, there is no more obedience. We read in
ancient histories, Orpheus.
that Orpheus was cut in pieces by the weomen of Thrace, because he had
changed their laws. For this cause, as the Lawyers write, if we be not
constrained thereto by an apparent and evident profit, we ought not to alter
what has bin before ordained. And as S. Bernard wrote to one at Lions:
Novelty is the mother of rashness, I. in rebus de consta. princi. Bernarde.
Galba Emperor.
sister of superstition, and daughter of lightness. The Emperor Galba was
greatly praised because he would neither change ancient law, nor creat new.
And Plutarque exhorts Traian, to take greater care in seeing his ancient laws
to be observed, Plutarque.
then in making of new; and above al things, that his life should serve for a
law. One asked Pausanias, why it was not lawful in Lacedemon, Pausanias.
to alter any ancient law, he answered, that Laws ought to have authority
over men, not men over Laws. Otherwise, as Plato and Aristotle maintained,
Solon.
it was a subversion of an estate. The answer which Solon made to Anatharsis,
saying: that his laws were like to Spyders cobwebbes, which hold but the
little flies, deserves to be well considered of: that as men keep their
contractes, that it is not expedient that any bargainer should break, so the
Athenians would willinglye cleave to his laws, out of which no man should
receive any damage, but every one very great profit. It were very necessary
we had such officers as were wont to be in Greece, called Nomothetes, who
took great regard that no man should derogate from any good law, nor publish
any that were pernicious or superfluous: Nomothetes in Greece.
which the Parlements ought to do. Notwithstanding a man may allege the
saying of our lawyers, that it is impossible to set down an order certain,
simple, and of one sort, to things which daily vary: And that which an
ancient man said, that a Mutton had but one voice, but a man diverse, because
we must do as time, and affairs require, all human affairs being in
perpetual motion, and France being composed of so many kinds of people, and
differing in fashions and language. In the first book of Thucidides,
Thucidides.
the Corinthians set down, that as in a city, which is in quiet and peace, it
is not meet their ancient laws and customs should be changed: so where a
common wealth is ouerpressed with diverse and unlike affairs, it is necessary
they look out many new helps, as to diseases strange and unknown, strange
remedies must of necessity be applied. Gellius. l. 12. cap. 1. Colum l 2. c.
4. Plato 4. de legibus De^ad. 4.
And in Titus Liuius it is declared, how men's laws alter according to the
time. And Aristotle in the third of his Ethickes, compares them to measures,
and Solon to coins, which are not alike in all. And in the sixth he says,
that laws do not proceed from art, or any other science, but from wisdom,
which regards things in particular, as they change, and attaineth to
experience by exercise and time: as Terence said: This age requires an other
life, Terence.
and other manners. For this cause Solon prayed his laws might be observed
for a hundred years space, Solon.
to the end that they might not be afterward changed. Moreover we have
often seen, what credit they have had about Princes, which have counseled
them to alter the laws for their own lucre, or particular passions. And such
as are studied in the constitutions of the Cannon and Cyuil law, may see, how
Popes and Emperors, have established, and abolished, and then put in use
again, certain laws, and what has pleased one has displeased his
successor. And what has had his course in one time, is clean rejected in
another. So much is man's mind enclyned to contradiction and change. l. 2. c.
3. de baptis. com. Don.
S. Augustine writes, that the decrees of particular Bishops have been
corrected by Prouincial counsels, and prouincial by universal, and the former
general counsels disanulled by the latter, when through experience of things,
that which lay close is opened, and what was hid is brought to light, which may
be seen more at large in histories. Here I could allege the opinion of an
Athenian ambassador, Policy in a Prince.
recited by Thucidides, that a Prince ought sometime to be a friend, sometime an
enemy, and to ply himself according to occurrents, and sometime it behooves him
to release the laws, as K Agesilaus ordained that for an accident then
happened they must be winked at, and afterward be observed. Another said to
Pericles that since it was not lawful to take clean away the table, wherein the
law was written, Plutarque.
yet they ought to turn the other side. And Plutarque praised Flaminius for
that he knew how to command over laws, Tacitus.
the necessity of the time requiring it. And in Tacitus the Almains were
praised, for cha^ging their customs found to be but bad. As also Valerus a
Senator of Rome shows in Titus Liuius, that it becomes men so to do. Titus
Liuius.
And some have condemned the law of the Persians and Medes, which was above
recited, when the usage, and state of a common wealth, has found it
unprofitable and pernicious. Every man also will confess, that in men's deeds
and speeches, the mean called constancy is to be required: which is a mean
between lightness and stubbernes And to persevere in one mind, is not always to
be praised, Cicero.
as Cicero in many places declares, yelding those for an example, which upon
the sea are constrained to yield to tempests and winds, and often times to alter
their course, never standing stiff in one deliberation. And there is no
nation, nor people which has not some time been accused of inconstancy, man's
life being so full of contrarieties: as Hipocrates in a certain Epistle
declares it to be. Hipocrates.
Every one ought also to consider, that the cause why we are so blamed and
found fault with by other nations, proceadeth by reason of the notable
victories which French men have obtained against them, and that they have so
often been subdued by the valor of the French: and not being able to revenge
with the sword, Guychardine a true writer, justifies the Frenchemen, and
condemne^h the Venetians.
they will do it with the fether. And whereas Paulus Iouius, Bembus,
Sabellicus, and Pandolphus, accuse the French men for not keeping their promise
with the Venetians, as well he as other credible aucthors, discovers the
falsehood, and reproach of these writers, showing it rather proceeded from the
lightness of other nations, as in sundry places in Cicero we may perceive. And
Titus Liuius calls them of Syria, Asia, and Greece, very light persons.
Tacitus attributes as much to the Almanes, The inconstancy of strangers.
and Scythians. What inconstancy and lightness since two hundred years last
past, have we I pray you seen, among Romans, Neapolitanes Genowaies,
Milanois, Florentines, and other Italians which they have used toward their
princes and governors? And for the very Almaines, have they not often abandoned
their Emperors, endured, and made means, that strangers enriched themselves
with the spoils of thempire? have they not served their turn with the son
to ruin the father? And have they not afterward left the son as a pray unto
the enemy? And upon the like occasions Auentin Crans, Auentin Crans.
and some other Almanes, have to small purpose, and folishly blamed the French
men of lightness and fantasticalnes, and named them by sundry other injurious
epithetons, so as they which see clear may easily judge by their very
writings, and by other authors better trained up in matters of state and
seasons of time then they, how they have written full of backbyting, lying,
pride, and envious malice. Beatus Rhenanus calls such historiographers
ambitious, praisers of their German nation, and blames them for so robbing and
concealing the praises, deserved by the French. And the said Italians unable
to excuse the great faults, cruelties, Italian Prudence. Italian vvriters not
of credit.
treacheries, cowardnesse, treasons, and dissimulations of their nation, go
about to disguyse these villainies with a name of Italian Prudence: and to
diminish the noble exploytes and enterprises of the French, they counterfeit a
letter of an Italian, as it were descended out of the clouds, thereby to give
thereto greater honor. And yet in those very examples which they do allege,
they show how they of their own nation, have with all their great discourses,
been as ill advised, irresolute and unconstant in all their affairs, yea and
more than any other nation. And howsoever they enforce themselves to stain the
French, we must needs confess, that there was never nation that ever
enterprised, well guyded, nor more happily executed brave and lofty
enterprises, and matters worthy of memory, then the French: nor that ever
with greater manhood, constancy and perseverance, has conquered, defended,
and recovered their own country, then they did even at that instant wh^^
^hese men so passionately wrote of them. Ierosme Beuzo a^ ila^ois, who wrote of
the West Indies, Ierosme Beuzo
having remained there above fiften years with the Spaniards, shows how far
the Spanish Chroniclers have spared the truth, and do go about to cover the
cruelties, inconstancies, and villainies of their nation, of whom part at
their return home were well chastened by the French, yea, and in the very
place by them selves, pilling and murdering one an other thorough the just
judgment of God. Moreover every one sees, that in that they blame the French
to be too open, prompt, moveable and light, they might better conster it to a
virtue: and such reproaches sets them again in so good away, that they take
away al occasion of speech: as Philip King of Macedon was wont to say of the
railing Athenians: and causes in them a habit to every virtue. And to persons
of colerique humor, as Frenchmen are, Galene attributes prompnesse and
prudencie in their actions. And this word of fantasticalnesse in respect of
the French, may be taken in a signification, as other authors use, for a
courage and readiness, in all matters worthy praise. And they are not to be
blamed if they take their party the best to help themselves, occasioned by
the incommoditie of their enemies, nor if they show themselves careless in
small matters, the better to be able to atchieue things of greater importance,
nor if they keep themselves from the treacheries, deceites, dissemblings, and
falsehood of faith, which their enemies have ever been accustomed to use, nor
if they render like for like as they are able, and occasion may serve. And
whereas K. Alphonsus, Of dansing.
and diverse other authors have greatly blamed Frenchemen because they delighted
so much in daunsing, they might easily excuse themselves through an old
ancient custom, which has bin received in sundry provinces, and by reason
of the exercise therein taken, so as a man modestly behave himself without
counterfaiting a mad man. It is to be wished for all that our paths might be
as well ruled as our words ought to be, and that daunsing were in less
estimation then it is, especially upon holy days, by reason of the
inconvenience, disorder, insolency and dissolutenes that ensues thereon. As
in time past the Romans, Lacedaemonians, and other common wealths well ordered,
yea, the very king S. Lewys banished out of their towns al vain plesures,
which served for naught else then to effeminate young men, and allure them to
vice, and above all they have been enemies to dansing, which a man easily may
gather, in an Oration that Cicero made for Murena, assuring that no man dansed,
except he were drunk or mad, and that such a vice proceeded from the dissolute
banquet of drunkenness, love and lechery, whereof no man was able to accuse the
said Murena, being a man given to all honest exercises. And the same Orator,
finding fault with an enemy of his called him a brave danser. And in his
offices he shows that for nothing in the world, a virtuous and wise man ought
to danse in public, albeit he had so promised. And Frederick the Emperor was
wont to say, that he rather chose to have an agew, then to daunse. And Plutarke
in his communings at boarde says, that the Persians never durst daunse in
presence of their wives. And Domitian deposed one Ruffyn out of the Senate,
because he daunsed, as though he had committed an act unworthy of an honest
man. And it seems they which so well love it, have more brain in their feet
then head, and think to play the fools with reason, as Terence says. And
Aristotle in his Ethics writes of the Milesians, ^. 3. c. 8. Prou. 4.26.
that they were not fools but did the selfsame things that fools are
accustomed to do. And herein they follow not the precept of the wise man, to
ponder the path of our feet, and to let al our ways be ordered aright. For
vanity is so great in many men, that they altogether study to keep measure
and follow the tune in dansing, and in their actions, countenance, speech, and
counsels; they go hedlong observing neither measure, wisdom, nor reason. It is
the very right occupation of iesters and iuglers, noted of infamy in good
commen wealths. And to cause laughture, and pastime, they were wont in time
past to counterfeit persons adjudged to die, ^. aut. damnat. de panis.
whereto all great princes ought to take heed that their scepters serve not
for a scoff to their subjects, and themselves there by run in contempt. Heb.
11.25.
The pleasures of the court of Pharaoh are caled in the Epistle to the Hebrews:
Prou. 6.27.
the pleasures of sins. And it is a hard matter as Solomon says, for a man
to take fire in his bosom and his clothes not to be burned. And in the 16.
chap. he declares, that such plesures are converted into tears, and torments.
Men of ancient time have named danses allurings, poysonings, and bauderies of
Satan, who by the means thereof corrupts us, as Lizander softened the walls
of Athens, and burned their ships, by sound of flutes. The Lord reprehended
them in Isaiah for using banquets, harps, tabors, and other dissolutenes.
Isaiah.
And without any more repeating the places of holy scripture, wherein we are
commanded to resist the desires of the flesh, Dancing condemned by the doctors
of the church
to shun al appearance and occasion of evil, and to show a good example as I
touched before. S. Basil in a sermon he made against drunkenness, flatly
forbids prophan songs and dansing, as things repugnant to all the holy
duties of a christian man, Basil.
in steed of bending his knees before god, which he ought to do. Chrysostom.
Which likewise S Chrisostom does in many homilies upon Matthew, the Epistle to
the Coloss. and upon Genesis, speaking of the marriages of Isaac and Jacob, S.
Ambrose. Augustine.
and in another homely, he praised the people for having left it. S Ambrose in
his third book of virgins, and S. Augustine against Petilian, declare that in
the well ordered churches, dansings were banished and reproved, as unworthy
dissolutenes, and upon the 32. Psalm, he is of opinion that it is not so ill to
trauail, and plough the ground, upon the sunday, as to danse. The which
Nicholas of Clemenge, an ancient doctor of the Sorbonists does commend in a
tretise he made, of not augmenting of holy days. And the said S. Augustine in
another place, Inconveniences happened by dancing.
rather likes the wife or maid, that sows upon the holy day, then her that
danseth. In the sea of histories, is mention made of an Archbishop of
Magdebourg that broke his neck dansing with a damsel. Other have been stroke
down with thunder, or knocked and bruised in pieces with the fall of the house,
where they dansed. Our writers make mention of the great danger which K Charles
6. escaped, having like to have bin burned in a danse, as some other great
lords were. K. Charles 6.
And by dansing Herodias caused John Baptist to be behedded. And by bills of
inditements drawn against sorcerers, it has bin found true, that in their
devilish sinagogues they go all dansing. And not without cause one of ancient
time named dansings snares for maids, misfortune for men, and a bayte for
baudes. And the Voltes, courantes, and vyolent daunses, proceed from fury,
and has caused many weomen to be delivered before their time. And god in
Isaiah greatly threateneth the daughters of Sion, for that they went winding and
prauncing, making their steps to be heard again. Origin.
Origin writes that al persons have been forbidden them, but especially
weomen, Plutarcke.
for fear of defyling their sex. Plutarque likewise writes, that they ought
to be ashamed to be found dansing.

Judge. 21.23. Council. 30. and 33.
And the daughters of Israel were by that means ravished. I could allege
sundry counsels which have forbidden it, yea, and of our own ordinances,
Exodus 16.29. and 31.13. Deuteronomy. 5.14. Leuit. 23.3. Heb. 3.11. and 4.3. 1. Cor.
5.8. Isaiah. 66.23
which we ought to keep, and among other at the last assembly of the estates
holden at Orleans. For the sanctification required by the law of God, upon the
sabbath and feastdaies is thereby maintained, the which figureth in us a
spiritual rest, which God works in his faithful, sanctifying them,
regenerating, and making them aspire to things heavenly and divine, keeping
their feast in sincerity and truth, as S. Paul has written. And this ought to
be a continual Sabbath to the said faithful, to the end that every day, they
may live holily, renouncing the works of the flesh, Why holy days be ordained.
and honor God both in body and mind. And the holy day is principally
ordained to hear the word of God, to serve him, to call upon his name, to
remember his benefits and free gifts, to give him thanks, to dedicate our
selves unto him, to perform al works of piety, to participate with the
public prayers made in the churches, and to set our selves far of from al
appearance of ill. As S. Paul says, Coloss.
that God has purifyed to himself a people, making profession of good works,
and this sanctification is declared in Isaiah to consist in doing of no ill,
Isaiah. 58.13
and in following the will of God not our own, Profaning of holy days
and suffering our selves to be governed by him. For how can we name our selves
Christians, and keep holy days, if we profane them with dansing, banqueting,
masking, spending excessiuely, and playing dissolutely, provoking the wrath of
God upon us? which will bring forth her accustomed effects and chastisements, if
we do not amend. And if according to the saying of our Savior We must render
account for every idle word, Math. 12.36.
how much more for our songs which men vomit out in daunses from a heart
impure, the more to give fire to our covetous desires, sufficiently occasioned
by other mean to boil, in stead of employing our tongue to the praise of our
creator, and giving him thanks for his benefits? And as the mysteries of
religion are spiritual, so do they require the mind of man, to the end to
nourish it, instruct, refourme, humble it, if it be too much exalted, and lift
it up, if it be too much thrown down, to comfort and regenerate it, without
applying it to vain things, dishonest and hurtful, which was the cause that
Saint Augustine and other doctors found it strange, that men are offended if
they see one plough upon a holy day, but not if one be drunk, go a whoring,
or work any other iniquity. It is to be feared that God will object unto us
that in the first of Isaiah, My soul hates your appointed feasts; I am
weary of them, Isaiah 1.14.
and I will not hear your prayers. And in Amos, I hate and abhor your
feasts days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies, Amos 5.21. and
8.10.
though you offer me burnt offringes, and meat offringes I will not accept
them, And I will turn your feasts into mourninges, and all your songs into
lamentations, and I will bring sackcloth upon all loins. The purity of the
Gospel calls us to a profession, that we should reform and cut off all
evil customs, and eloigne our selves from all dangers, vanities, Antisthenes.
and lightness. And not without cause, Antisthenes being demanded, what a
feast was, answered that it was an occasion of surfeting and disorders. And
oftentimes no days are less festifall, and less observed, then the festifall
days, which many dedicate to Bacchus and Venus. Which surely would require to
be well reformed. Pleas and Saytes.
And whereas they blame frenchmen for great pleaders, those that are of the
best advised exempt themselves, make a pointment, and quit one part to conserve
the rest in peace, and wind themselves out of the hands of these suckpurses
and palterers, thinking it a true saying of Chilo, that quarrels, suits, and
debtes, are ever accompanied with miseries: as more at large hereafter it is
declared. Chilo.
Now to conclude the justifying of our selves, we will cleave to these places
of the holy scripture, All nations noted of vice and imperfections.
which accuse al nations of lightness, vanity, inclination to evil, lying,
change, selfeloue, inconstancy, infirmity and hereditarie vices, which every
one by experience may find in himself. And no man in this world is able to
glorify himself, but only in that God has showed him mercy, in that he is
called to his church, and put in the rank of his children and heirs to be
partaker of the heavenly benefits. And I will pray all them which will not be
satisfied with my excuses, Civil vvarres.
to consider, the saying of the Emperor Augustus, that civil wars cause
many inconveniences and disorders, which are amended thorough a good peace: as
sundry aucthors have written of diverse people, especially Xenophan of the
Lacedaemonians famous for a time, for their great discipline, but in succession
of time, yielded themselves to all dissoluteness. Some bewail in France the
diversity of fashions taken from strangers, and desire that it might have the
honesty, courtesy, gentleness, humanity, valor, justice, honest exercises,
frugalitie, and temperance, to cloth themselves, drink, eat, and speak,
which the ancient french men were accustomed to have. And as Plutarke writes
of the Sicilians that their continual wars made them like to savage beasts,
so is it not strange to see a change in France, occasioned thorough so often
wars especially civil, as Tacitus at large describes it in like sort to
have happened to the Romans.

CHAP. 12. That we ought to fly evil and seducing companies with other
instructions to nobility, worthy to be noted.
Choler and headines enemies to good counsel.
CHoler, and headiness, have ever been taken for enemies to good counsel; and
sudden, and quick natures, are ever subject quickly to enterprise, and
shortly after to repent themselves. Wherefore it is necessary, that we
accustom our selves by little and little, Thoroughly to consider of our
deliberations and enterprises.
yea in matters of small importance, not to do or speak any thing, but first
thoroughly to consider what may ensue thereon. For when one has undertaken a
matter thorough counsel, it is a great contentment and occasion to continue
what he has already begun, if the time which is ever true schoolemaister,
and correctour, teach not a better advise. Iphicrates.
To this end Iphicrates said, that the worst speech possible to come out of a
Captains mouth, is, I never doubted that, or else, I never once thought of it.
And we see that wise men, have ever in the beginning, to their power, applied
provisions to all accidents and good counselles, to the end they might not be
surprised: being a matter necessary in war, and other affairs, to change
sometime our deliberation, according to the course of affairs, having regard
to the disposition, will and nature of those, with whom we are to negotiate,
and be ready prepared before the assault. I will dispense with my self to
say, that in charge that I have had of great importance, I have had sent me,
many remembraunces, commandments and letters, whereof I made no semblance
at all, knowing the difficulty and impossibility to accomplish that,
Exercise of what efficacy and force.
which was contained therein. And I ever took heed not to advance my self
in words, and to hold back from making any promise. There is nothing so
hard or difficile, that custom will not render easy. And exercise in matters
of virtue is of so great efficacy and force, that she attayneth to the top
of all. And we overcome the vices and passions of the mind, thorough
judgment and exercise. Indgement, that is knowledge, preceedeth, because no
man does exercise himself in rooting out the vices of his mind, except he
have them in hatred; and we then begin to hate them when we perceive the
filthiness, shame, and damage that follows thereon: as we see that
flatterers, curious men, bablers, and liars, whylest they would be beloved,
bring themselves into further hatred; and the contrary to that they pretend
does often happen to lewd persons. The which we ought first to consider, and
afterward that there is nothing more pleasing to God and man, nor more
agreeing to nature, then to be a virtuous man, constant, true, round,
offensive to no man and despising all passion. We must likewise consider how
wise they are reputed, who speak little, and are constant in their deeds and
words, wherereof there ensues a good conscience and hope, which accompanies
them all the days of their life. And since we are created of God to serve to
his glory and the advancement of our neighbor, The end of the birth of man.
and to approach the nearest we are able to his holiness, and are borne, and
predestinate to honesty, as Cicero himself declared, by the opinion of Zeno,
and Aristotle, we ought to take great heed, that no inconstancy, lightness,
or lie be found in our actions: and that no word proceed out of our mouth,
but aduisedlye pondered. We ought also to consider, that our Creator is good,
just, wise, and almighty, and proceeds slowly to the chastisement of the
wicked: to the end that thorough his example, we should shun all beastly
headiness, not doing ought rashly or by adventure, as being the fountain
whence all faults spring, as it is taughtvs in the Proverbs, that Whosoever
is hasty comes surely to poverty: and that there is more hope of a soul
then of him. Pro. 21, 5. and 29.20. Constancye. Justice. Temperance
For constancy ever accompanies the other virtues. And therefore justice is
defined to be, a constant will, to render to every one, what appertains of
right unto him. And temperance to be a constant moderation to use all things
aright. And it comes to pass, as Titus Liuius has written, that good
success ever follows good counsel, Good counsel causes good succes.
and abandoneth rashness: whereof we have infinite examples, which ought to
keep us back from being too soddaine, and to exhort us to follow the
properties that are in God, in showing al virtue clemency and patience, taking
the fear of his name for our guide and counselor. And for this cause
Alexandridas said that the Lacedaemonians stayed many days in deciding their
criminal causes, Criminal causes.
where question passed of men's lives: because they which once erred in the
death of a man, could no more sufficiently make recompense for their faults.
And there have been Emperors that have said, that there could not be too
long time taken about the condemnation of a man: And the ancient proverb does
carry, l. 3. chapter of the vvarreof the Ieuves.
that we must long time deliberate, for that we would execute but once.
Josephus attributes the greatness of the Romans to be, because they
enterprised nothing, inconsiderately or unadvisedly. And they esteemed those
accidents of fortune which had ill success, much better being deliberated of
by counsel, then if without having taken counsel they should have succeeded as
they would have had it: co^tenting themselves and rejoicing, Li. 2. chapter 16.
in the misfortune which arrived unto the^, after the matters were debated, and
consulted of. And in the second book Agrippa declared that nothing in the
world sooner remedied wounds, then long patience, nor any thing brings more
shame to the violent and furious persons, then the patient, who endure their
egernesse and violence without making any show or semblance. Patience.
And in the 4. Li. 4. chapter 1.
book Vespasian says, that it is the fashion of the Romans, to begin and
finish all things, with order, knowledge and industry, the contrary being
proper and natural to the barbarous, using immoderate hastiness. The examples
likewise of such evils as has fortuned to many thorough this headiness and
choler, ought to make us more advised, as that written of sundry in time past,
Choler.
who have kept in, and retired them selves, feeling choler coming on them, and
especially of one Architas, who said to his servants keeping ill rule, it is
a good turn for you that I am in a chafe. And Agesilaus counseled the
Athenians to set all their force against Epaminundas alone, adding that none
but the wise and prudent were valiant, and the only cause of victory, and that
the other would be soon enough vanquished. We see likewise that light brains,
go themselves up and down gathering of matter to inflame their passions, and
voluntarily cast themselves hedlong into such vices, as of themselves they are
inclined unto: and so it comes of necessity, that he which is once disposed
to stumble, does ever so continue. And since that vice is made a virtue, A
custom to evil most dangerous.
and that the evil is turned into a custom, there is small remedy, as Seneca
writes, or as experience does declare. And we must in the beginning be well
advised how we deliberate, because we can not afterward without dishonor and
danger leave it, or take an other course, having long time perseuered therein.
And if the reasons be contradictorie, we must follow the more reasonable, and
the most strong conjectures, hoping for remedy, as well thorough time, as
other accidents. Men praised the prudence of Fabius, because he broake the
point of fortune, Fabius surnamed the linguerer.
and hindered the advancement of Hanniball, in a shonning to fight, temporysing
and attending his advantage, which is a virtue that is named long suffrance.
And Scipio was wont to say, Scipio.
that he might the better keep his people in, that he was accustomed rather to
buy suertie, then to submit himself to any hazard. And did like unto the
Surgeons, who never work with their instruments when they may find any
other remedy. He punished the Carthaginians for their inconstancy, for which
fault we have seen as well french as other to be bitterly chastened. It is
also very requisite, To estrange our selves from filthy talk and company.
to estrange our selves from foolish talking, lewd company and unconstant
people. For men of ancient time, without any further inquiry, Ephesians. 5 4 Tit.
2. Tim. 5.
judged a man to be such, as they were whom he most frequented. Saint Paul
teaches us discreetely to have regard to the humors of such company as we
would frequent, for fear least we be pertakers of their evil. In an ancient
tragedy there was a wicked man brought in, forbidding any man to come near
him, Eccles. 7 2.
fearing least by his shadow the good might be annoyed. And Ecclesiasticus
does counsel, that we depart from the thing that is wicked, and sin shall
turn away from us. Which moved David in sundry his Psalms to protest, that
he both hated and shunned all wicked company, and was not able to endure
within his court, any wicked or disloyal person. Wherefore I beseech the
nobility and good wits of France, because it is a matter so easy to be
done, that they will once master their wills, passions, headiness,
soddainenesse, and choler; and that they would for ever accustom themselves to
patience, gentleness, silence, and modesty, giving as it were a bridle to
their desires, and as the Psalmist says: a watch before their mouth, to the
end they may do or say nothing, but what they have well before thought of.
And that they will begin by little matters to gain upon greater, which may
be able to hurt us, Eccles.
for as it is written in Ecclesiasticus, he which despises small things shall
fall. Cassiodorus. lib. 5.
And in Cassiodorus King Theodoric writes, that it is the lightness of the
wit, lightly to promise, what a man will not or is not able to perform. As we
will more at large declare hereafter. He likewise that could accustom himself
not too much to love himself, nor his commodities, Not to much to love ones
self.
nor that which they call ouerwinning, the which causes the usurpation of an
other man's goods, but contrary wise to follow the rule of charity, so much
recommended unto us from GOD, shall not easily cast himself hedlong, Isocrates.
into this inconstancy. Isocrates wisely counseled his king, to consider
well, what he would say or do, for fear least he failed therein. Basil.
And albeit it be no light combat as Basil said to vanquish an evil custom,
yet by little and little must a body change itand of rash inconstant and
light, to become modest, constant and stayde. Commen. li. 7
Let us consider what Caesar in his commentaries, lays to the charge of the
Frenchmen, because they bare arms too lightly, mutinous, and not so subtle in
war, as hardy and courageous; and that he no less desires in a man of
war, modesty, and obedience, Obedience. Thucidides.
then prowise, and greatness of courage. Thucidides the great Captain and
Historiographer of the Greeks, esteemed, the fortunate and happy conducte of
the war, to hang on three points, that is, to be willinge, to reverence,
and to obey; as Paulus Aemilius was in like sort wont to say. We have many
examples, that may serve to instruct and teach us, in the iourneyes that have
been made into Flaunders, since ten years past, of the evil fortunes and
mishappes, and disorders happened during our troubles, and an infinite number
of enterprises, to inconsideratelye and lightly undertaken, upon vain
imaginations and deceitful hopes, having reaped naught else thereby, Damages
in vvarres.
then loss and dishonor: and the profitte of all the wars, since one
hundred years past, is not able to be compared, to the damages and evils that
have thence proceeded. Whereby we must confess that God has weighed all
things in an even balance, minglyng losses and victories together, that
thereby he might set forth his judgments, and make us shun lightness,
VVarly discipline.
avarice and ambition, as well of great as small. The discipline of war
consists rather, in not putting our selves without necessity to dangers,
and in making void the effortes of the enemy, and in turning vpside down
their enterprises with industry and patience, without shedding the blood of
subjects, than to combat courageously, and valiantly. And there is often
times more hope of victory, in standing only to defend our selves, and let
the time run, then in putting our selves to the arbitrage of fortune. And
there are infinite examples, what losses have been sustained by giving of
battayles, following the counsel which Timotheus gave to the Thebanes, except
one be thereto encouraged through a great advantage or constrained by an
urgent necessity: God being accustomed as he said, to throw down the
proud, and lift up the humble. And it is no less the duty of a Captain,
which is valiant, to show himself wise in his actions then courageous. It
were very expedient that were practiced, which happened in our time, in the
year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred fifty and one, between Gonstaue
King of Sweden, and the Moscouite, where all those that were occasioners of the
war, they had so lightly undertaken, Aucthors of war punished.
were executed, and put to death. And not without cause did Pausanias call all
the Captains in the war, both Peloponesians and Greeks, murderers and
destroyers of their country. It is to be desired that the nobility of France
would accustom themselves to modesty, rule, order, constancy, and to
mortify this their great heat, War unnecessary.
to arms, and war unnecessary. And as the Physician preuenteth sickness,
thorough small preparatiues, and apostumes; so beginning with their lesser
inclinations, choler, and passions, they may the easilyer attain to the end
of the more strong: and consider that which is written in the life of Saint
Augustine, that he would never pray for such, Murder.
as of their own voluntary motion had been at a strange war: and greatly
reproved, as saint Cyprian did Donatus and others, that killing of a private
man, was in particular punished, but he who had slain many in war was
greatly praised. In Titus Liuius Scipio shows to King Masinissa, that a man
ought not so much to doubt his enemies armed, as those pleasures which render
a man effeminate and unconstant It was wisely said of an ancient man, that
the foundations of all counsels and actions, ought to lean to piety, justice
and honesty, without using of any headiness. I would willingly give that
counsel to French men, which Archidamus gave unto the Aeoliens, Archidamus.
meaning to aid the Argians in their war, within a letter containing only
these words, Quietness is good. And said unto such as praised him for the
victory he had obtained against the Argiens, it had been more worth to have
overcome them by wisdom then by force. Xenophon writing of the acts of the
Greeks, Xenophon.
shows, that all wise men abstain the most they are able from war, albeit
they have thereunto just occasion. And that saying of sundry Emperors was
very famous, that war ought not to be taken in hand without great need.

Augustus.
And the Emperor Augustus was wont to say that a war which were good must be
commanded by the Gods, and justified by Philosophers and wise old men. For
the time serving for laws, and for arms is diverse, as Caesar said to
Metelius. And we have had too good experience how much God, the weal
public, order, and justice has been offended herewith. And war has been
called a gulf of expense, and a cruel tyrant ransacking the people: and peace
ordered with good policy, as a good king, moderating, charge, and excess. And
as Horace feygneth, that the place into which Eolus shut his winds being open,
the sea is troubled in every part: so by the opening of war, partiality,
insolency, and all vices manifest themselves. And wars are naught else then
a horrible punishment of a whole people, a ruin of a whole country state and
discipline. And wisely did Spartian write, how Traian was never vanquished,
because he never undertook war without just cause. The very which Titus
Liuius declares of the Romans, in the end of the first Decade. Otho the
Emperor chose rather to die, than to raise a civil war. For which men
likewise praise Zeno the Emperor: and Cicero in his Philippiques, calls him
which is desirous thereof a detestable citizen. Study in learning.
I am also of opinion that the conversation with the Muses, and study of good
letters, would render the nobility more advised and constant, as we have well
marked else where. And am not of the Swissers mind, which thinks too much
study marreth the brain: nor of the Almaynes, who in the time of Galienus the
Emperor after that the city of Athenes was taken, kept them from setting a
fire a great heap of books, they had there made, saying: let us leave them to
the Greeks, to the end that applying themselves to them, they may be less
proper for the war. For the reading of good books (as Alexander the great,
and diverse other of the most valiant captains said) makes the nobility
more hardy, and wise, and contains them within the bounds of their duty.
And what good nature soever a captain be of, he falls into an infinite
number of faults, for want of reading of good books. And that being true which
diverse have written of Xenocrates, Xenocrates.
that he did so pearce the heart of his auditors, that of dissolute persons
they became temperate and modest, what ought we to judge of the instructions,
taken out of the holy letters? And as some have counseled, before they sleep
they are to demand of themselves a reason and account, of that which they
shall have gained of modesty, gravity, constancy, and facility of
complexions. Socrates.
It is written of Socrates, that when he was dry, he would never drink, but
first he would cast out the first bucket full of water that he drew out of the
well: to the end said he that he might accustom his sensual appetite, to
attend the fit time and opportunity of reason. Of the soul and body.
Theophrastes. Plutarque.
Theophrastus said, that the soul paid well for her hyer to the body
considering what she there suffered. But Plutarke writes, that the body has
good cause to complain of the noyses which so grievous and troublesome a guest
makes him, which notwithstanding is within the body, as in a sepulcher or den,
which she ought to guide being before lightened by the truth, and ruling her
self according to it, both in respect of her own safety, and of her hosts.
I would also counsel them to shun all dissolutenes, be it in bitter,
Dissolutnesse
or vilanous words, uncomely garments, and unshamefast countenance. For it is
all one in what part soever of the body a man show his unshamefastness,
vanity, pride, and lightness. And the Lacedaemonians were highly commended,
because they banished a Milesian out of their city, for going too sumptuously
appareled. We ought also rather to desire to be virtuous then to seem, to use
wisdom and descretion in all assayes, avoiding debates and selfewill (without
witnessing whether it be true or false not hurtful) following the precept of
Epictetus, in yielding unto the greater sort, persuading the inferiors, with
sweetness and modesty, consenting to the equal, to the end to avoid
quarelles. Above all things we ought to enforce our selves to tame our
covetous desires and concupiscences, especially where liberty to take and
enjoy them is offered unto us, To refrain our concupiscences.
and to accustom our selves to patience and meekness, in keeping under the
desire of revenge, knowing, as the great Monarch Alexander was wont to say,
that it is a sign of a more heroycall heart, and praise worthy, for a man
that has received an injury to pardon his enemy, then to kill him or revenge
himself upon him. And that revenge proceeded of a baseness of mind, and
virtue consisted in matters hardly reached unto. And it is written in the
Proverbs, that it is a greater honor for a man to overcome him self, and
command his passions, then to raze cities, and castles. It is that which God
requires by his Prophets to cut off the forskinne of the heart. Prouer.
The which Saint Paul to the Romans reco^mended to the end we should cut off
the bad thoughts and desires of revenge. And the Platonists said that the
shortest way to return unto God, was to mortify our affections, and that
virtue was a victory of reason over passions. I think they long a go that
wrote, Monsters subdued.
so much of monsters, perils, tyrants, and thieves, vanquished by Hercules,
Theseus, Ulysses, and Jason, meant thereby to teach us, Revenge forbidden.
that men virtuously disposed and well taught, have subdued their pleasures,
desire of revenge, inconstancy, lightness, inte^perancie, and other passions
and vices. Which also the Poets figureth by Eolus, which moderateth and
keeps in his winds. The most valiant Lacedaemonians highly extolled him, that
endures an injury. And a Philosopher gave counsel if he which harmed us were
weaker then our selves to pardon him: if more mighty to pardon our selves. And
by the law of God and man, all ways of revenge are forbidden; and
reconciliation and atonement, commanded by God the King and the laws: and the
peacemakers are called the heirs and children of God, who will never pardon
us, if we pardon not those offenses which other have committed toward us. Mat.
5.5.
S. Augustine calls the obedience which we render to God, the mother and
garden of all virtues. And when our savior in S. Matthew calls the meek
blessed some have reduced to them that are not moved with injuries. And S.
Paul commands us to live peaceably one with an other. The which we have
handled else where, and deserves to be again repeated, for that point in
which the nobility judges all honor to consist, but amiss, and being
carried without the bars of reason, they hazard themselves to the peril both
of their corporal and spiritual life, willing to be the accuser and slayer of
themselves, the witness, judge and hangman of such as they pretend to have
offended them. And it is not possible to revenge themselves, but thorough a
thousand perturbations, which causes them clean to depart from
tranquillity, which an ancient writer termed to eat out ones heart, and to
offend ones self more then his enemy. And often times thorough a little
miscontentment, which we coin to our selves, we enter into choler, and
melancholy, forgetting the pleasures we receive else where, and as if we were
bewicthed suffer our selves to be so transported. S. John in his first epistle,
Ioh. 4.20.
calls him a liar that says he loves God, and hates his brother: and we
ought not to have respect to a corrupt custom or opinion, but to that which
God and the King commands. For as Demosthenes was wisely wont to say, We
live and rule by laws not by examples. We read in good aucthors that in old
time, that words were never revenged but by words, and never came to
handstrokes. I counsel the nobility likewise, not to differ, any resolution
in a good matter. For slacknesse does often time make that hard, which is most
easy to be brought to pass in his time. Not to differ
As the loss of the Roman legions was attributed to the negligence of Varus.
And it is a very easy matter, to note an infinite number of losses, happened
through such slackings. The answer which Alexander the great made to him which
asked him, Alexander.
how he had gained and subdued al Asia in so short a time, is to be recommended
to all Captains, following Homers precept, never to differ or omit what was
to be done. Diligence of Caesar.
Which was in like sort reported by Julius Caesar, and the old proverb, is
very notable, He that will not when he may, deserves when he would to have a
nay, and to abide the smart of it. The said Caesar shows likewise, how much
quickness and diligence is profitable, to the end we should not give time,
to our enemies astonished, to assemble themselves, Religion. Ephesians. 4, 14. Heb.
13.6.
but to use the victory, not tarying about the pillage. I will not here forget
to exhort them to shun all inconstancy, in religion, faith, and doctrine,
not to vary nor suffer themselves to be carried about with every wind of
doctrine, as Saint Paul teaches us: and Saint James Chap. 1. and 3.
Constancy is preserved by patience; as Tertullian declared in the book he
made, and Impatience is the cause of all mischeiues. It is also necessary to
provide, for that which they so much reprooch French men with, that is, that
they commence and pursue many things happily enough, but for lack of
constancy, staydenesse and discretion, they never come to the end of their
enterprises: and never consider that they which do not so lightly run about
their business, proceeding with a ripeness of judgment, and a more stayde
brain, carries away the honor and profitte, of their enterprises wisely
undertaken, and courageously executed.

CHAP. 13. That the truth finds good that which many fear and fly, and
gives contentment.
IT were no small happiness, if in life, we put in practice, that which we
have marked in sundry Philosophers, who albeit they were destitute of the
light of the Gospel, Philosophers despisers of the world.
and the certainty of the promises of God, yet have they discovered the mask
of this world, contemning the honors, riches, and pleasures thereof,
delighting in their poverty, patience, sobriety, and temperaunce, carrying
meekely all losses, mocking at the foolish opinions which drive men into
passions, condemning false apparaunces, and vanities, themselves remaining in
great tranquillity, and calm in all perturbations: and having naught but
their wallet and certain vile garments did nothing but laugh all their life,
as if they had been at a feast, and eaten (as they say) of a bride cake. And
we which have so great pleadges of eternal life, Christians.
and an assurance of the divine promises, bounty, and more then a fatherly
affection of our God toward us, have much more occasion, not to esteem these
corruptible things, and to live joyfully in respect of that which has been
given unto us, without being desirous or coveting any other thing, then that
which proceeds from the will of the almighty. Seneca in the second of his
Epistles writes, Nature contented with little.
that such as live according to nature, are never poor, and according to the
opinion of men they are never rich, because nature contenteth her self with
little, and opinion does infinitely covet. And in his 4. book, he counsels
a friend of his, to despise all that which other so hotly pursue. For that
which men esteem as great advancement in honor, goods, or pleasures, when they
once approach to the truth, to virtue, and heavenly goodness, it loses clean
his appearance, and luster, even as the stars, when they are near the sun
beams. For the dispositions of such as are moderated, and instructed in the
truth, renders a life peaseable, and like unto her self, the occasion of the
quietness of the mind proceeding thence, thorough his grace which
communicates so great a good, as it is written in the book of Wisdom, I do
rejoice in all things because wisdom goes before. And it receaueth no
grief, Possidonius.
but such as our selves are content to yield unto as Possidonius said to
Pompey. And there is an other savor given and an other kind of face set upon
that which they call evil. And virtue, valor, force, patience and
magnanimity, can no ways play their part without grief and pain. And as
Diamans and other precious stones, have either a more high or dim color
according to the foil in which they are set; so fares it with the evil
happes, and grief which takes place, Man's life compared to a game at draughts.
as a man is either strong or weak. And as all things in this world in the
end refers it self wholly to the glory of God, so does all things turn
to good to such as are good. Plato and Terence compares our life to a game at
draughtes, where the player must ever mark well what shall befall unto him, and
dispose every thing either to profit him, or little to hurt him. And they which
care least for to morrow following the commandment of our savior, ariue
there most joyfully, having not the will vnproportionate to the might, nor
their mind afflicted. Not to care for to morrovve.

Vessels in heaven full of desteneis.


Homer makes two vessels to be in heaven full of destinies, the one of good
the other of bad; and he accounts him happy, which equally partaketh as well
of the one as the other, and as much honey, as gaul. And Seneca writes that the
destinies lead gently such as consent, and draw by force such as refuse.
Notwithstanding the wise do temper, and turn the evil into good, drawing out
of their good adventures what naught soever is there mingled, and by this
means pass away the more easily the course of this life. To which the old
proverb agrees, that every man is the workman of his own fortune, and
fashioneth her according to his manners. And if we do contemn honors, riches,
pleasures, banishmentes, griefs, and sickness, we shall be clean exempt,
from all covetous desires, passions, What profit ensues the contempt of
riches and pleasures. Pheraulas.
and torments of the mind. As Xenophon in his Pedia recites of one
Pheraulas, to who^ Cirus gave a Lordship, of a very great reuenewe: but having
well considered the ease and contentment which he took during his poverty, and
the care which he must then needs take for his reuenewe and domestical
affairs, he put all again into the hands of a friend of his. Anacreon.
As Anacreon having had five talents worth three thousand crowns, given him
by Policrates, after he saw that he had passed two nights together studying
what he should do with it, he sent them back again, saying that they were not
worth the care he had taken for the^. And when news was brought unto Zeno, and
certain other, that their ships, goods, Zeno.
and merchandise were lost, they reioysed, because it was a cause to make them
apply themselves to Philosophy, which yielded them far greater contentment.
Philoxenes having purchased a farm, whereby he might live the better at ease,
quitted it again and returned to Athens saying, These goods shall not loose
me, but I them. Philoxenes.
As Seneca wrote to a friend of his, Seneca
if thou had not lost thy goods it might be they might have lost thee. And
the bricklenesse of the advised, serves them as it were to be shodde with
shows of ice against sin. Anacharsis.
Anacharsis left the kingdom of Scithia to his younger brother, to grow to be
a Philosopher, in the said City of Athenes. Aristides chose likewise to
remain in his poverty, though it lay in his power to have made himself a
Lord of great riches. Scipio
Scipio having by force taken Cartharge, touched no whit of the sacking or
spoil thereof. Epaminundas Camillus
Epaminundas, and Camillus among all the victories they obtained, never
carried any thing else away then honor. An infinite number of other, as well
Captains, as Philosophers, have contemned goods, albeit this moderation which
was so greatly praised in them, was never joined together with a hope of
eternal life, Hope of the Christians
as the Christians is, who know that the creator of heaven and earth, is their
father and Lord almighty, that he loves them, and knows full well the way
they ought to hold, the medicines which they ought to use, and whatsoever is
most expedient, to bring them to the promissed bliss; after this their
pilgrimage and exile. Therefore they suffer themselves to be co^ducted by him
without murmuring, approving for good whatsoever proceeds from his fatherly
hand, and by this mean remain in the peace of the spirit, and calmness,
what wind soever blow, without being tossed in the troubles and storms of
this life. They know likewise that if God do stricke them down with the left
hand, he rayseth them up with the right again, according to the promise he
made by his Prophet Ose. Hosea 11.
And as all meats are agreeing with a good stomach, and to a bad the most
delicate seem corrupt, as it is written in the Proverbs, that to a hungrye
soul all bitter things seem sweet: Romans 8.28. Eccles. 39.27
so, all things turn to good to the faithful, as S. Paul has written. And in
Ecclesiasticus, all things are turned into good to such as fear God, but to
the sinners they are turned into evil, who turn light into darkness, and
good into evil. And money is to good men a cause of good, to the wicked of
evil and cruelty. And as the show is fashioned according to the foot, so
his disposition which is wise, and moderate, leads a life like unto it, to
wit peaseable, Cicero.
and without passion, coveting nothing impossible, and contenting it self with
the present. That is it which Cicero writes, that virtue in trouble does ever
remain quiet, and being cast into banishment, never departs from her place.
For the goods of fortune, rejoice those most which least doubt their
contraries: and the fear of loosing them, makes the pleasure of the enjoying
of them, Plato
more feeble and less assured. Plato gave counsel not to complain in
adversity, for that we know not whether it happen unto us for our hurt or no.
And in his Phedon he writes, that look what beauty, riches, honor, and
kindred we here desire, it is so far off from being good, that indeed they
do rather corrupt and impair us. But a Christian man, ought to esteem all
good, and for his health, which persuasion serves unto him, as the meal did
which Elisha cast into the pot, 2. King. 4.41 Exodus 15.25.
which took clean away all the bitterness of the pottage, and as the tree
with which Moses made the waters sweet. From thence ensues that Christian
Parradoxe so often times verified, that there never happens evil to the
good, nor good to the wicked, whose nature is changed by blessing. As it is
said of a diseased body, that the more it is nourished, the more it is
offended. And as strange dreams, show that there be gross and clammie
humors, and perturbation of the vital spirits; so the passions, couetings,
and misknowledge, of the goods which God has bestowed upon us, are the bad
vapors which obfuscate and torment our senses. And even as to rid a man pained
with a grievous dream, the next way is to awake him: even so the truth does
declare, that that which many fear, is but an opinion and foolish imagination,
and as it were a picture of a tyrant or cruel beast which astonieth no man.
And as the fire which Moses saw in the bush did nether burn nor endamage him
because God was in the midst thereof; Exodus 3.2. Worldly accidents how easy to
be borne.
so interminglyng God and his promises with our humane affairs and accidents,
al shall be easy for us to bear: And God being for us none can anoye us, as
the Apostle says. It is also called a wall of brass a rampire and a defense
for us to defend us from all dangers. Romans 8.33
And as it is written in Job: God makes the wound and binds it up, he
smites and his hand makes whole, he shall deliver thee in six troubles, and
in the 7. Job. 5.18.
the evil shall not touch thee, In famine he shall deliver thee from death, and
in battle from the power of the sword: Thou shall be hid from the scourge of
the tongue and thou shall not be afraid of destruction when it comes. And in
Jeremy it is written of the faithful, that he shall rest and be at his ease,
and none shall make him afraid, because God is with him to succor him after he
has gently corrected him, and will heal his stripes. And as the higher we
clime, the less those things under us seem to be, so the nearer that we
approach to the knowledge of God, and his truth, the less account do we make
of these earthly, base, and corruptible things. To be therefore contented and
rich, Contentme^t and true riches.
we must not ad goods upon goods, but diminish and take away as Socrates said
from our covetous desires And we ought to consider, how many persons in the
world, are worse at ease then our selves and to draw aside as one may say, the
courtaine and vale of appearance, and opinion, which covers them whom we
esteem happy and great, the better to perceive the trauales, troubles and
griefs, which thy have, and how often they hoyse up the sail of their ship
so high, that they are forced to make shipwreck. For this cause Scipio being
Censor, A public and solemn prayer changed by Scipio
made the prayer to be changed, which was wont to be said upon certain high
days, for the increase of wealth to the people of Rome, saying: that it was
sufficient, and that they ought only to pray unto God, to preserve it such as
it was. It is written of Antiochus, Antiochus.
that when the Romans had gotten from him the greatest part of his kingdom,
he should say he was much beholding unto them, for so much more care as they
had eased him of. And Philip father to Alexander the great, being fallen upon
the sands, Philip K. of Macedon,
and seeing there the mark and print of his body. O Lord, says he, how
little a plat of ground is nature contented with, and yet we covet the whole
world. When God sees that high callinges, riches, health or any thing else
does turn us from him, God does deprive us of such things as we are to far
in love with for our own good.
(as in Zachary prosperity is called a canker and Pyndarus says that nothing
is harder to digest, and that it does make us drunk) he does deprive us
thereof, and sundry ways corrects us removing the hindrances of his
approaching nigh us, to the end that shutting our eyes at the miserable estate
of this world, we should open our ears to the hearing of his promises, and
according unto the counsel which he gives us, lay up our treasures in
heaven, Mat. 6.20.
where there is neither fear of thieves, nor canker, and range our selves
under the yooke and obedience, of his divine, just, upright, and equitable
will, holding impatience for a rebel thereunto. In histories we find examples
enough of Popes, Emperors, Princes, The mean is to be kept both in prosperity
and adversity.
and other that have even dyed for grief and anger, for resolving too much
upon the unstableness of this life, and by weighing the inco^moditie, by other
graces, which God bestowed on them. In great prosperity we glutten up the
benefits of God, without sa: uoring of the^, and thereby become insolent and
blind: and in adversity many loose heart not thinking of any other gifts they
have received at Gods hands: by this means a man is miserable, if he hold
not the mean, and if this truth does not open our eyes, that we may see God
through al things, and thereby discover his bounty. For the accidents of this
world, nor all that which they call fortune, is no way able to make us
unfortunate, except malice and vice aid them finding a faint heart delicate,
effeminate, and not acquainted with the affairs and changes of the world, and
retain the corrupt opinion of the vulgar sort, which has been imprinted
within it: but mingling such things as are fierce, rude and sower with the
sweet and gracious, and obscuring the ill adventures, with the conference of
the good, and mixing suffrance together with hope, whatsoever is most
disagreeable, yea, the very sting of death, dies it self, fear apprehension
and opinion being cast out; the which serves for a receate to all mischiefs.
Judges. 14.8.
And as Samson found honey in the body of the Lion, so the faithful finds
joy in the bottom miseries, and peace amidst storms, and through the virtue
of faith resists al fears, and as a wise and well experienced pylote, who
ever doubts a great calm, in the maine sea, never abuses his good fortune,
The abuse of gifts and graces of God
and helps himself with all winds to ariue at his desired port. But a man
may say that the most part of men pass over that which they call their
fortune, through a strainer, wherein all the bad stick and remains, but the
good drop out. And as a cordmaker, that was pictured in an old temple, had
behind him an ass, which eat his cord as fast as he made it: so the
chagraine, and melancholy, and the understanding foolishly settled upon that
which displeases, does clean deface, devour, and pass over carelessly all
other goods and commodities, without any savor at all, or better consideration
for their own comfort. Or as a fly entered into a bottle, or a fish into the
net, tormenting themselves, not able to take the right way to escape. True
riches in heaven.
Many do not temper their small discommodities, with other infinite goods that
they receive from God, and never settle the discourse of their understanding to
consider what false apparances and vanity consists even in that, which they
make so much account of, and never think of the inconstancy of the things of
this world, whereby they might find nothing strange nor new, and fasten their
ancre, treasor, and hope in heaven, where it is most safely laid up against all
assaults and enterprises. And we ought to put the saying of Ecclesiasticus in
practice, that he which fears the Lord, shall not be afraid, Ecclesiast.
for he is his hope, pillar and defense. And that which David song, Psalm. 112.7.
that he whose heart is fixed, and believes in the Lord, will not be afraid of
any evil tidings. Aristotle, Pindarus, Tacitus, Salustus and Cato, were wont
to say that it was a harder matter to govern a man's self well in prosperity,
then in adversity, because often times prosperity is accompanied with pride,
ignorance, wantonness, contempt of others, The benefit of adversity.
licentiousnes, intemperance and other vices, which provoke the wrath of God:
whereas adversity does quicken our slepie spirits, incourageth us to modesty
to fear, praise and call upon God, and to take better counsel, and reform our
life, as a French Poet wrote, that adversity and contrary fortune, did profit
men more, and do them more good then the sweet and pleasant: for by the latter
they learn but ignorance, and through adversity are taught knowledge. Which
also Isocrates most learnedly entreated of in his Areopagitique, thinking it a
very hard matter to judge, which of the two, either poverty or riches, a man
ought to leave behind him, and to covet for his children. The which made
Aristides, Curious, and an infinite number of other to live in a very base
condition, the which Demosthenes and Lucain called a singular gift of God, and
unknown of men. Poverty a singular gift of God.
And Plutarque had reason to write, that Lisander did more hurt the
Lacedaemonians, in sending them store of riches and precious mouables, then
Sylla did the Romans, in consuming the revenues of their treasor. And Pliny
in his seventh book declares, what a number of men have been even lost
thorough too much wealth. Riches an occasion of the ruin of many
And the wise man says in the Proverbs, that fools are clean ruined through
prosperity, and the end of all joy is sorrow. And the said Isocrates,
entreating of peace, is of opinion, that it is a most hard matter to govern
ones self well, Prou 2. and 14
in great estates and dignities, the which he compares to a courtisan and
strumpet, who entiseth to her love the unwise, as a bait to the ruin both of
their body and soul: and declares that men are often times more sharp, and
addicted to evil matters, and superfluous rather then to the good and
necessary. Men more given to naughtines, then goodness.
And in what is to be desired, they have want of judgment. He likewise
describes how much more pleasant and happy their life is, which are
accustomed to little, then other to great riches. And Seneca aloweth the saying
of Demetrius, that nothing is more unhappy, then him who never knew what evil
fortune or aduersitiement, and that the more torments be endured, the more
honor; and that the more ill that happens unto us, the more God is mindful
of us, as the Psalmist says. In this life few are exempted from affliction,
be it in mind, body, or goods. Ierem. 32.41.
And albeit that God delights to do good as Ieremias says Chapter 32. yet
does he sometime, what is not proper unto him, as to afflict to finish his
work, and what good he pretends to do, says Esaias Chap. 21. and Saint
Paul. 1. Cor. 11. Heb. 12. And Osea writes Chap. 2. that God will stop the way
with thorns, Hosea 2.6.
and make a hedge, which leads to destruction, to make us return unto him.
Afflictions instruct us to patience, and hope, Romans 5. They make us humble, and
incline us to obey God, Psalm. 119. they retain us back from pleasures, and
worldly things, and make us have recourse to God. Which has moved some to name
affliction the saulce of prayer, as appetite is of meat. Affliction the saulce
of prayer.
Moreover we perceive thereby that God has a care of us, and does not account
us unworthy of his visitations, and often times does recompense us doubly: as
we read in Joseph, Job, and others. And S. Paul says, that they are not to
be compared to the glory promised us. It is not to be doubted but a sensible
man, will carry him self even in each fortune, promising no certainty at all
unto himself in matters of this world, being by nature so uncertain. And
having considered the unstableness of humane things, and the fatherly care
which it has pleased God to take of his, he cannot be surprised at unawares,
A wise man in each fortune behaueth him self alike.
as in a sudden incursion of the enemy. And knowing he holds all things
from God, as borrowed ware, he renders them voluntarily, and without grief,
when he which lent them does redemaunde them, giving him thanks for the time
it has pleased him to suffer him to enjoy them, that he might not be found
ungrateful. They also which desire but little, cannot want much, Content with
little.
leading their barbarous and coveting passions by reason, as the masters voice
makes the dog to couche. Chrysostom.
Saint Chrysostom entreating of covetous desires says, that as the form of
the shoe is the foot, and if it be greater then it should be, be it of
velvet or of cloth of gold, yet is it unfit; so the body ought to be the
form of whatsoever we possess. And if we swarne from this form and usage,
then is there naught else but a confusion, disorder, superfluity, abuse, and
excess. And oftentimes, lack of experience, and want of good discourse, and
not knowing well how to apply our selves to the present state, causes us to
wrap our selves in an infinite number of passions and torments. We ought then
earnestly to desire this truth, to the end we should not be dismayde, if
God do not suffer us to wallowe and tumble in too much ease. Besides wherefore
does wealth serve, To what end wealth serves.
but only as a testimony of his favor, and an occasion to acknowledge it
from him, well to use it to his honor, and releaue of our neighbor? And
Apollonius had reason to say, Apollonius.
that virtue and riches were two contrary things, and that the one increasing
the other was ever diminished. And as the greater we see our shadow, the
nearer we draw toward night: so must we fear, least the more that we see our
selves charged with honors and wealth, Goodness and riches seldom coupled
together.
the further off truth and the light estrange themselves from us. And Platon
in the fourth of his laws, thinks it a matter impossible for a man to be
both honest and rich. Diogenes.
Diogenes was wont to say, that virtue never found any place in a rich city or
house, Seneca.
and that it was a great happiness to have both wealth and understanding. Seneca
wrote that he was a mighty man who esteemed himself poor amidst plenty of
riches, and did not in respect of them, carry himself more loftely: Matthew. 5.3.
but that he who had none at all, went a great deal more surely, Prosperity
doubted and suspected.
and in greater safety: following that which our Savior taught us, when he
called the poor in spirit blessed. And as men in old time, ever held in
suspicion the end of their fortune, K. Amasias.
so have they done in great prosperity: as King Amisias said to Policrates,
seeing that one had brought him back again his ring which he flong into the
maine sea. These good happes do not please me, because I fear me they will
turn into calamities and miseries: S. Ambrose.
as afterward it befell unto him. Saint Ambrose happening into a rich man's
house, and understanding that he had every thing as he would wish it, never
having occasion of disquiet or anger, presently departed, fearing least he
should be partaker of some misfortune: anon after was the house swalowed up
with an earthquake. S. Ierom.
Saint Jerome alleges an ancient proverb, that a rich man is either wicked
of himself, or heir to a wicked man. And he wrote unto Saluia, that even as
poverty is not meritorious if it be not borne with patience, no more are
riches hurtful if they be not abused. S. Chrisostom.
The which S. Chrisostom in his homely of the poor man and the rich, more
amply entreats of.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the care which men have had that youth might be instructed in
the truth.
PArents have been commanded to bring up and instruct their children, but
especially to teach them how to know, Exodus 12.26. and 13.8. and 14.
and fear God, in Exodus Chap. 12. and 13. Deuteronomy. 4.6. and 7. in Saint Paul to
the Ephesians. 6. Deuteronomy. 4.25. and 6.7. and 7.3. Ephesians. 6.4.
in sundry Psalms. In Persia, Lacedemonia, and sundry other provinces, the
most virtuous grave, and learned men, The instruction of children commanded.
had the charge of the education, and instruction of youth, and endeavored most
especially to make them true and hate lying, following Platoes counsel in
sundry of his treatises. And in Alcibiades he writes that there was given
unto the Princes of Persia their children, a tutor which had care above all
things, to make them love the truth: for of the four virtues, which concern
manners, to wit, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, Moral virtues
and Temperance, the truth especial draws near unto Justice, which
renders unto every one what appertains unto him, and keeps equality, being
the spring and foundation of all virtue, and preserver of the society of man.
Which was the cause that in time past they had so great care to teach their
children, together with their mothers milk, a habit and custom to be true,
and hate lying, dissembling, and hypocrisy, and that they employ that time
which is given unto them, to all matters of virtue, and reform them, making
them more advised, and capable to serve God, the common wealth, and their
parents. Diverse Emperors have been greatly praised, for erecting of common
schools, Common schools erected.
the better to instruct youth to discern truth from lying. And those Princes
which gave stipends to scholemasters, were accounted to have don more good to
the common wealth, then they which ordained wages for Physicians, because the
former bettered the wit, the other only the body, which is the lesser part,
and of less account. For this cause Alexander the Emperor, Commenes, and
diverse other, Alexander. Commines. Leo Emperor Guichardin. li. 10.
are recommended to famous memory, for providing for all things necessary to
scholemasters, readers, and poor scholars. Great account was made of the
speech of Leo the Emperor, who wished that scholemasters might receive the
pay of men of arms. Guichardin writes, that sundry Popes gave consent to
the Venetians, to gather money of the Clergy, the better to encourage, and
find scholars in learning. And there were in the old time, certain persons
chosen out of the quarters, and wards of good towns, which they called
Sophronistes, who had a continual charge, and care, Sophronistes.
to control, moderate, and rule the manners of youth: which being well
instructed, all things prosper more fortunately, Learning.
and every one does his duty, without need of any more laws. For as
Diogenes said, and since Cicero: Learning is the temperance of youth, the
comfort of old age, standing for wealth in poverty, and serving for an
ornament to riches, as more at large is discoursed of hereafter.

CHAP. XV. How requisite it is to speak little, and not to blase a secret,
with advise upon news invented and of that which is to be spoken.
ECclesiasticus does counsel us to use but few words: Praise of scilence and
few words.
because many multiply vanity, and a man of good understanding speaking little
shall be much honored. Pithagoras willed all those he received into his school,
to tarry five years before they spoke. Pithagoras his scholars.
And it is ever seen that children which are long before they speak, in the
end do ever speak best: as among many, it is written of Maximilian the first:
and that they which cannot hold their peace, do never willingly give ear to
ought. And by a good occasion one made answer to a prater. It is great marvel
that a man having feet can endure thy babbling. And those that have been long
time past, have said, that men taught us to speak, but the Gods to hold our
peace: as also it is written in the Proverbs, that God has the government of
the tongue, and that a wise men does ever hold his peace, and he that can
countermaund his mouth, keeps his own soul. Joined with all, that by a light
word, oftentimes great pain is endured, whereas scilence does not only
no-whit alter, Lycurgus the law giver of the Lacedaemonians.
but is not at al subject to accounte nor amends. For this cause one being
asked, why Lycurgus made so few laws, answered, that such as used few words
had no need of many laws, and would accustom their youth to deeds, The
answer of K. Francis the great.
and not to writing. And the great K Francis made answer to one that asked
pardon for one speaking evil of him, if he will learn to speak little, I will
learn to pardon much. And Cicero in his book of the Orator, writes, Cato.
Piso.
that Cato and Piso, esteemed breefenes, a great praise of eloquence, so as
thereby they make themselves to be fully conceived. Among such as speak much
I comprehend, following the opinion of them of old time, such as speak
either what is hurtful, or serves to no end, or as Saint Paul calls them,
things pleasing for the time which do no whit edify. Geese, Cranes, and
quails.
Plutarque sets us down certain Geese, and Pliny certain Cranes, which
when they pass over Cicilie upon the mount Taurus, fill their beck full of
flintes, for fear of making any noise, least they should serve for a pray to
the Eagles that are there. The like experience we have had of Quails after
harvest, Calisthenes. Simonides.
in France. Aristotle sending Calistenes a kinsman and friend of his to
Alexander, counseled him to speak but little, which he not observing, it
fared with him but badlye. Simonides was wont to say, that he repented
himself oftentimes in speaking, but never in holdinge his peace. The which
Valerius attributes to Xenocrates, following the rule which is in our law,
Xenocrates.
that those things hurt which are expressed, but not such as are not. And
Apollonius said, that many words breed often times offense, but that holding
ones peace was the more sure. Apollonius.
Greatly was the breefenes of the Lacedaemonians praised in their letters, as
amongst other things of a Prince, which put in his answer but this word
No: and that which we touched above of Archidamus to the Aeoliens dissuading
them from war, K. Philip the fair.
saying that quietness is good. And K. Philip the fair, aunswering a letter
of Adolphe the Emperor, gotten by the Englishmen, in all his packet had but
these two words too much Almane. An Ambassador having long time spoken before
Agis king of the Lacedaemonians, asked him what answer he should carry
back: Thou shall say (quod he) that I have suffered thee, to speak
whatsoever thou would, and have heard thee continually without replying any
word. And the great K Francis, K. Francis. 1.
to an Ambassador of Charles the fifth Emperor, who began his Oration with
these words: When Scipio arrived before Carthage, said, Grow to your end, for
we know well enough he went not a foot but a horsback. The Athenians made a
feast to K. Antigonus Ambassador, Zeno.
and among other called thither Zeno the Philosopher, who was held in great
reputation: and for because he had not spoken one word all the whole banquet,
they asked him what they should say of him to their Prince: he answered, Speech
hardly tempered.
what you have seen: because speech is hardly tempered, and as Bion said: it
is impossible for a fool to hold his peace at the table, and it is not so
dangerous stumbling with the foot, as with the tongue. Alexandridas
Alexandridas, to one which made a very good discourse, yet longer then
needed. My friend, said he, you say as it ought to be, Cleomenes.
but not as you ought. Cleomenes to a long Oration of the Ambassadors of Samos
answered: As for your exordium I do not well remember it, nor so consequently
the midst, and I will say little to your conclusion. Philip king of Macedon.
Of like sort was the answer made by K Philip to an other Ambassador. We
have not understood your conclusion, because we forgot your beginning. And
after he had asked the Athenian Ambassadors, if they desired ought else at his
hands then to have him their friend, and that they answered that they wished,
that he had hong himself: he told them that he which bare these words, was
much more modest then the Athenians, who had not the discretion to keep them
in. And another was cast in the teeth, that for a drop of wit, he had a flood
of words: and that he which is liberal and abounding in words, is ever sparing
in deeds. Solomon says: He which has knowledge spares his words. Even a
fool when he holds his peace is counted wise. Prou. 17.27.
Which gave occasion to men of old time to write, Harpocrates.
that Harpocrates was the superintendent, and correcter of man's speech, being
drawn with a ring fastened on his lips. And they ordained certain
ceremonies to use men to scilence, and not to speak but upon good
deliberation. Other worshipped Angerona the goddess of scilence, drawn with
her finger upon her mouth, Angerona.
showing in what reverence they ought to hold secrecy. It is written of S.
Pembo, Pembo.
that he was wont to say, that he had spent nineteen whole years, to put in
practice the beginning of the 39 Psalm: I though I will take heed to my
ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth bridled. The
Ambassador of the Rhodes greatly accounted of before K. Ptolome, Psalm. 39.1.
that in his country weomen were given to solitarines, and little speech. To
this comes the custom which the Popes observe, that when they receive any
Cardinal, Custom observed in receiving a Cardinal.
they stop his mouth, and after certain days that he may learn of his
seniors, they open it again. Job also fearing to have spoken too lightly, said
that he would hold his hand upon his mouth. And S. Ierom writes how he saw
some that in seven years never spoke. Amb. lib. 2. de virgin.
S. Ambrose cast the Christians in the teethe, for that the infidels in their
temples, and sacrifices, used great scilence, but that Christians did not so.
And to show how a secret ought not lightly to be revealed, Metallus.
we have the answer of Metellus a Roman Captain, to one that asked of him
his opinion: that if his shirte knew his counsel, he would presently throw it
off, and cast it into the fire. Charles 8.
The which our French writers have noted to have been since that, Antigonus.
the speech of Charles the eight. And Antigonus answered his son, demanding
of him when he should go fight: Art thou afraid for not hearing the sound of
a trumpet? for it is a very hard matter, not to publish what one has heard,
which makes us often times, lose many good occasions. As an indiscreete word
of one man, K. Lycimachus.
hindered the whole city of Rome, that it was not delivered from the tyranny
of Nero. King Lycimachus asked Philippides, what he would have him grant
unto him: he answered, Proverb. 25.3.
what it will please you (Mileeche) to part with so it be not any of your
secrets; Eccl. 27.16.
for as it is written in the Proverbs: The Kings heart can no man search out,
and a secret thing must be concealed. And in Ecclesiasticus: He which
discovers secrets, loses his credit.

Alexander perceiving that Ephestion had red a letter, Alexander. Ephestion.
which his mother had sent him, with his signet closed his lips, as who
would say, he ought not to disclose what he had read. Pompey.
Pompey suffered a finger of his own to burn, because he would not reveal
the counsel of the Senate. The like is noted in Papirius. And Plyny tells
of one, that cut out his tongue, and cast it at the face of a Tyrant, because
he would not discover a conspiracy. One asked Anacharsis (who invested his
younger brother in his kingdom) why when he lay down, Anacharsis.
he always held his right hand upon his mouth, he answered, because he might
neither reveal any secret, nor speak rashly: for that he to whom one
reuealeth it, Diodorus.
gayneth the liberty of the other. Diodorus writes, how the Egiptians did
ever cut out his tongue, that had disclosed any secret, or revealed any
practice to the enemies. And one Valerius a Poet was executed at Rome. King
Seleucus, called the conqueror, Valerius. Soranus.
having lost a battle, fled by many crooked ways, and in the end arrived at
a poor Pesantes Cottage, who gave unto him what he was able to come by: in
the end he knew it was the king, and not being able to keep in his joy, nor
disguise with the king, who desired nothing but to be unknown, he guided him,
into the highway, where taking his leave he said: farewell my Leeche Seleucus.
K. Seleucus.
The king made a sign to one of his company to kill him: whereas if he had
held his tongue, for a while until the king had better fortune, he might have
been highlier rewarded for his secrisie, then for his good cheer, for since
that a word issues out of ones mouth as out of his haven, there is no more
harbor, A word escapes the mouth returns not.
where to shrowde, nor ancker to trust unto, but in the end bursteth against
some rock or goulfe, to his great danger that suffered it to pass. And as the
Vyper is torn asunder, when she brings forth her little ones, so secrets
coming out of their mouths, that are not able to conceal them, do but
utterly undo and ruin such, as have revealed them, and thorough the
intemperance of their tongue cast themselves down headlong, as one made an
example of cruel beasts, that were penned up, who if they once go abroad,
did much harm, and oftentimes men were constrained to kill them. In the time
of Augustus one Fuluius, Fuluius.
for having disclosed a secret to his wife, caused themselves both to be put to
death. And Quintus Cursius shows what great punishments the Persians
ordained for the like. Amasis king of Egypt, Qu. Curtius. lib. 4. Amasis king
of Egypt.
sent unto Pittacus, one of the seven wise men of Greece, that was come to see
him, a mutton, willing him to send back that piece which he accounted as best,
and that which he judged to be the worst, in steed of the two pieces so
differing, The tongue the best and vvorst piece of the body.
he sent unto him the tongue, as the instrument both of the greatest good, and
greatest harm that might be: and that therein (as it is said among great wits)
consisted most excellent virtues, and notorious vices: as it is written in the
Proverbs, Prou. 13.3.
that death and life are in the power of the tongue, and that he which keeps
his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from tribulations. Let us then I
pray you consider that we have two eyes, and two ears, but one only tongue,
and that to enclosed within the teeth, and lips, between the brain and the
heart, serving as their truche man, The seat and piece of the tongue.
having above it the instrument of all the senses, the eyes, the ears and the
nose obedient unto reason, to the end she put forth nothing, before she have
taken counsel of the said senses her neighbors, and of the inward faculties
of the soul, which are the understanding, and reason placed within the brain:
whereby we may easily judge how faultye they are, who are so lauishe of their
tongue, before they have fully pondred and considered, what they ought to
speak. Homer.
Homer blamed Thersites, for too much speaking, and praised Menelaus, because
he spoke little. The which Plutarque did of Phocion, Phocion spoke better then
Demosthenes.
by whom it was written, that he spoke better then Demosthenes, because when he
spoke in few words he comprehended much matter. The said Demosthenes likewise
termed him the knife of his words. And was wont to say, that such as knew much
spoke little. Pericles.
Pericles before he mounted into his cheyre, was wont to pray unto God, that no
word might escape his mouth that served not to the matter he had in hand. And
Zeno reproched a great prater, Zeno,
in that his ears was founded upon his tongue. And to an other he said he was
borne of a drunken father: Drunkenness subject unto much babbling The Pie
consecrated to Bacchus.
for drunckennes is myxed with this vice, that it causes one to speak more
then appertains. The Pie in this respect was consecrated to Bacchus. Certain
of ancient time said that wine descending into the body, caused the words to
ascend. Ecclesiasticus called, the comprehending of much in little speech,
Eccle. 22
good music. We must then set before our tongue the bulwark of reason, which
hinders flowynge, and the slypperinesse of inconstancy. And as ryders when
they break their coultes, first teach them to have a good mouth, Cato of the
Greeks and Romans.
and obey the bridle: so ought we to teach our children, to hear much, and
speak little. Cato said of the Greeks, that their speech came but from the
teeth outward, but the Romans spoke from the heart, (as Homer writes of
Ulysses,) and in his youth he said he refrayned from speech, until he knew
how to speak well: and that it was the property of Lelius to speak too
much. And if there proceeded but this benefit unto a man which had once
gained this reputation to be accounted, discreet in his speech and true, that
he is beloved of God and men, he is honored and believed in what so ever he
says, he goes with his head lyfted up; and contrarywyse he which is once
caught with a lie, or is a pratler, is hated, blamed, and destitute of
friends, loses his credit, and means to teach, it were sufficient to make
us to embrace the truth, and shun lying. And whereas Caesar in his
commentaries found fault with the french men, because they received for
certain such brutes as ran up and down, Caesar. Comment. lib. 6
and uncertain aduertisementes whereof shortly after they repented, as before
I touched: it were very requisite that that order which he then writes to have
been observed, were at this present practiced, that he which had learned
ought that concerned the state, Counterfaite nevves
should presentlye make relation to the magistrate, and not speak thereof to
any other person: for that says he we have often seen by experience that
men being light and ignorant, easelye made them selves afraid with false and
counterfaite news, which led them to a resolution to undertake matters of
importance, and dangerous, To be silent is dangerous.
as we have sundry examples of our time: and all histories are full of the
misfortunes which have happened to such, as have spoken, enterprised, and
believed too lightly. Moreover in some cases to be silent is as dangerous, as
if any know any conspiracy, against their country, or king, or any that
might greatly prejudice their neighbor they ought to discover it. To them
likewise, whose duty is to teach Virtue, and reprehende vice, and to preach,
silence is forbidden both by GOD and the laws. And as Saint Ambrose learnedlye
writes, if we must render account to GOD for every idle word, so must we
likewise for our idle scilence, if at any time we have omitted (according to
our duetye,) to instruct or correct our neighbor, there by being able to
turn him from his evil way or error. We must likewise consider the time
and place to speak, or hold our peace: Circumstances of time and place to
speak.
as it is written that Socrates being requested at a feast that he would speak
of his art, had reason to answer, it is not now time for what I can do, and
that which the time now requires can I not do.

CHAP. 16. That as well of friends as enemies one should learn the truth.
By friends, and enemies truth is discerned from falsehood
Diverse have written, that the better to discern truth from falshoode, it were
requisite to have either very entire friends or enemies: for these meaning to
anger one, do vpraide, and blame whatsoever seems vicious unto them, and as
out of a watch discover such imperfections as oftentimes men do not think
on, and so are a means that they are corrected. Xenophon. Philip King of
Macedon.
As Xenophon writes that a wise man is able to reap his profit by his
enemies. And Philp king of Macedon said, that he was bound to the Athenians
which reviled him, because they were an occasion to make him the more virtuous,
and advised, and enforced him all his life long, both in his actions, and
words to make them liars. And in truth they are a cause, that makes men
contain their fashions and manners, The profit which men reap by their
enemies. Scipio.
as in a straight diet. And this habit that one undertake nothing upon the
sudden, clean takes away all occasion from our enemies of mocking us, or
rejoicing: For this cause Scipio answering them that immagined the estate of
the Romans to be in very great surety, the Carthagenians being overthrown,
and the Acheens subdued, said, Nay now are we in greatest danger, having taken
away all those, whom either we ought to reverence, or might justly fear. A
Lacedemonian captain, answered to the complaint of a Athenian: If the Athenians
took good heed to what they did, they should never be troubled nor need to
care, what the Spartiates reported of them. Contrariwise friends, I mean
without flattery or disguising, The profit of friends. Euripides. Diogenes.
declare freely what they think amiss, and il beseeming. Which moved
Euripides to exhort men to get such friends as would not spare them: As
Diogenes said that other dogs used to bite their enemies, but he his
friends, for their own good. And such an amity, which is a benevolence, a
conformity of wills and pleasures, and a desire of the good of an other joined
with virtue, Amity.
is (as some have said) a beast of the company, but not of the troop, because
there be very few true friends. Menander.
And Menander said not without cause that he was happy, that could meet but
with the shadow of his friend, Eccles. 6.16.
who is called by Ecclesiasticus a tresure, and the medicine of life.
Pithagoras. Plato.
A man must not shake every man by the hand as Pithagoras said Plato wisely
discoursed how the greatest of all euilles does spring up with us, and that we
desire not to be delivered of it, to wit that every man loves him self, Love
of it self is blind
and delights in his own opinions: because love is blind, and one easily
deceaueth him self, in what he loves, being prevented and abused thorough
fancies before conceived. Therefore he said it was very requisite to shun
this foolish love, The similitude of Demosthenes.
which takes from us our judgment. And the similitude which Demosthenes made
is very true, that as the pain in the eyes hinders one from seeinge what
lies before his feet, so the first conceates and fancies, obfu. scate the
understanding. Wherefore to the end we may see the naked truth, we must be
void of all passions, loving to hear of our faults and to be corrected, To
be warned by our freindes.
which the wise man esteems as a chain of gold about ones neck, and ought
rather to desire it might proceed from our friends, then from our enemies,
because we must eschew vice, led thereunto thorough virtue, and shame, and not
by the contrary way, or by fear. And it is a great deal better to abstain
from doing ill following the counsel of our friends, then to repent our selves
for having done ill, when we see our selves accused and blamed by our enemies:
and such warninges as go before disorders, are a great deal more fit, and
render better fruit then such as follow after.

CHAP. 17. That it is needful to read histories, there to see the truth which
one is afraid to speak, with advise upon the reading of all books, and of the
conquestes of French men, of the means to keep them, and to assure a
victory, of the duty of a captain, and of that which is to be considered, in
examples and alterations.
Demetrius gave counsel to King Ptolome, that he should diligently read
such books, as entreated of the gouernmentes of kingdoms, and segnuries,
Knowledge of histories necessary for princes.
to the end he might be instructed in those things, which men dare not so
freely, deliver them selves to princes: for the pen is of a more free
condition then the tongue. We read likewise how the Catoes, Aemiles, Scipios,
Caesar's, and sundry other Emperors, have been so studious in readinge of
them, that they have copied out with their own hand, whole histories, and
even them selves composed such as were in their own time. And have been more
curious to have of them in their hands, then their swoordes by their sides, to
the end to join the written discipline of war, To take counsel of the dead.
with the practice of the wars. For this cause Alphonsus said of Qu. Cursius,
that he was sooner healed by his history, then his Physicians, and that he took
counsel of the dead. Which Ferdinand king of Spain likewise said by Titus
Liuius. And the reading of Xenophon moved Scipio to undertake those prowesses
which he performed. And the great Selim having caused Julius Caesar's
commentaries, to be translated into his own tongue, and heard them, Caesar's
commentaries translated by the commandment of Selim
by imitating of him he knew the greatest part of Asia and Africa. And the
said Julius endeavored altogether to imitate Alexander, who likewise set
Achilles before him self as an example. And the Emperor Charles the fifth, had
in hand the history of Philip of Commines. Laurence of Medices surnamed the
father of learning, The love the weomen of Bavire bare to their husbands.
recovered his health in reading the historye of Conradus the Emperor, who
resolved to make Guelphe the Duke of Bauire to dye, and to ruin both the
place, and the inhabitants of the city, which he had long time besieged, in
the end overcome with the intercessions of the weomen of the city, suffered
them to depart, their lives and baggage saved, with all that they could carrye
upon their own sholders: but leaving all their goods they carried their Duke,
their husbands, fathers, children and friends, as many as they were able: of
which the said Conrade conceived such contentment, The monuments of our
ancestors inflame us to virtue.
that he gave pardon both unto his enemy, and all the rest. And if the
Fabians and Scipioes, as Polibus and Salustus have witnessed, have been
greatly enflamed to virtue, when they have beheld the statuas and monumentes of
their ancestors, and by the remembrance of the high feats of arms which
they most prosperously have achieved, this flame increased in the hearts of
generous persons, and was not quenched until such time as their virtue had
equalled their glory, Themistocles awaked through the trophies of the
Miltiades.
and high renown: and if Themistocles said that the victories and trophies,
of the Miltiades kept him, that he could not sleep: how much more ought it to
prick us forward, when we read in histories of the prowesses and magnanimous
feats that have been consecrated to immortality, and more lively
representing such manners, counsels, occasions, and means as have been held
in enterprises and executions of brave attemptes, together with the euentes,
the better to resolve in all affairs, and to judge what we ought to follow, or
fly in like occurrence of human accidents? And there may Princes learn
without hasarde, expense, or danger, how deeply they are charged: and the
better impresse within their memory the precepts either of politic laws,
or of the art of war, then they should do in Philosophers books, seeing
what praises are given to the well doers, and what blame and punishment to the
wicked, as in the middle of a Theater. And they are awakened, to take the way
of virtue, as out of a trompet of honor, and the seeds thereof are taken out
of the valor and gentleness of our ancestors. And albeit there be great
difference between the actions of our ancestors, and ours,, yet we ought to
follow, and practice according to the reason, by which they have guyded their
inventions, carrying the like spirit, judgment and hardiness that they did.
And since that as Seneca has written in the first book of his Epistles, if
one have a mind to do ill, and espieth one present by him that will be a
witness thereof, he sins the less, so is there no doubt but many
tyrauntes have refrayned the executing of a number of mischiefs they have
determined, Fear of blame and dishonor causes the wicked to refrain.
for fear of the spotte which a history would stain them with. As
Democritus likewise rehearses, how many kings of Aegipt have heene brideled
from committing of evil, fearing a custom which the people had, to oppose
them selves to the pompes and magnificences, that were wont to be celebrated at
the obsequies of their good kings. Without histories, Custom of Aegipt. Diod.
lib. 2^. cap. 3
we are never able to know the benefits which GOD has bestowed upon men, nor
the chastisementes with which he corrects the wicked: nor the beginning,
progress, and success of all things, nor the mischief which both the
public and particular weal suffer, nor what doctrine is more ancient, and
to be followed. For this cause Cicero calls it, the light of truth, the
witness of times, the Mistress of life, the Messenger of antiquity, and the
life of memory preseruinge from oblivion deeds worthy of memory, achieved
thorough long process of times. And this same seed of virtues, which Plato
says is in our spirits, lyfteth it self up thorough the emulation of
them, which have been such as we now are: And we do gain more by
reading thereof in our youth, then by whatsoever is either attributed to sense,
Charlemagne.
or experience of old men, or to such as have been in far voyages. It is
written tht Charlemagne, would ever have a history read unto him during his
meals: and that, perceauing the small regard the ancient Gaulois had, of
setting down the monumentes of their ancestors in writing, Songs containing
the high enterprises of virtuous persons.
he caused certain songs to be made, commanding they should teach their
children to singe them by heart, to the end the remembrance thereof might
endure from race to race, and that by this means other might be stirred up to
do well, and to write the gestes of valiant men. Which they say was likewise
observed by the Indians, and Homer writes the same of Achilles. And the like
is mentioned in the 78. psalm. And Caesar in his Commentaries, Lucane and
Tacitus, makes mention of certain philosophers, that were french men, Bardes.
called Bardes, which song the praises of valiant men, and the blame and
reproach of lewd persons, tyrauntes and base minded: and Polibus shows that a
history does teach and prepare the way to the affairs of Policy: and to
carry well the chaunges of Fortune, Time left.
and to know what we are. And if that which Pliny writes be true, that all
that time which is not employed to the study or exercise of good things is
lost: and that which Seneca has written, that they are all fools, that in
this great scarcetie of time which is bestowed of them, learn but matters
superfluous: We ought much to lament, that the desire which the common sort
have to histories, Fables and old vvyfes tales.
is an occasion that they give themselves to fables and old wives tales, where
is naught else but a vain delight without any profit: where as in histories,
besides pleasure, there is great learning, to teach us not to undertake upon
the fiske and flying, either any war that is not necessary, or any quarrels,
suites in law, or other affairs of importance. And we see how many
mischiefs, Prudence required in reading histories
losses, and faults, ignorance has been the cause of. But Prudence is
greatly required, especially in holy histories. For there must we confrant the
examples to the commandments of God: because the very saints them selves
have had their faults which we ought not to follow, and the holy scripture is
a good looking glass, which represents as Saint Augustine said, things as
they in deed are, setting before us virtues to follow them, and vices and
imperfections to shun them, and to praise the mercy and bounty of God in
that he covers them. And as touching the profane, we must carry the like
judgment, and therein consider the particularities, the causes, the conduct,
and Prudence which men have used, and the fortune, and success that has
proceeded from above. It shall not here be amiss, for the readers, if I
admonish them not to take for good monye, not to account all that which
profane aucthours have written as articles of their faith, All profane authors
write not truly
nor indifferently to trust thereunto without examining them further. I
comprehend herein all such, where they which can see clearly may discover lies
and untruths amidst good things, and some beasts come from a pensell, and not
by nature. Therefore we must apply thereto a good sife, to sifte, and separate,
the one from the other. And me thinks what knowledge soever those books
teach us, is very small if one be not acquainted with the use and practice of
the world, A reader of histories must not be too quick of belief nor too
credulous.
and be likewise accompanied with a judgment, and quicknes of spirit. And it
was very wisely written by Aristotle that in reading of histories a man must
not be of too quick a belief, nor too incredulous, for fear he take not
false for true, or else profit no whit at all. And what color or disguising so
ever, men set on to flatter great ones, they which pry narrowly into their
behauiours, and take their counsels and actions in time of peace and war, are
not deceived: and discern toys, and cauillinges amidst deep counsels, and do
discover pretexts, cloaking, and occasions, with the true causes never having
their judgment there by deceived, referring and examining all things to the
rule of the holy scripture. The holy Scripture the rule of all things.
Besides we ought to esteem most, of such histiographers, which have had least
passions, and partiality, and the best means to discover the truth, either
being there them selves in person, or having certain intelligence from
them that were present, men of faith, and sincere judgment, speaking without
affection: to the end they set not out fables, and lies, as many of our time
have done: and that which they steal from other, is as a precious stone, ill
set in work. It were also requisite, they should be conuersaunt, and nourished
in affair of state, What vvriters soonest to be credited.
and acquainted with the proceedinges of the world: and not give them selves
so much to pleasure as to speak the truth, not being enough not to write
false, but to declare the very truth, without any partiality at all. For if
in any one place, a writer be found a lier, the rest of his history is
clean rejected as Alexander the great was wont to say. It is also needful
to observe, what sundry Italians, Spaniardes, Fleminges, as Almames, of an
envious malice, and want of right judgment, have even enforced them selves to
praise their country, and cover their faults, Enemies envying the french.
and diminish the greatness, and excellency, of matters done by the french
men, to the advancement of whole christendom, Affections and passions of men
stain the truth.
and profit of sundry nations. And it is no strange thing to see how much the
passions and affections of men do stain the truth, which is the very eye of
histories, ( Polibus him self reherseth the examples of sundry
historiographers before his time) and discover contrarieties between them
selves, and by other greater authors then they are condemned of lying, as we
have marked in the Spaniardes before, which have written the history of the new
world, and of the west Indies, who cover and make less, their own excess,
and incredible vilanies, the greatest part of them being revenged and punished
thorough the just judgment of God. The Englishmen have somewhat run awry, in
handling the affairs on this side the sea. Paulus Iouius, was wont to say,
that to do favor to such great personages as gave him pensions, he set
things down, in such sort as they that lived in that time, were well enough
able to discover them, mary the posterity should hold them for true. And in
truth sundry historiographers of all times, thorough ignorance, hatred,
covetousness, or ambition, take a color to warrant their lying and disguising,
upon a belief they have, that few shall be able to discern their coseninges.
And for because thorough this error of discourse, they name sundry wise and
prudent, which in deed have been most wicked, and blame french men that have
been virtuous, of a good conscience, and have ended their lives honestlye, and
laudablye, condemning them of fool hardines and vice, men ought therein to carry
a good sound, and right judgment. Considering that such authors do not
always measure, Not to judge things according to the event.
the manners and actions of men according to the immovable rule of the word
of God, and moral philosophy, nor distinguish the vicious by the intention or
conscience, but only by the issue, dexterity, and industrye, or rather
subtiltye of such as know how to apply each thing, to the end which they
pretend, never regarding whether it be honest, laudable, and just or no. They
do not in respect of the french men refer any of their acts at all to
virtue, if they be not led thereto by that which they account prudence, but
rather to rashness: as they do in regard of their own nation, imputing their
own acts of cowardnesse, baseness of mind, disceat, dissembling, treason,
cruelty, disloyalty, infidelity and ambition, to wisdom and prudence.
Nevertheless here we may well consider for what cause, they have made the like
comparison of french men that Antigonus did of Pirrhus, to a gamester, whom
the dise favored well, but knew not how to serve him self, of those chances
that happened unto him: To make conquests assured.
(for that look what he got by the effect, he lost thorough, hope, coveting in
such sort what he had not, that he clean forgot to assure himself of what he
had gained) because they are more ready to get then wise to keep, and that by
feats of arms they make brave conquestes, but they preserve them but a while,
not knowing that a country conquered by such as observe not discipline, is
both unprofitable, and hurtful. Therefore they conjecture, that valor and
dexterity in arms, is a great matter: but that nobility not brought up in
learning, nor in reading of histories, has not this wisdom to moderate it
self, and to provide by such means as they ought to take, to be able in
peace to conserve what they have conquered, and suffer themselves to be led by
the colored words of their enemies: who after that the first fire, and
french boiling is extinguished, they know well enough how to use their occasion,
and serve their own turns, with the ignorance of such as esteem naught but
arms, without running over, the courses held by their ancestors, in keeping
their conquestes, and using of their victories: as we have but too many
examples, which is the cause that Caesar writes in his Commentaries, Comment.
li. 6
that french men are more hardy and courageous, then fine in war, (which
they make great account of) ioynct, that they give them selves more to the hope
which they take of conquering, Men differ from beasts by reason.
then they do to any fear of losing. Every man confesses that men differ
from beasts in reason: if this good nature be not manured, with the reading of
histories and good letters, what other thing is it the^ a precious stone hid in
a donghil? Cassiod. lib. 1.
We ought to account the saying of K. Theodoric true, that what was begone with
good advise and prudence, and preserved with care, is of long lasting and
strong. And if victories be not made sure with temperance, and prudence, they
dim through some unlooked for accident, the glory which was before gotten: and
in short time loses the whole fruit through insolency, carelesnes, Causes of
losses.
delicacies, arrogance, violentnes of taking up of lodging, and yet to be well
entreated, in capacity of a governor, covetousness confusion, and to make no
distinction between persons, in giving, taking away, or changing, and sometime a
commandment amiss conceived, an ordinance ill executed, rashness, and vanity
of speech, carries the victory away clean unto such, as before seemed
already vanquished. And a marvelous prudence is required, to foresee an
innumerable number of other accidents in matters of war, and sometime to
apply counsel to necessitye: being no less the duty of a valiant Captain
to show him self wise in his actions then courageous, to the end he approve,
deliberation less difficile, and dangerous, and clean reiecte all rash
counselles attendinge likewise the oportunities of times, and ripeness of
occasions, not for all that presupposing for certain, those perilles that are
uncertain, being more afraid then he ought, calling hope no less to his
counsel, More laudable to keep then to get
then fear. Cirus likewise in the end of the seventh book of the Pedion of
Xenophon, thought it a matter more laudable to keep then to get, because often
times in conquestes is nothing but hardiness, but a body can not conserve
what he has taken without temperaunce, continence, care and diligence besides
valor. And as it is a greater grief to become poor, then never to have been
rich, so is it to lose, more bitter, then never to have gotten. I do not
think that garrisons serve to so great an end, as if the conquerours show
them selves meek, and lovers of good things: and that no thing can succeed
well to such as abandon virtue and honesty. Aristotle dedicatinge his
Rhetorique to Alexander, writes unto him, that as the body is entertained
thorough a good disposition, Use and practice.
so is the wit by discipline and erudition: which were the causes that not
only he had ever an address to do well, but also to conserve what he had
gotten. It is likewise requisite, that we put the said reading in use and
practice, thereby to becomme more virtuous, wise, and advised, and that we
confer, things passed with the present and such as might ensue: and to apply
examples, to the rule of veritye, justice, Aug. cap. 131 mor. epise.
and equitye. And albeit that Saint Augustine, attributed much to histories,
yet does he add, that he can not see how all that which is written by the
wit of man can be in every point true, consideringe that all men are liars,
and that it comes to pass often times, Men's vvritings in all points can not
be true.
that they which follow the reason of man in any history, build upon the
brutes of the vulgar sort, and are abused by the passions of sundry men,
which report nothing of certain. Notwithstanding they are to be excused, if
they keep a liberty, and write not to the end to deceive. But in the holy
history, they ought to fear no such thing since that it proceeds of the
holy Ghost, and thence a man may take out certain witnesses and sovereign
arrestes. Now that we may the better reap our profit out of Historyes, The
beginninges and motife causes of al things as to be considered.
we must consider the beginning, and motyfe cause, of all enterprises, the
means which therein they have held, and afterward the issue thereof, which
cannot possibly be good proceeding from an evil beginning. And after having
known the root, and causes thereof, we must judge what may happen in like cases,
and consider other circumstances which bewtifie the actions, and refer all to
the glory of God, through whose bounty the events have succeeded well, and
gloriously, To praise and thank God for our good success Romans 15.4.
to the end we may render praises and thankesgeuing unto him, which are due
unto him; for as much as by weak and vile persons, he oftentimes compasses
high, and mighty things. Whatsoever is written, ought to serve for one
learning.
And because that whatsoever things are written before time, are written for
our learning, We ought to apply unto our selves whatsoever we read, and to
behold as in a looking glass our own affections: to the end we might follow
good, and eschew evil, and clean remove from us, all disguising and
corruption, and above all things we ought to acknowledge the judgments of
God, against the wicked, and contemners of his law. And for because that great
dangers ensue those which indifferently govern them selves by examples. I
thought good to advertise, Examples.
that it is diligently to be considered, whether there be a concurrence of like
reasons not only in general, but also in particular. It is also necessary to
rule ones self as prudently, as they did whom we would imitate, and to demand
of God like success. Mutations is common weals.
And in our enterprises we must not only consider, the superficies and
beginning of things, but to look more inwardly what may happen in time. We
must not likewise take too exactly, what is written by ancient
Historiographers, but confer them with the new, having regard to the great
chaunges which happen in all countries: and that there are few Cities or
Nations which hold their former name, nor their ancient seats, and fashions:
otherwise we should wander awry, and judge amiss. And this consideration of
the unstableness, subuersions, dissipations, and lamentable chaunges of sundry
peoples and families, ought to prepare us to bear all accidents sent from
God: knowing that this life is but a sorrowful exile, subject to storms, and
continual tempests: This life but a sorrovvfull exile.
and that there is no seat nor haven sure, but in the heavenly and eternal
life, to the which the son of God, our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, has
prepared the way for us, and let us humbly beseech him to guide us therein.

CHAP. 18. That one ought not to suffer him self to be deceived by praises,
nor be carried away from modesty, and that honor depends upon virtue, with
advise upon the same, or upon the reproaches or lies of the people: and how much
it is requisite to command ones self.
Prases deceive men.
WHo so would not swerve from the truth, ought not to be moved with praises,
which for the most part are disguised: for as Saint Augustine has written, He
which often praises one, abuses him self, confirms an error, and proves
in the end a liar: and he which is praised becomes thereby a great deal more
vain. And Dion said, the over great praises and honors out of measure carry
with them a misknowledge, lightness, and insolensie, yea among such persons as
of them selves are modest enough: because they are persuaded that they deserve
them, and every man pleases them, and puffs them up as Xenophon writes,
though in deed they might well be termed mockeries. And such excessive honors,
are neither more nor less, then as portractures ill proportioned, which fall
to the ground of them selves, as the three hundred statuas of Demetrius, which
never engendered either rust or filth, Statuas thrown down and broken.
being in his own life time broken in pieces. And those likewise of Demades
were bruysed, and made to serve for chamberpots, and basins in close stools:
and so have sundry other princes their monuments been served. The inhabitants
of the city of Pills, Honors refused by Theopompus.
in their counsels, ordained most mighty honors for Theopompus: he wrote
back unto them, that time was accustomed to increase honors moderately
bestowed, and to deface the immoderate. Niger.
When Niger was chosen Emperor, they recited certain verses in his praise:
but he said, that they ought rather to praise Hanniball, or the prowess of
some other great captains, to the end they might be imitated, and that it was
a mockery to praise men while they lived, which peradventure might alter. And
that there was great presumption, that either they did it for fear, or for
hope to obtain somewhat of them, and that for his part he rather desired to be
favored and loved during his life, and praised after his death. Other were
wont to say, that they never acknowledged such praises, but wished to God that
they were worthy of them. Bracidas
Bracidas his mother was highly commended for aunswearing the ambassadors of
Thrace, comforting her for the death of her son, affirminge that he had not
left his like behind him, that she knew well enough, that the city of Sparta
had many Citizens a great deal more worthy and valiant then him. As
Antigonus said unto a Poet, who called him the son of the sun, Antigonus.
that he which emptied his close stool knew well enough there was no such
matter. The shadow shunneth those which follow it, and follows those which
shun it, and so fares it with praise. Sigismond the Emperor, stroke one
that praised him too much, Sigismond. Justinian.
saying that he bitte him: So was it likewise reported by Justinian. When they
offered to Titus a crown of gold, together with great praises, for his
taking of Jerusalem, he aunsweared, Titus.
that he himself was not the author thereof, but that GOD served him self
thorough his hands, in that he made manifest his anger against the Jews.
Fabritius. Timoleon. Antisthenes.
As much is said of Fabritius, for the delivery of Greece, and of Timoleon,
for restoring Sicilie to liberty. And Antistenes commanded his children,
never to conne any thanks for praising of them: for often times it is with men
as with an number of beasts, which suffer a man to do with them what he will,
yea to tumble and drale them on the ground, as long as he tickleth them.
Galien entreating how the sickness of the mind might be discerned writes,
Galien.
that he learned of his father to despise glory, as an intisement to evil,
and enemy to truth. Offices and dignities called charges.
And Josephus writes, that honors bestowed on young men, are as matches of
folly and rashness. And in our french tongue we call offices, and dignities,
charges. And Varro in his fourth book of the Latin tongue writes, that this
name of honor proceeds from a name which signifies an honest burden, which
binds us to do well, and to take care, and travail: Honors.
because that praises are alyed with virtues, and are as the badge thereof, and
follows it as the shadow does the body. The ancient fathers have likewise
noted, that in the holy scripture, the triumphs and honors of the common sort,
are not termed glory, but only virtuous acts. Glory. The temple of glory
adjoining to that of virtue
And Cicero in his Tusculanes questions defines glory to be a consent of
praises, by virtuous men, which judge without corrupting virtue: for they which
are of good judgment know better our valor then the grosser sort. And there was
some mystery in that the Romans builded the temple of glory, adjoining to that
of virtue, through which they must of necessity pass that will go to the
other: as if one would say that there were no honor without virtue. Epictetus.
Epictetus said likewise that glory, and virtue were two sisters which could not
be severed one from the other. And Cicero calls praise the hyer of virtue.
Cicero. Solomon. Ecclesiasticus. 10.
And Solomon in his Proverbs writes that the noblenes of young men is their
virtue. And when it is said in Ecclesiasticus, that the land is happy when
their king is noble he means thereby virtuous and not young of understanding.
The which is well marked in the first law de cond. in pub. hor. l.x.C. and L.I.
de dignitat. l. 12. C. Marius mayntayneth in Salust, that they may be called
noble and gentle, Marius.
which are most honest, and virtuous: and that all nobility proceeded at the
first from virtue. And it is better to bring it into a man's house, than to
diffame it, when he found it already there. And the glory of our ancestors
serves unto the posterity as a light which suffers neither good nor evil
actions to lie hid. Majesty pictured.
Some have pictured Majesty apparelled with a cloak of admiration, tissued,
with great virtues and honesty, the marks whereof are in her gesture and
actions, and that great personages ought to conserve and maintain her. And
they which command ought derogating unto her or that is unjust, cannot excuse
themselves of high treason, and diminishing her Majesty. And sometimes it is a
great honor, when benefits are not proportioned according to the valor of
deserts. And it is far better to be worthy of honor then to receive it:
Cato.
as Cato said that he had rather one should ask him why he made not a monument
for himself, then why he had erected one. He said likewise that every man,
being well borne, and of an honest heart, ought to carry in his mind and
remembrance his nobility and his ancestors, to the end he should do nothing
worthy of reprehension, and might be ashamed of all actions of reproach. The
ancient kings of France used many ceremonies in making of a knight, the
better to induce them to all honesty, and above all things to keep their
faith and truth, A knight. Maximilian.
which custom as it is told me remains yet in England: and at that time
every man contented himself with a single promise. Maximilian the Emperor
answered one that desired his letters patentes to ennoble him, I am able to
make thee rich, but virtue only to make thee noble. And there is great
likelihoode that that which moved the Lacedaemonians to sacrifice unto the
Muses, at such time as they went to warfare, was to give courage to men to do
so well that they might afterward be praised. Above all things we must take
heed of praising our selves with our own mouth, as the wise man warns us.
But if our life and holy conversation do show it, virtue shall ever be followed
with praise. I do not for all that think that a wise man ought to despise the
true honor, which consists in the good will of such as have received any
pleasure. Honor to be accepted.
And from this reputation proceeds faith and confidence, which pusheth men
forward to the enterprise of all good actions, and serves as a rampiar
against the envious. And it is to be excused in young men, Youth stirred up to
virtue through praise
if they please themselves in doing well: because virtues do double and flourish
in that age, and do increase through moderate praise given unto them. And the
common wealth has an interest, in making the praises of famous men to remain
engraven, to serve for an imitation pricking forward, and example to al ages.
Pope John the 23. said unto the Cardinals, who had heard what was spoken in his
praise, Pope John. 23
that they mingled therein many things not true, and yet he took pleasure to
hear them. Themistocles.
And Themistocles being asked what music or voice he desired most willingly
to hear, said, such a one as praised his virtue. Yet such as so loftily
carry themselves, are like such as brag they have received false and naughty
monye. Remedy against praise and glory.
And that we may not be abused, it is very good to consider thoroughly the
infirmity of man, the shortness of our life, the defilings of our flesh, and
that whatsoever is in us to be praised, proceeds from the pure liberality
and loan of god, which is able to take all from us again in a moment; to the
end that we contain our selves in modesty and humblenes of mind. Pyndarus
likewise compares the life of men unto a dream of a shadow, the which is as
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 62.9. and 144.4.
more vain then vanity it self, and as a flower vanishing away. But because
that many fearing to be falsely blamed of the common sort, are thereby fallen
into great inconveniences, I willingly would advise quick wits, not to
surcease the pursuit of a good enterprise, nor to undo themselves through the
fear of such a blame. Plutarque.
As Plutarke said in his Proeme of the lives of Agis and Cleomenes, that having
well considered the accidents of the brethren named Gracchi, Gracchi.
who having been well borne, brought up, and nourished, and now attained to the
managing of the affairs of the common wealth and that with a very good
intent, yet were they both destroyed in the end, not so much through an
unmeasured desire of honor, as through fear of dishonor, the which for all that
proceeded not, but from a great and noble heart. Virtuous persons in like sort,
have ever made small account, of counterfeit words and false lies imagining,
their conscience, and the virtuous course of their life, and the behauiors of
themselves before time, would sufficiently warrant and defend them, and the
contempt which one has of a foolish word, makes the envious clean
confounded: Demosthenes.
and railing as Demosthenes said, which makes him never the worse against
whom it is used, is not esteemed among any virtuous persons. That is to say,
that the reputation of a good man, is not diminished through any blame that is
unjustly laid to his charge. And sundry of our kings were willing to meet with
the quarrels and lightness of the nobility, that a man might know by good and
sufficient proof, The Lie.
if the lie were well or ill given, to the end it might be judged upon whom
it ought to fall. Titus
Titus the Emperor was wont to say, that because he did nothing that deserved
blame or reprehe^sio^, he cared not for any lies were made of him. Fabius.
As also Fabius surnamed the most high, answered some that rayled on him, that
a Captain and ruler in the field, who for fear of speaking, or of the opinion
of the commons, ceased from doing what he knew to be profitable, or to desist
from a purpose fully deliberated of, and whereof he well understood the causes
and reasons, ought to be esteemed more faint, then he which fears to prove
his strength, when he sees occasion given for his advantage. And chose rather
that his wise enemy might fear him, then the folish citizens should praise
him, and that being well advised he cared not for being accounted too fearful
or too slack. It is the lesson of Ecclesiasticus. Set not thy heart upon every
word that is reported. Ecclesiasticus. Plato.
And Plato in Criton admonishes us not to regard what every man says, but
what he says that sees al things, and the truth. And not without cause an
ancient father said, I will lose the very reputation of an honest man, Cato.
rather then not to be an honest man. Cato was accustomed as Plutarque writes
in his life time to be ashamed only for dishonest things, but ever to despise
what was reproved by opinion. S. Augustine attributed the death of Lucretia to
her imbecillitie, Lucretia
as fearing the evil opinion and suspicion of the common sort. And there is no
enterprise or execution so right, and worthy of praise, that is not subject to
the reproach and detraction of the ignorant, to the passions of the malignant
and envious, and to rash judgments. A good conscience.
For this cause in all our actions we ought to content our selves with a
conscience well informed. And but that I fear I should be too tedious, I
could allege a number of most notable examples, of the inconveniences that
have happened as well to them of old time as of ours, for esteeming more the
judgment of the ignorant then the truth. Which detractions K. Demetrius was
wont to say, he cared not for, K. Demetrius
not esteemed them better then a fart, not much passing whether it made a noise
before or behind, above or below. Marius likewise spoke wisely in Salust,
Marius.
how no report was able to offend him, because if it were true it would sound
to his praise, if false his life and manners should prove it contrary. By this
discourse I desire to impresse into the nobility a sound judgment, of true
honor, which is engendered but by virtue and good deeds: and to make them lay
aside that foolish opinion which they have of falshod, under color whereof,
upon light occasion and offense they undertake combats, never regarding the
laws of God, nature, civil, canonical, private, nor their own salvation, or
duty of charity, hazarding their lives, souls, goods and friends, for that
stale, infected passionate, and fantastical tyrant, termed honor, never
embrasing such means of concord as the laws command. And remain so
stubborn and blind, that whereas the true honor consists in obeying God and
his laws, in mastering ones passions, in loving, forgiving, and succouring ones
neighbor, they make it to be in disobeying of God and his holy laws, going
about to diffame, destroy, and murder their neighbors, and render themselves
slaves to their own choler. And how can that be honorable which God
forbids, detesteth, and condemns to eternal death? And also to be meek,
peaceable, and reconciled to overcome wrath and passions, to aproch near unto
God through his clemency, and mercy, (which are the acts of virtue, and of
true Christians,) how can these I say, breed unto the nobility either
dishonor or infamy? Considering that by the ancient discipline of war, it
was adjudged dishonest, and worthy of punishment, VVarly discipline.
if one combatted with his enemy without his Captains leave, or if he left
the place given to him in guard. And the ancient Emperors and Kings esteemed it
a point of greater magnanimity and nobility to pardon and command ones
self, then to be revenged, and as a murderer of himself, to lay open his
own life to evident peril. We proceed all of us from God our creator, not of
our selves: into his hands we ought to put all our reuenges, Vengeance
reserved to god
as he himself wills us: and not to make our selves the accusers, Judges,
and hangmen, of him, whom we pretend to have cast an eye upon the shadow
of this delicate honor, as I have else where touched, for the importance of this
pernicious error.

CHAP. XIX. That without the truth there is naught else but darkness, and
confusion, and how much the Philosophers have labored to find it out, and how
far wide they have been of it.
Truth in Policies and governments.
HE made no bad comparison in my opinion, that said, that policies,
gouernements and kingdoms, were like an empty lamp, or lantern: and that
the truth was the match with the oil, and the wax, or the tallowe that gave
the light: for without this Sun shine of truth, there is nothing but
darkness and disorders in this life, and we may say with the Prophets, that
without it, the people remain lying in darkness, and in the region of the
shadow of death. And with Jeremy that the wise boast not in his knowledge,
nor the strong in his force, Ierem. 3. Luke 1.
nor the rich in his wealth, but that all our glory be to know him which is
the very truth: for whatsoever men may allege unto us, of victories,
tryumphes, honors, eloquence, force, and other gifts and graces, they are
naught else if this truth be taken away, but as if one should sail in a
dark night, among the floodes, rocks, and tempests of the sea, Phil. 3.8.
and in the end prove a sorrowful tragedy. Saint Paul judged all things
to be doung in respect of this knowledge, and the excellency thereof, which
has lain hidden many ages, and made most clearly manifest, thorough our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who has imparted unto us the heavenly
treasures, and has been made for us, justice, righteousness, life,
sanctification, Philosophers of old time have not attained to the light of the
truth.
and redemption. And albeit the Philosophers of old time, attained not unto
this light, yet did they not cease to pursue the shadows thereof, of which in
part we entreat, leauinge unto the Divines the deep insight into this
light, and majesty of the essential truth. The said Philosophers, as
Socrates, Plato, Democritus, Aristotle, Pliny, Architas, Tales, Tianeus, and
an infinite number of other, have made very far and long voiages the better
to be instructed in this truth, and in the knowledge hereof, to the end they
might not ouerlightly believe or speak out of purpose. Tales.
The said Tales being demanded, what distance there was between the truth and
a lie, answered, as much as between the eyes, and the ears; as if he would
have said, that we may boldly declare what we have seen, but that often times
one is deceived, trusting unto another report. And albeit, the said Plato,
Aristotle, and other Philosophers, have written many notable things concerning
the virtues, yet have they not declared, The ignorance of the Philosophers.
at whose hands they ought to be demanded, nor whither they ought to be
referred: neither have they known the beginning of the corruption of man's
nature, nor the remedy of al evils, which is revealed in the Gospel, by the
knowledge of the truth, and the adoption of the Christians, the remission of
sins, and the promises, which give us a certainty, of the favor, blessing,
and good will of our good God, whereof ensues a good conscience, hope, and
peace in the spirit, which consumes all the grief and sorrow, as the Sun
does the morning dew. And there is none of the said Philosophers, except
Plato, which was able to set down, that the sovereign good of man, was to be
joined with God, but he had no taste at all what this conjunction meant, Man's
sovereign good.
nor the mean to attain unto it. And as touching the comfortes of the
Philosophers, the complaint which Cicero made, in his Epistle to Atticus is
true that the medicine is not of force enough for the disease, The Philosophers
co^forts.
and that neither the discipline, learning, nor books ought profited him.
Which a body cannot auerre by the holy scriptures, as David said, Holy
scripture Psalm. 119.
that he was quickened, comforted, and instructed, and that they gave light to
idiots. And there is another manner of efficacy, then the drougg which Homer
called Nepenthes, which he said was able to keep one from smelling ill savors,
and charm grief, Homers Nepenthes.
understanding thereby a discreate speaker, and one able to apply himself, to
the present affections, times and affairs: as more at large we have before
declared. Which makes me to disprove, the opinion of Seneca, Seneca and Horace
reproved.
which attributes it to god in that we live, but in that we live well to
Philosophy; which in deed ought rather to be referred to God the aucthor of
all good. Horace spoke as ignorantly, writing, that God gave him life and
riches, but that he furnished himself with a good and right understanding. For
God causes the eye to see, the ear to hear, and gives the right judgment,
both to will and to perform, Phylosophie the love of wisdom.
as S. Paul says, and he disposes the paths, and intentions of men. This
word Philosophy has been interpreted for the love of wisdom, and Aristotle
in his second book of his Metaphisicks, takes it for the knowledge of the
truth. Many have noted great variety, Aristotle reprehended.
ambiguitie and uncertainty in the doctrine of Aristotle, and that he was
ignorant of the most excellent things of nature, and used very necessary
demonstrations. The which men in time past well marked, picturing behind his
portracture a woman, which had her face covered with a veil, Physis.
named Physis, that is to say, Nature. And it is no marvel at al, if all of
them were not able to attain to those supernatural things, since that the
most excellent treasors of nature, were concealed from them. The which ought to
make us admyre at Gods speech in the five last Chapters of Job, discoursing of
the mouings of the heavens, Job.
force of the stars, of the earth founded upon the waters, and of the waters
hanging in the middle of the world: and sundry other wonders which a body may
perceive, able to declare the knowledge of man to be very full of ignorance.
The life of the Paganes.
S. Augustine compared the life of the ancient Pagans which were accounted so
wise and virtuous, to a wandering course, and their arguments to a glass which
is shining, but very brickle: Concluding it better to halt in the way of
truth, then to run lightly without it. He wrote likewise that their virtues
were impure, and imperfect; because there is nothing good, without the
sovereign good. And where there is defect of the knowledge of eternal life,
there virtue is false and men's intentions go awrie. The promises of God are
certain.
And there is no man that can have any quietness of conscience, but through the
promises of God (from which they were shut out,) and also by the inward
obedience, required of God, by trusting in him, by repentance, righteousness,
and justification of the faithful, by the free forgiveness of our sins, by
hope, patience, confidence in adversity, confession and giving of thanks, and
by referring al things to the glory of God, and to charity. And S. Chrisostom
upon the first to the Corinthians and fourth Homely, Chrysostom.
co^pareth the subtle disputations of the Philosophers to cobwebbes which
break and rent asunder with the wind, and speaking of a happy life, Romans 1.22.
were never able to attain unto it, and as S. Paul writes, professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools. And not without cause Socrates in
Plato, The lamentation of Socrates.
lamented that the Philosophers studied more the contemplation of nature, and
knowledge, then to live well, or give good precepts. And toward the end of the
treatise of his laws, as through a divine inspiration, he gives hope of the
coming of one more excellent, more redoubted, and more holy then any man,
whose office was to open the secret places of truth, and the hidden
fountains, who should be followed and honored of al men, which surely could not
be understood, but by our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the way, Job. 14.6
the truth and the life. S. Chrysostom sets down in the rank of
Philosophers, Aristides, Cato, Solon, Lycurgus, Epaminundas, and sundry other,
who besides their knowledge, were excellent in matters of state and
government, (as was our lawyer Vlpian) and studied more to do good to every
one, then to be conversant in contemplation. For the Sophisters counterfeit to
be wise, Sophisters.
and in deed their end is but glory, and proud boasting. And S. Augustine
thought that all Philosophers were rather given to the service and searching
out of the intelligences separate, Lib. 10. Cap. 2 de ciuit. Dei.
which we call angels and devils, and which they called gods and spirits, then
of the true God, albeit they confessed there was one only almighty, father of
the Gods and men. And it is easy to gather out of their writings, Against
Atheists and Epicures.
how they confessed one only God in three persons, the Father, the Son and
the holy ghost, and other Articles contained in the Apostles Creed, to convict
Atheists and Epicures withal.

CHAP. XX. Of disguisings done to Princes, and what is their duty for their
honor, and quiet of their subjects, and of the miseries of the wicked, of the
observation of ordinances, and of that which maintains or alters an estate.
PRinces were ordained of God, to be fathers, protectors, Why God ordained
princes.
and shephardes over the people committed to their charge, to serve to
maintain their liberty, and to defend them against all injuries, and to
show them good example, to entertain justice and peace, to cause virtue,
learning, sciences and good laws to flourish, to provide for the instruction
of youth, to esteem of the good, and chastise the wicked.

Plato did write, following the fixion of Homer, that children, Kings children.
born of Kings were composed of a precious mass, to be separate from the
common sort. And it is said of Scipio, Scipio.
and certain other great personages, that they were descended from a divine
race; because God gives particular graces to such as he sets over others.
Horace likewise named Kings Diogenes, that is to say, the generation of
Jupiter, and Diotrephes, nourished by Jupiter, and Aristes, of Jupiter, which
signifies as Plato interprets, the familiars, and disciple in politic
sciences. And Frederick is as much to say, as the k. of peace. And for as much
as Artaxerxes Mnemon, delighted in peace, was affable and virtuous, the rest of
the Kings of Persia since his time have been called by his name. And it is
incredible, how so many should fall headlong into so great dishonors and
misfortunes, as we have both seen and red of, had the truth been laid open
before them. It is written that K. Lewys the eleventh was wont to say, K.
Lewys. 11.
that he found every thing within his kingdom, but only one, which was truth.
K. Lewys the twelueth, permitted al commedians and stage players, to speak
freely and to reprehend such vices as were manifest, K. Lewys. 12.
to the end they might be amended: And said that for his own part he knew
many things by them, which he was not before witting of. Dyonisius the tyrant
of Sicille, being retired to Athens, Dyonisius the tyrant of Sicil.
after he was deprived of his kingdom bewailed the estate of Princes, but
especially, in that men never spoke freely unto them, and that the truth was
ever hidden and concealed from them. The Emperors Gordian the younger, and
Dioclesian, The complaint of Gordian and Dyoclesian Emperors.
made the very like complaint that every thing was disguysed and colored unto
them, and that flatterers cast dust before their eyes, making them believe, the
evil to be good. That they were often times cosened, and sold under hand;
that they put the sword into the hands of furious magistrates, and bestowed
states and honors upon unworthy, covetous, and lewd persons: That they were
caused to turn the day into night, and the night into day: That they were
altogether conversant, and brought up, in delicacies, huntings, and other
pastimes, whereby their minds might be turned from remembering that charge
which God had laid upon them: and all this were they brought to do, to the
end that such flatterers as were about them, might the better attain to the
depth of their devises: And that oftentimes they were but Emperors and Kings
in name, as if they had played their part but upon a stage, or had been
commedians. And that their counselors were the true actors, and reped all the
profit and honor. It is likewise written in the rest of Hester, Hester. 16.6.
that they which deceitfully abuse the simplicity and gentleness of Princes
with lying tales, make them selves partakers of innocent blood, and wrap them
selves in calamities, which can not be remedyed. Flatterers compared to the
Syrenes.
And flatterers have been compared to the Syrenes, who thorough their singing
entised all passengers upon the sea, that heard them to draw near unto them.
We may very well impute to such disguysinges, the great expenses which the
Emperoures Tiberius, Nero, Caligula, Commodus, Domitian, Heliogabalus, and
sundry others, have foolishlye spent under a color of liberality, and the
better to maintain their prodigalities, put to death and impouerished many: K.
Antiochus.
which prodigality we very well may term a kind of lying. King Antiochus in
hunting lost his way, and was constrained to retire to a poor Yeomans house of
the country, who not knowing told him all the faults that he, and his
favorites had committed: to whom at his return he declared, that he never
understood the truth until that night: and ever after he carried himself
most virtuously. We read of sundry our kings of France who have done the
like: and of some Emperors, who have disguised themselves, thereby the better
to understand what the people spoke of them. Eugenes pope
Platina writes of Pope Eugenes, how he sent certain round about the city,
to epsy what men most blamed either in him or his, K. Lewys the gross.
that it might be amended. King Lewys the Gross, which builded S. Victors
disguised himself often times, the better to be informed of the truth. And
king Lewys the 12. as Charlemagne, K. Lewys 12.
and Saint Lewys had done before him, took great pleasure to understand the
complaints of his subjects applying thereto such remedy as their case
required. And for this cause he obtained the name of father of the people, and
his memory is more famous to serve for an example to the posterity, then all
the conquestes and victories of other kings. Sundry of our kings in the
beginning were greatly blamed, for that they suffered themselves to be so
much governed by the principal of their court: and some have been resembled
to golden images, that are gilded and shining without, but within are full of
rust, cobwebbes and filthiness. For the crown does not take away the passions
nor grief of the spirits, Ptolome.
but rather does it diminish the true pleasure. As Ptolome seeing certain
fishers sporting themselves upon the sea shore, wished he were like one of
them, adding that monarchies are full of cares, fears, Charles the 4 and 5.
Seleucus.
mistrustes, and disguysed miseries. Which also Charles the 4. and 5. Emperors
were wont to say, desyring to lead a private life. Seleucus before that did
the like, adding that if he should cast his crown into the high way, there
would be none found, that would take it up, knowing the charge and griefs
that ever did accompany it. Adrian Pope,
And Pope Adrian said that he thought no estate so miserable nor so dangerous
as his own, and that he never enjoyed a better or more pleasant time, Traian
emperor.
then when he was but a simple monk: and Traian the Emperor wrote unto the
Senate of Rome, that having now tasted the cares and pains which the
imperial state led with it self, he did a thousand times repent that ever he
took it upon him. Homer. 2. iliad.
Homer fayneth all the gods to sleep except Jupiter, who was altogether exempt
from sleep. Saint Chrysostom upon the second to the Corinthians, An art of
great difficulty to command and rule well. Dioclesian.
and 15. homely, said that to govern and command well was the greatest and most
hard art of all, as his fault is more dangerous which guides the stern, then
his which holds the owers. It is written of Dioclesian that he was wont to
say before his Empire, that there was nothing so hard as to command well. Yet
many place therein their felicity, and acquit themselves with pleasure of the
charge which God has laid upon them. In my speech before I do not comprehend
the wicked and tyrannical Princes, The miserable life of tyrants and wicked
princes.
who as Tacitus writes in the life of Tiberius, are perpetually tormented and
torn a sunder in their consciences; yea and sundry of them have lamented the
infamy they should endure which they saw very well men would do unto them
after their death. And allege the saying of Plato, that if their souls could
be discovered, they should be seen full of stinching scarres, and torn in
pieces with a hidden iron that ever burns them. Wisd. 17.10.
And as it is written in the book of wisdom, It is a fearful thing when
malice is condemned by her own testimony and a conscience that is touched
does ever forecast cruel things. It is written of Nero and certain other,
that they were of an opinion, that the earth did open before them, and saw the
shadows of such as they had caused to die ready to torment them. Guichardin
writes of Alphonsus K. of Naples, Guichard lib. 1 of Naples.
that neither night nor day he could rest in his spirit, thinking the very
heavens and elements had conspired against him: that in sleeping the ghosts of
such as he had put to death seemed to appear unto him, and in the day thought
his subjects to rise to do vengeance upon him: which was the cause that he did
not abide the coming of the Frenchmen. Plutarke says that the souls of
Tyrants, are composed of arrogance and cruelty: Plutarque. Demosthenes.
and Demosthenes is of opinion, that they be enemies to liberty and laws. And
Artemidorus describes the visions, and fearful and dreadful dreams which
have affrighted the wicked. The which ought to move all Princes to fear God,
The duty of a good prince
to subject themselves unto the laws of nature, even as they desire the
obedience of their own subjects, procuring their good, unity and quiet,
revenging their injuries, charging the^ with as little as they may bestowing
their governments upon virtuous persons, giving good wages without selling of
offices, as the Emperors Alexander, Seuerus, Pertinax, sundry of our kings,
and diverse other have greatly recommended unto us. And Claudius the Emperor
was wont greatly to thank such as he had provided for offices, for that they
being men worthy and capable of them would accept them. It were also a very
great praise, if men would not so easily dispense with the holy ordinances,
and especially those that touch age, and forbid two of one parentage, Claudius
emperor. Dispensing with holy ordinances. Comment. lib. 7
to be of one chamber and bed, as also it is reported in the Commentaries of
Caesar that it was a matter straightly forbidden at Authun. Such ordinances
likewise as have been renewed through policy, the garments, banquetes, and
justice, would breed great quietness were they well observed. And if
according to the disposition of the law, for every matter contained in the
Kings letters, L. 5. Si contra ius.
which should not be found true, there were a good fine set, according to the
condition of those which so greatly abuse the favors of the Prince. And were it
not that I feared to offend such as reap profit and commodity by the seal, I
would desire that those restitutions and remedies which the law does give, L.
5. de Thesau. L. x. C.
might be accorded by the ordinary judges without letters. For as the Emperors
and lawyers have said what need one trouble a Prine, or be too importunate
upon him for that which the law of it self permits? And al policy tends
to a public profit as we have heretofore noted. It were likewise an
ordinance very laudable, that all offices were bestowed, by an election made
of three persons, to the most capable of which the king should give the estate
that is void without any money. Selling offices.
For the sale of offices is an occasion of sundry mischiefs, as Aristotle
declares in his Politicques.

There are likewise a great number, which following the first ordynaunces, are
very desirous to see those said offices and estates, to be once again
reduced to their ancient number, and what ever were superfluous to be
suppressed as near as possible might be, Suppressing of offices.
for that the over great number of Judges and governors (as Plato says) is
an occasion of great disorder. The King in like sort should ease himself of
many importunities, and great, if he would cause a role to be made, of such
benefices, offices, and charges, as are vacant, and within one month or a
little after they be void, to provide good servants and worthy members to
occupy the same. And he should deserve great praise, if he would cause his
places upon the frontiers, to be well furnished and fortifyed, Frontiers and
high vvayes
and the high ways to be amended and repaired: as the said Emperor Traian
did, and other Lords, and commonwelthes. And should greatly comfort his
subjects, Superfluous ordinances.
if he would cause all superfluous ordinances to be rejected, and which are no
more in use, and leave a little volume of such as are necessary. And for as
much as the offices of Marshall chief, and governor, require a far more
great wisdom, and experience, the faults which they should commit being of so
great importance, Offices requiring great wisdom
they ought not to be bestowed upon young men that are not experienced, and of
whose virtue there is no further proof then favor, but upon well tried
Captains, and men of years. As also he ought to take the like order, in the
principal offices of judgment, and among the generals of revenues, of the
justice of Monyes, procurers general, and Commissioners of war. And above
all things Princes ought to measure their actions by the standard of their
laws to be gracious, maintayners of godliness, justice, and faith, pitiful
to the oppressed, modest in prosperity, patient and constant in adversity,
courteous unto the good, and terrible unto the wicked, to flatterers, tale
caryers, and coyners of new inventions, clean abolishing all occasion, that
might tend to move sedition, trouble, and dissension, matters leading men to
vproares, Equality to be observed.
arms, and partialities clean dismembring the dew obedience we owe unto our
sovereign. Aristotle comprehends all the public vices under this word
inequality, which seuereth the hearts of the people: therefore it is
requisite a geometrical equality be kept to meat with such miscontentmentes:
for if the entreatie which is made between diverse persons, be temperate and
well proportioned, then peace ensues thereon: if it be dissolute and out of
proportion, wars, commotions and dissentions arise thereupon. 2. Cor. 15.
And albeit there be no agreement between light and darkness, Edicts of
religion made for necessity.
nor between Christ and Belial, as S. Paul writes in 2. to the Corinthians,
and that every good man ought to desire a unity in religion: yet do I
greatly commend their wisdom, who seeing the urgent necessity, that France
has of a long and quiet peace, (to the which the King has now guided it, as
a ship in main sea often times sore bruised with storms and tempests) are
not of opinion it should be again put to the mercy and injury of the waves,
and the rage of bloystering winds of partialities and divisions, which so long
time have tossed too and fro this state, nor that the edictes should be
broken, having so many times been sworn unto and published, after having
taken the advice of the whole body of the Kings privy counsel, and of the
principal soueraygne courts of the whole Realm, as a man may say, besides
an infinite number of reasons founded, upon that, which the Emperors
Constantine, Licinius, Nerua, Gratian, and sundry other Emperors have done,
in respect of the necessity of the time, thereby to be the better able to
establish peace, and quietness, and so better preserve their own estate.
Christians in Turkey.
I leave the Turk which does not at all enforce the consciences of the
Christians: yea and some religious persons, in the holy mount aunciently called
Athos, and near unto Constantinople receive yearly alms from him. The
Princes of Italy support the Jews rank enemies to our religion. In Polognia,
both the Greekish and Romish religion, has each had their course time out of
mind: yea and in sundry cities as well of Germany as Swyserlande, there be
Churches of two religions, and since certain years, the nobility make
profession there of the religion of the Protestants. The Emperor Charles the
fifth, so puissant, and wise, after sundry deliberations had of this matter,
The Edict of the emperor Charles the 5. at Ausbourgh.
agreed and gave consent by an order made at Ausbourge in the year 1530 to the
peace named of religion. And in the year 1555. a perpetual edicte was to that
end established. Ferdinando.
Ferdinando his successor endured the change of religion in diverse provinces
of his kingdom of Bohemia, and certain places of Austria. Maximilian.
And since Maximilian his son, Philibert D. of Savoy.
permitted the like to his nobles and gentlemen of Austria, as likewise did the
late Duke of Sauoye to diverse of his subjects. And the counsel of the King
of Spain so greatly Catholic was yet constrained to suffer the like in
sundry places in Flanders. And in the time of our savior and before, there
were in Jerusalem sundry sects, whereof some clean impugned the principal
articles of our faith. Demosthenes.
Whereupon I am not of the mind to found any certain rule, knowing we ought
to live according unto laws, not examples as Demosthenes was wont to say: but
considering the mischeifes and disorders of times, and that the sweetness of
religion and justice is impatient of cruelty, of the excess and unworthiness
of troubles, having too feeble a voice to be understood, amidsts the horrible
clatteringes of blouddie weapons as Marius said, I desire that they may not
stir up a mischief now lying quiet, and that each one praise the king,
for the constancy and equality which he has kept in his promises, rather
attending a more mild and fit remedy for a greater unity, Acts. 5.38.
esteeming the counsel which Gamaliel gave to the Pharisees as true, that no
force nor practice of man can destroy what is of God, and if it be of men it
will come to naught and perish of it self. The laws of the twelve tables
required that the safety of the people, were the most sovereign law, and
esteemed that patron as abominable, that would defraude his subject or freed
bondsman. So ought subjects to be entreated without oppression. Princes ought
likewise to beware of two things which Aristotle in his Politiques says
subuerteth Empires, Two things which subvert empyres
to wit, hatred and disdain, rather making themselves to be beloved and
esteemed, and abstayning from all kind of injustice and violence, and
whatsoever else deserves blame. As the Emperors Titus, Nerua, and sundry
other boasted of themselves, that they were able to say, that they ever behaved
themselves toward their subjects, even as they would have their subjects
do toward them selves if they were in their place. Pensions to Strangers.
And to preserve peace among subjects, they ought to take order that every
one be occupied and follow his vocation honestly, and leave to give excessive
pensions to strangers and unworthy subjects, following the maxim of
Alexander Seuerus, Alexander seuerus.
that men are not to be nourished which are neither necessary nor profitable
for a common wealth. And Anthony the Emperor gave charge, Traynes of princes.
his train by no means should press the people. Galba often said that a
Prince ought to provide that they of his court should offer wrong to no man,
Galba.
and that their gardes that offended herein should be rigorously punished, or
they which in hunting would mar either corn or fruits. Seneca.
And as Seneca says, the good renown of servants increases the glory of
their masters. It were also to be desired that the ordinance of taxes were
observed, and that the men of arms, and soldiers were well paid, without
marringe of the plain country, attending other means of remedy, until they
be clean removed. Cassiod. lib. 4.
For as king Theodoric wrote, the army which is not entertained with pay,
furniture and munition can by no means keep discipline: as likewise Alexander
Seuerus the Emperor was wont to say. Tiberius.
The Emperor Tiberius the 2. accounted for counterfaite coin that money which
was levied with the tears and cryings out of the people. And Pertinax the
Emperor was highly extolled for his liberality, Pertinax.
and for that he did abolish all taxes, customs, subsedies, and other imposts,
which he said were the invention of tyrany, and restored all to the former
liberty. It were also a very great commodity if the matter whereof they make
money, were not so mingled, Money.
but either were pure gold, silver, or brass. For the delaying is a most
pernicious invention, as it is in like sort to have so many officers about the
mint: Above al things the key of the revenues ought to be put in suer
handling. The last will and testament of the King Saint Lewys may not be here
omitted, The testament of K S. Lewys
in which he commanded his son and successor, to preserve the good laws, to
be charitable toward the poor, to take great regard, that he might have wise
counselors, and of ripe age, in no wise to sell his estates, that he should
make choice of servants, prudent and peaceable, not covetous, given to speak
ill or quarellers: that he minister justice alike to all, thorough which Kings
reign: that he should not be too light of belief, nor raise taxes, or releife
of his subjects without very urgent necessity, the which we may say to be
able to support an infinite number of charges, and business, the better to
administer justice, to preserve the public weal from all dangers, to
suppress the wicked, and maintain all his country and subjects in
quietness, and to be able to pay what is dew to strangers and his own
subjects: which cannot be brought to pass without great means and expenses.
Julian the emperor pardons the Alexandrians
It is written of Julian the Emperor that he pardoned the people of
Alexandria, who had trayled their Bishop thorough the city and killed him;
because that he had given counsel to Constance his predecessor, to raise
certain new taxes upon them. The bulle of the supper
By the bull of the supper on holy thursday, the Pope does excommunicate all
such as levy new subsides, or exact what is not their dew. I will not in like
sort pass over with a dry pen, the remembrances which Basil the Emperor of
Constantinople left unto Leo his son, The instructions Basil gave to his
son Leo emperor
that he should be a virtuous Emperor, not becoming slave to his own
affections, that he should remember what sins himself committed against God,
to the end he might pardon such as were committed against his person: that he
should be more careful to adorn his words with good manners, then his manners
with words: that he should give himself to learning which beutifieth the
spirit, showing himself worthy to be the Image, and lifetenant of the king of
heaven. For subjects rule their manners according to the pattern of their
Prince. That he should get nothing unjustly for fear of loosing all, that he
should be courteous, gracious and grave; that he should banish from his court
all lewd counselors, such as charge the people with new inventions, that
his life should serve for an unwritten law, that he be such toward his own
subjects as he would require of God to be toward him, that he manifest
not him self either to sorrowefull or to ioyefull, that by no means he sell
his offices: for he that sells them makes sale of his own subjects.
Agesilaus contrary to many Tyrants.
Me thinks we ought in no wise to forget the commendation which Xenophon
gave to King Agesilaus, comparing him as contrary to many tyrauntes, that he
ever measured his expenses with his reuenewe, fearing least for the furnishing
thereof, he should do ought that were unjust: greatly delighting to see his
subjects rich, and that they being valiant, he commanded over valiant people:
that he esteemed it a greater praise, not to be overcome with money, pleasures,
and fear, then to take by assault most strong cities: that he showed himself
much to the people, and courteously entreated every one that had any
supplycation or suite to make unto him, and as soon as he was able gave order
for the dispatch of whatsoever was proposed unto him with reason. The holy
ordinance of Antony emperor.
The ordinance of Anthonye the Emperor, was holy for his time, that no tribute
should be exacted without the consent of the Senate and the people, and also
that it should not be employed to any use but by their especial authority.
For there must be a Geometrical proportion kept between the King and the
people. And when he would wrest all unto himself, it is as the Emperors
Traian and Adrian were wont to say, The oath the emperors tak at their
coronation.
that when the spleen is swollen, all the rest of the members wax dry. Among
the oaths which the Emperors make at their coronation, one is that they shall
lay no tax or tribute without the consent of the estates of the Empire. The
which the kings of Polognia, Hungary, Inglande, and Danemarc, do in like sort.
Thence proceeded the ordinance made by Philip de Valois, Procurers general.
and other of our Kings. And if such as are charged by virtue of their office,
to see the buildinges of Churches to be repaired, the poor to be well used, to
hinder the excessive fellings of Timber, to cause the good laws to be put in
execution, to hold the Mercurials, to control each one, would perform their
duty every thing would prosper better. Conduits of cities.
The law which Titus Liuius, and Plutarke writes was practiced at Rome, were
very profitable, to be put in ure within the city of Paris, that all
fountaynes which were drawn into particular houses, thorough favor,
corruption or otherwise, might be clean stopped, and placed in public
places, or out of the same houses, that particular persons might not be able to
withdraw the water, in abusing the public benefit as they do. Guardes not
necessary for good Kings.
The saying of King Agis Agasicles, and Titus the Emperor is worthy to be well
considered, that a Prince may easily reign without any guarde or weapons, when
he commands over his subjects, as a father over his children, vsinge them
withal meekensse, sweetness and clemency. For if a Prince tend to naught
else, then to maintain him self, and bring his people into slavery, there is
no more any name left of city or people as Saint Augustine says. And it is
not enough that a Prince knows what establysheth, preserves, L. 4. c. 4 and
l. 9 c. 21. (...) ciuit. Dei.
or destroys seignuries, if he do not withholde or reiecte away clean the
cause, and prevent troubles, or if they do chance to happen presently quench
them, with small damage. It were besides to be desired that they had a care to
the mayntenaunce of godliness and religion, of hospitales and schools, K.
Philip de Valois.
and that they put in execution what King Philip de Valois said to the
Archbyshoppes, Bishops, and Prelates, of his Realm, whom he had caused to
assemble together: that if they would correct what were worthy of
amendment, he would alter nothing in the state of the Church: but if they
differred to do it, he would remedy it in such sort, as God thereby should
be better served, the people contented, and the nobility (which so much
complained thereof,) without cause given of offense. It would also breed a
very great benefit, if according to the ordinance of Charlemagne, Lewys 12.
Otho the first of Councels, Decrees, Cannons, and the advice of sundry good
Popes, Divines, and Doctors, they would institute into benefices the most
learned men, and of best life, and which might be found more agreeable to
Ecclesiastical functions and to the people, not depending of one alone which
cares for naught but to put in his coffers the yearly reuenewe, which
appertains according to the Cannons, and meaning of such as were founders to
other as well as to the poor, and by this reformation would justice be
maintained, and a better order established thorough out. For if the dewtie of a
Magistrate be to see that the people live well and virtuously, Arist. lib. 3
c. 6
(according to Aristotle his opinion in his Politiques) religion is one of the
greatest virtues. As in like sort Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Solomon, Aza,
Iosophat, Ioab, Ezechias, Josias, and other, greatly trauayled to refine the
service of God. And Saint Ambrose writes that Theodosius when he dyed,
Theodosius.
had a greater care of the Church, then of his sickness. And Socrates in the
Proeme of the fifte book of the Ecclesiastical history, shows the great
care that the Emperors ever since they became Christians took, touching
Ecclesiastical affairs. And the Divines are of opinion that the name of
Melchisedech King of Salem, shows what kings ought to be, to wit, kings of
justice and peace. And the word Abimilech signifies my father the king.
Melchisedec. Abimilec.
Sundry have likewise wished, for the quiet of the commonwealth, that Princes
would often set before their eyes the causes, by means whereof an estate is
turned topsie turuie, and changed, according to the rules in the holy
scripture, and hystories, thorough vice, hatred which God carries to impiety,
idolatry, injustice, The causes of the alteration of states.
tyranny, sorcerie and whoredom. And often times the envy of such as
govern, their ambition, desire of revenge, choler, rashness, obstinacy,
despite, covetousness, trust in their own strength, accompanied with
hautinesse, foolish imitation and curiosity, corrupts their counselles, and
provoke them to stir up out of season, what they should let lie in quiet.
And we in our own time have seen, what troubles have ensued hereon. For which
a good Prince ought to provide: and if he chance to forgette him self, he
ought to be brought back again, The Condition of princes uncertain
thorough the gnawinges and bytinges of the sharp teeth, and smarting pricks
of his conscience. And he ought well to weigh the threatninges contained and
set forth in the holy scripture, and that which Seneca writes, that there is
no tempest upon the sea so soddaine, nor wave that follows one an other
sooner, then the condition of Princes is variable, for that they are subject
to dreadful faules and chaunges. Psalm. 107.40
And the Psalmist says, Job. 12.18.
that the Lord powers contempt upon Princes, and causes them to err in
desearte places out of the way. The which Job sets forth more at large.
And the alterations which we see happen in our age in so many countries, might
serve for a notable table to behold the judgments of God, clean abolyshinge
whole empires for cause of our sins. Deuteronomy. 18 11
And God declared that he cast the people out of the land of Palestina, for
the sorceries which they used. And threatened that he would not only root out
sorcerers, Leuit. 20.6.
but those likewise that suffers them to live. And in Jeremy he says: Ier.
15.4.
that he will scatter them in all kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasses
for that which he did in Jerusalem. Which ought to move all Princes to detest
them, and cause them to be punished according to the law of God. Sundry
histories do witness that upon the image of Sennacharib in Egypt was
written, Learn by me to fear God.

CHAP. XXI. That Princes ought to have about them good counselors, which may
not spare to tell them the truth, and that their life ought to serve as a rule
and instruction, to their subjects not to grant to any unjust thing, of
excessive gifts, an advertisement to such as are in favor, of warnings, and
that in all actions of importance one ought to take council, without trusting
to his own sufficiency.
MAlice and vice, taking their full swyng, Tirannical License
through the carier, of the power, and liberty, which wicked Princes yield
unto them, do push forward every violent passion, making every little choler
occasioned upon some false report, to turn anon either to murder or
banishment: and every regard, and love, to a rape or adultery: and covetousness
to confyscation. The sight of what is precious, causes a mischeuous desire of
making war, and is the occasion that a million of swords are naked,
Flatterers of Court Micheas 2.3.
which peace would keep within the scabbard. The importunity of a flatterer
drives away a good counselor, a light belief or suspicion, causes the
innocent often times to loose his life, as the Prophet Mycheas describes.
Through inequality, injustice, or ambition, an entry is made to seditions and
troubles. And a wicked counsel causes the ruin of a whole estate, and the
order of justice, and affairs is clean turned vpside down, and as Isocrates
writes, the amities of Tyrants, through a false report, are often turned into
most deadly enmities. They proceed rather with a headines, then counsel,
without resisting their appetites, they are insolent and impatient, imagining
that with a look they are able to remedy al hindrances, and to surmount the
nature of things, not taking counsel of wisdom and reason, but of their
own will, their words ever differing from their works, and preferring profit
before says. Caligula the Emperor, Caligula his vvishe.
wished that all the people of Rome had but one head, that he might cut it off
at a blow. And one day having two Senators at dinner with him, that asked him
what made him to laugh, it is answered he, because in the twinkling of an
eye, I am able to hang you both. The which other Emperors both have said,
and put as much in execution. And as Saluste writes, Tyrants rather suspect
the good then the wicked, and stand in fear of such as are virtuous, and are
many. As Horace (after other historiographers) recites of one Dionisius a
Tyrant, Horat. ode. 2. lib. 3. Dyonisius. Damocles.
that he caused a friend of his to sit, in a place abounding with all kind of
delicacies and delights, but over his head he had a naked sword hanging by a
threede, thereby to show him the estate in which all tyrants stood. The
Emperor Alexander Seuerus did as it were the like, Seuerus. Ouinius.
to a delicate Senator named Ouinius. And in truth, if justice, reason, laws,
and the fear of God, did not conteyne, and keep within bounds such power
and might, and that they were not accustomed to demand account of themselves,
condemnations would go before profes, and all justice, policy, Varus.
and order should lie under feet. Varus the Emperor was wont to say after
Marius in Saluste, and diverse other of old time, that it was a most hard matter
for one in great power and authority to temper himself, or not to be
corrupted, and to put a bridle to his desires. 1. Sam. 8.11.
Herodotus shows how easily royal government is degenerated into tyranny,
(whereof Samuel advertised the people of GGD so plainly) by the example of
Deioces, Deioces.
who being greatly renowned and loved of every one, for his virtue and
justice, was choosen as Bayleife among the Medes, and in the end crowned
their King: and to the end he should have greater authority, and be the
better able to maintain justice, and to oppose himself to any harm, they
gave him a guarde, and a very strong place of defense. But he seeing
himself so assuredly establyshed, changed his manners clean according to the
fashion of tyrauntes, and thought of nothing else but how he might be
revenged, and contemned and oppressed every one, Theodosius.
for his own greatness and pleasure. And not without cause Theodosius the
Emperor exhorts his children Arcadius, and Honorius, to put a bridle to such
licentiousness, as never regarded what was just, and to moderate their first
motions and choler, without trusting too much to fortune, which is like unto a
glass, the more it is shining, the more is it brickle. Wherefore Plato,
Fortune like a glass --
Xenephon, Aristotle and Plutarke, counseled all good Princes to provide about
them men learned, well advised, modest, and of good understanding to confer
with, and to understand of them what their dewtie is. Isocrates wrote unto
Nicocles that he should procure friends, Isocrates.
not such as should be ever ready to show him pastime, but such as should
assist him in well governing of his kingdom, and that ever would tell him the
truth. And he adds that it is a greater felicity to obey a good King then
to raygne, Theopompus made answer unto him, Theopompus.
that demanded how a King with safety might govern his kingdom, in giving
liberty unto his friends frankly to speak the truth, and in taking heed that
he oppress not his subjects. Plutark shows that Philosophers ought
especially to converse with Princes, alleging the answer of Solon, Solon.
to him which said that one ought not to approach near Princes except he
purpose to do al things to plese the^; but contrariwise says he you ought not
to be about the^, except you ever tell the^ the truth. As he did in visiting K.
Craesus. And Plato in Sicilie to Dionisius and Dion. Philostratus recites in
the life of Apollonius that when Titus returning from Judea was invested in the
Empire, Titus. Apollonius.
he required the said Apollonius, to give him certain politic instructions,
the better to be able to govern his Empire: to who^ he answered that he would
give him a certain disciple of his, that should teach him the manner a good
Prince ought to use. And being demanded what qualities he had, He is (says he)
a man frank of speech, that will not hold his peace for fear of any when it
should be time to speak, Cinike.
and you shall find in him such a courage and virtue, as Diogenes the Cinike
had, that is to say a Dog lover of mankind: and this dog shall be capable of
reason, that for your sake will bark against any other, and against you to, if
you do ought worthy of blame ever for all that using prudence and discretion,
and having regard to the time and season when he ought to perform his duty.
Then Titus prayde him he would with speed bestow that dog upon him, that
was so compagnable and loyal, to whom he would give leave not only to bark
when he should do ought worthy of reprehension, but also to bite him, if he
saw him do any thing unworthy his authority. He likewise never used such
violence, cruelty, or tyranny as did his brother Domitian. For in truth when
the people of Rome and other nations, People yealding their right.
yielded the sovereign power and right which they had unto Monarchs, they
never meant to put their liberty into their hands that would rather use violence
and passion then reason and equity, but to yield themselves to the tuition of
such a one, as would govern according to laws, reason, and justice. And it is
not possible that this first ordinance could be made without the consent of the
subjects, for otherwise it could not be grounded upon a lawful Empire or
kingdom, but upon an unlawful and tyrannical usurpation, and it is
necessary that such a consent should retain the nature of a contract in good
faith, and a bond counterchangable. As we see it in like sort practiced at
this day, in the greatest part of kingdoms and Empires that are in
Christendom, that it is the only foundation which mainteyneth them, and as
Plutarke writes the posts and pillars which uphold an estate. The oath
princes take at their coronation.

The cause of the creation of kings.


Neither are Princes able without necessity to dispense with the oath they
take at their coronation and with the obligation which they owe to God, and
their subjects. And according as Aristotle, Herodotus, Tacitus, Demosthenes,
and Cicero have written, the first souerainitie proceeded from the good will
and well liking of such, as for their commodity quiet, and suertie, submitted
themselves to such as excelled in heroical prowes, the better to be able to
maintain their civil society thorough laws. And that he, in whom was not
found, the cause of this original and image of safety, justice, clemency,
and divine bounty, was a person unworthy of such honor, causing an infection
to the body of the whole public weal. And most notable is the saying of king
Cyrus, that it appertayned to none to command, but such as excelled their
subjects in bounty and goods of the mind. The great King of Sparta Agesilaus,
Agesilaus.
answered those that so highly commended the magnificence and greatness of
the K. of Persia, Wherefore is he greater then I, except he be more just then
I? For a king ought to cause him self to be loved and admired of his
subjects, thorough the virtuous examples of his good life. And Plutarke in the
life of Pirrhus writes that the Kings took an oath that they should govern
according to their laws, and that in so doing the people would obey the^.
Kings given of God. Dan. 2.21. Pro. 8.16.
Now we must needs confess that they are given of God, who (as Daniel
witnesses) establishes, and puts down Kings. And Jeremiah writes that he
will bestow kingdoms on whom it him best likes. And God says in the
Proverbs, Through me kings raygne, Job. 13.18. 2. Chron. 9.8.
and Princes judge the earth; and if they do not he threatens them in Job,
that he will loose their celer, and guirde their loins with a girdle. And the
Queen of Saba said to Solomon, that God had set him in his throne as King,
insteede of the Lord God, to execute judgment and justice. The which more
plainly Solomon speaks in his book of wisdom, 1. Sam. 9.2. Sa. 6 and 21.
1. Chron. 19. 2. Kings 19.11.20.35. Polit. lib. 5. chapter 21. and 3 chapter 7.
Lord thou have choosen me to rule over thy people and to judge thy sons and
daughters. And the people is called the heritage of the Lord, and the King the
governor of this heritage, the guide and light of Gods people. And Aristotle
in the fifth book of his Politiques shows, that kings often times took
certain officers to contain them in their duty, as did the Ephores about
the kings of Sparta. The which Caesar declares was greatly observed among the
Gaulois, yielding an example of Ambiorix and Vercingentorix. The oath the
greatest part that the Christian kings took was, The oath of Christian princes.
I will minister law, justice, and protection aright to every one. And Zonarus
wrote after Xenephon, that the kings of Persia showed them selves more subject
to laws, the^ Lords, Zonar. lib. 3. cap. 11.
and had more fear and shame to break the laws, then the people had to be
punished what they had offended. And God instructing Joshua what he should do,
Joshua 1.8.
above all things commanded him, that the book of the law should not depart
out of his mouth, but that he should meditate therein day and night, that he
might observe and do according to all that is written therein. For then should
he make his way prosperous and have good success. Then it follows in the
text that the people promised to obey him in all. As Xenophon writing of the
commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians says that monthly the kings did swear to
guide themselves according to the laws, Kings of Lacedemon.
and the Ephores took oath in the peoples behalf, that upon that condition they
would maintain the^. Romans 13.1.
And S. Paul says that every power is of God, whose servants they are for the
benefit of their subjects, Deuter. 17.
consequently they are bound to follow his will and rule given by Moses. And the
means which are of succession or election, depend of the divine providence
which causes the^ to prosper. 2. Sam. 6.
David humbled himself, to what was his duty and office, making alliance with
the deputies of the people, and describes the duty of a good king in the
72.82. and 101. Psalms. And whilst he, Solomon, Ioas, Ezechias, and other
lived well, they continually prospered, but falling from that fell into many
miseries. Pericles.
Pericles was commended for that as often as he put on his gown, he said unto
himself, remember that thou do command over a free nation, over Athenians,
and over Greeks. The which christian Princes have more occasion to speak and
observe. Agapet said of Justinian, that he maystred his pleasures, Justinian
being adorned with the crown of temperaunce, and clad with the purple of
justice. And Ammian writes, that a Kingdom or Dukedom is naught else, then
the care of an others safety: and that where the law does not govern, there
ruin is at hand. As Antiochus said to his son Demetrius, Antiochus.
that their kingdom was a noble slavery. And Plutarke in the life of Nicias
recites the saying of Agamemnon in Euripides.

We live to outward show, in greatness, state, and might,
Yet in effect we are you know, but peoples servants right.
Titus Liuius writes, that the Carthaginians punished their rulers, when they
followed any evil counsel, albeit it succeeded well: the which was long time
observed in the kingdom of Persia. For as Brutus wrote unto Cicero, a man once
placed in great dignity has more to do to mainetaine the grace and reputation
which he has already gotten, then he which does but begin to get. Even as
King Philip answered Arpalus, K. Philip.
who greatly did importunate him to reuerse a suite that a kinsman of his had
in the law: it were better that thy Cosen, in the estate which he is in, be
defamed through his own outragiousnesse, then that I, who am a King
commanding over so great a country, should give cause to my subjects to
speak evil of me, for having done so great injustice either in favor of him
or thee. K. Artaxerxes.
As also the great King Artaxerxes, gave a great sum of money to a gentleman
of his chamber, in steed of a suyte he besought at his hands which well he
might not grant, saying that for giving that he should not be the less rich;
but if he had yielded to what he unjustly craved, he should have been less
esteemed, and not have performed the duty of a good King, The life of princes
a rule.
which above all things ought to have in price, justice, and equity. For as
Pliny declared unto Traian his Master. The life of a Prince is a censure, that
is to say, the rule, the square, the frame, and form of an honest life;
according to which their subjects frame the manner of their life, and order
their families: and rather from the life of Princes, do subjects take their
pattern and examples, Isocrates.
then from their laws. This was it which moved Isocrates to write unto
Nicocles, it serves to prove that thou have well governed, if thou see thy
subjects become more modest and rich under thy Empire. For the subjects
follow the example of their Princes, as certain flowers turn according to
the Sun. And Theodoric the K. of the Goths wrote unto the Senate of Rome, In
Cassiodorus
that the course of nature would fail, before the people would be other then
their Prince. Claudian.
And Claudian was of opinion, that the edictes and laws were not so well able
to amend and temper the manners and hearts of the people, Hos. 4.9. Xenophon.
as did the good life of their gouerners. And in Hosea it is written that there
shall be like people, like Priest. Xenophon in the eight of his Pedion, writes
that subjects are as it were enforced to do well, when they see their Princes
temperate, not given to injustice and for the most part fashion themselves
according to their moulde. For this cause great personages have the more need
to have good counselors about them, whose understanding, ^ib. 2. Polit. chapter
12.
mouths, eyes, and ears, may serve them, to make them better able to acquit
themselves of their charge, as Aristotle says. And it were to be wished,
Plynye. Q. Cursius.
that they were not corrupt, but well remember what Pliny the younger wrote unto
Traian, that a Prince ought only to will that which he may. Quintus Cursius
writes, that a Prince rather ought to employ his time, and to spend in
getting and maintaining a wise counseler about him then in conquests. Anthony
Anthony the Emperor only amended his manners, by the report of those as he
had sent about the city to understand what was said of him. Theodoricus 2
And the Emperor Theodosius the second, copyed out with his own hand all the
new testament, and red every day one Chapter, and made his prayers, A landable
custom of S. Lewys, and other kings.
and soung Psalms together with his wife and sisters. And many have commended
the custom of diverse of our Kings, and especially saint Jews, who when they
rose out of their bed, kneeled down, thanking God, that he had preserved them
that night, beseeching him to pardon them their sins, for his mercies sake,
and to continue them in his holy custody and favor, to the end that without
offending of him, they might employ all the day to his honor, and acquit
themselves of the charge which he had bestowed on them. And they caused a
Chapter of the Bible or some other good book to be red while they apparelled
them selves, the better to teach them to govern. For to rule is as much to
say, Deuter. 17.19
as to amend what is amiss or awrie. And in Deutronomie it is commanded the
King to have the book of the law, Job. 8.8. Pro. 1.35. and 11.14. and 24 6.
Council.
and to read therein all the days of his life, as above we have noted was
enjoined to Joshua. And it is written in Job that we should enquire of the
former age and search of our fathers, because of our ignorance. And in the
Proverbs, Where no Council is, the people fall: but where many Counselors
are, there is health. And that health comes from many Counselors, but good
council proceeds from God. And we see by sundry histories, that such
Emperors as have contemned the Senate, have had a very evil end. And that
some of our Kings, though they were but of mean capacity, yet so guyded
themselves thorough Counsel, that they achieved great matters, And Thucidides
called them bondmen, slaves, Thucidides.
and of very base minds, that were led by lewd Council. Edward King of
England, said of King Charles the fifth, surnamed the wise, that he feared
more the learning, K. Charles the wise.
and remembrances of that wise King, then he did the puissant armies of his
predecessor. And K. Lewys the eleventh, said it was as much as to fish with a
hook of gold, to send an army beyond the mountains, K. Lewys 11.
where the loss is assuredly greater then can be the profit. Agamemnon said in
Homer, Princes, who ever had especial care to retain about their persons such
as were the vvisest to counsel them the better in the managinges of the
affairs of their kingdoms.
that he had rather choose two like unto his old counselor Nestor, then so
many Achilles or Ajax. Darius King of the Persians and Medes, made great
account of Daniel. Pericles had about him Anaxagoras, Cato, Anthenodorus,
Scipio, having in charge, and being appointed to go look and sound out,
what justice reigned through the world, presently sent to fetch Panetius, and
oftentimes served his turn through the council of Lelius. Julius Caesar took
advise of Aristo: Augustus, of Mecenas: Pompeye, of Cratippus. Nero, all the
five first years of his Empire, wisely conducted him self through the counsel
of Seneca. Marcus Antonius had Apollodorus: Demetrius, Crates, of whom he was
wont to say, that he conned small thanks to his business, and affairs,
which so much hindered him from sooner having attained to knowledge. Pyrrhus
said likewise of Cineas his councellor, that he more esteemed his eloquence,
then the valor of all his Captains. Alexander the great, had in high
estimation Anaxarques and Aristotle: to whom he confessed, that he owed no
less unto them then to his own father, having of the one received life, but
of the other to be able to live well, and that the best munition, weapons, and
maintenance of war that he had were the discourses he had learned of
Philosophy, and the precepts touching the assurance of fearing naught, and
the diligence, in differring nothing that was to be done. Cyrus used the
counsel of Xenophon, Craesus King of Lydia sought by great presents to recover
Anacharsis, and that little which he learned of Solon, saved his life. And
Dionisius the tyrant of Syracusa had Aristippus and Plato: Ptolomeus Stilpo and
Aristophanes: Antigonus, Bias, Attalus and Lycon: Marcus Aurelius Apollonius.
Mithridates, so far adored the said Plato, that he caused his image to be
erected to do him the greater honor. And Antiochus marueilously mourned for
the death of Zeno, Platoes image exected.
because he said he spoke his mind unto him more frankely then did either
Byas or Demetrius. Epaminundas was instructed by Lysias: Theodosius councelled
by S. Ambrose.
Agesilaus by Xenophon. Theodosius the Emperor was greatly assisted by the
council of Saint Ambrose, and learned of him to be ready to hear what any
one had to declare unto him, and to repeat over all the letters of the
Alphabet, before he should command any thing, when he found himself moved
with choler, which before that time Augustus was warned of, who one day being
in his throne ready to condemn certain persons, the said Mecenas not being
able to come near him for the press, cast unto him a little scroll wherein
was contained these words: Arise Hangman, which caused him to arise and go
away, without further execution of his passion. The said Theodosius likewise,
L. digna vo. ^. A wise prince renders him self subject to laws. Zaleueus.
and Valentinian wrote in a certain law that it was a speech worthy of a
prince, and a royal majesty, to say he was a subject, and submit himself to
the laws: because the authority of a Prince depends on the preservation of
justice. The which Valerius recyteth of Zaleueus the governor of Locres, who
caused one of his own eyes, and another of his sons, who was found in
adultery, to be put out, for that the people so much besought him, that he
would not put out both his sons eyes, according to the law. Charondas.
Manlius
The like Diodorus witnesses to have been done by Charondas and Titus Liuius
by Manlius, who caused his own son to be beheaded, the better to maintain
the discipline of war. We read likewise, that Antigonus made answer to
one of his councillors, K. Antigonus
who said it was lawful for Kings to do what best listed themselves: Nay,
that which you say I think be very true among Kings of barbarous nations,
nourished in ignorance, and void of learning, and which know not the
difference between honor and dishonor, between equity and inequitie:
Nothing lavvfull that is not honest.
but to us who have an understanding both political and moral, thorough the
instinct of learning, capable of wisdom and justice, having ever been
thereto brought up and instructed, there is nothing honest and lawful that is
not so in his own nature. The which in like sort Traian learned of Pliny,
Plato. Tacitus lib. 3.
and to guide himself in such manner as though he should be ever ready to
render an account of all his actions. The which Plato sets down in the
fourth of his laws. Tacitus discoursing of the original of the civil law
says, that Seruius the third King of Romans established many laws, to
which the Kings were subject, Diod. lib. 2. c, 2.
and Diodorus recyteth of the kings of Egypt, that without any dispensation
they executed and followed the ordinances of the laws. For as Cicero said in
his oration for Cluens, the heart, understanding, Good laws are the souls of
common vvealths.
and counsel in a public weal, are within the good laws, and ordinances: and
a political estate is not able to use his own parts without laws, no more
then the body of man can exercise his due operations, without reason and
understanding, nor the hogshed keep his liquor, if you take away the hoopes.

Traian. Faithful and true friends most profitable.
The said Emperor Traian highly esteemed those frinds and counselors, who^ he
found true, faithful and loyal. And when he was desired to tell how he made so
good choice. Marry quoth he, because it was ever my good fortune, to choose
those that were neither covetous nor liars: because that they in whom
covetousness and lying have once taken deep root, can never perfectly love.
Princes ought in like sort to consider the malignitie and lack of wisdom in
such as they put in trust under them, who either through negligence not
attending their business, Naughty and foolish ministers to princes very
pernicious.
or for lack of capacity do not discern of themselves the good counsel from
the wicked. And it were necessary that they should not be permitted to
receive any pension or benefit from any other Prince or Lord. One of the
Hebrews which translated the Bible, answered Ptolome, that he might assuredly
trust him, who was not withdrawn from his amity, neither by fear, gifts or
any other gain. Celius writes that the Emperor Charles the fifte, when he
was at Naples, sent for one Nyphus a very great Philosopher, and demanded of
him the way to govern well an Empire. To which he answered, if you will keep
near your person, such counselors and men of virtue, as you O Emperor make
show to think I am. For this cause Isocrates and Tacitus have written, that
there is no instrument so good for an Empire, Xenophon.
nor so profitable, as the virtuous, and well advised friends of a Prince.
Xenophon in his Pedion brings in Cyrus, saying to Cambises, that friends are
the very scepter and bulwark of kingdoms. It were to be desired that every
one were as well advised, as was that virtuous King Charles the eight, who
oftentimes of would tell his favorites, Mignions of court.

A good admonition of Charles 8.


that he had chosen them for the opinion he had that they were of the most
virtuous, and of whom he might assuredly trust, fearing but one fault in
them, that they would suffer themselves to be spotted with covetousness, having
easy means to be drawn and tempted thereto, in respect of the great credit
they had about him. But if he might once perceive that for their profit, they
would cause ought to be commanded that were unjust and dishonest, they should
lose his favor for ever. That they might have just occasion to content
themselves with the goods of this world, since God had made him rich enough
for them all, He prayed them to make profession of honor, the only means that
brought them and could preserve them in his good favor, whereof he did
admonish them, to the end to take heed, that neither he nor they might fall
into any mischief, which he willingly would eschew. And as Marcellinus wrote,
speaking of the insatiable covetousness of the officers, of the Emperors
Constance and Julian, that they were the nurcerie of all the vices that infected
the common wealth in their time. And from this desire of riches, Means to
meet with the avarice of the Courtiers.
proceeds the riotousnes and superfluity of expenses in all estates, the
which Cicero in like sort lamented in his time, and certainly we may well
bewail the same at this present. And to meet herewith, it were very good to
put that in practice which has bin used after the decease of some of our
Kings, Basil emperor of Constantinople.
to resume from such as have received too excessiuely. The which likewise
Basile Emperor of Constantinople, ordained by edict, that they which had
received money without reason, and huge gifts of the Emperor Michael his
predecessor should render them back again. And so by the ordinances of the
kings Charles 6, and 9. Philip 6. John 2. Charles 5.6. and 8. The ordinances of
the kings of France.
such alienations were revoked. And at an assembly of the three estates holde^
at Tours, the said Charles the 8, being himself present, sundry alienations
made by Lewys the 11. were repealed. And sundry places that he had bestowed
upon Tanored du Chastel his chief mignion, were taken away from him. The like
was renewed at the last parliament holden at Orleans. Hence came the order and
decree concluded in the treasury chamber. Trop done soit repete.
Too large and excessive gifts must be caled back. I will not here omit how
sundry authors have written of the kings of Persia, that every one had one of
his chamber, ordained of purpose, to come every day very early into his
chamber, The Larum of the K. of Persia.
and say unto him: Arise Mileach and provide for the affairs which the great
god has committed to thy charge, The which we read was in like sort used by
Philip k. of Macedon. And sundry kings have bin called some Philadelphes, that
is to say, lovers of their brethren: others Euergetes, Surnames of good Kings,
that is to say Benefactors, Soter, swyor, Eupater good father, Theophiles
lovers of God, others, favorable shephards, and fathers of the people, and by
sundry other names mentioned in the former Chapter proper to good Princes. And
yet we see in sundry ancient sta^ps of Augustus, Nerua, Traian, Lewys the 12.
and others, how great account they made of the names of protectors and fathers
of the people. Quintus Cursius recyteth how Alexander bosted and vanted of
himself, Alexander,
that in all his actions, he esteemed himself in the theater of the whole world.
The which Cicero in like sort says ought to take place in all Magistrates,
Spartianus, Suetonius. Lampridius.
to the end they may guide themselves the more wisely. Spartianus, Suetonus,
and Lampridius write, how Tiberius, Claudus, Alexander seuerus and Adrian the
Emperors, often went to the Senate, and called to their council, not their
fauorits, but men learned, grave, well experienced and of a good conscience; and
that there ensued less danger if the counselors were virtuous, and the Prince
wicked, than if the Prince were good and they of his council naught. Garneades.
We may nevertheless justly complain at this present, as Carneades said of
his time, how the children of Kings and great Lords, learn nothing aright
but to ride well, and manage their horses, which know not how to flatter or
spare the great more then the simple. The image of Osyris.
In Egypt they pictured their God osyris, with an eye upon a Scepter,
understanding by the eye, the providence and knowledge of the truth, and by
the Scepter, authority and power. And many have thought the custom that is
observed in France, Kings kiss the book of the holy Evangelists. The picture
of Pallas.
to make our Kings kiss the book of the holy Evangelists, is to admonish
them to honor and follow the truth. Men of old time painted Pallas armed,
having a cock upon her helmet, as governing as well over learning as war.
For many have the nobility not so accomplished as their calling required,
Nobility ought to be learned.
except they intermingled learning with arms, knowledge, wisdom, and skill
in hystories, and the Mathematiques mixed with valor and actiuitie. Charles 5.
The Emperor Charles the fifth, oftentimes was much grieved that he never
learned Latin, Paulus Iouius
and confessed he had great hindrances thereby, as also did Hannibal. And
they which have not been learned, have run into the common error, and have
suffered themselves to be blindfolded, to the end they might not further
search into that, which should give unto them great judgment, and ornament.
And if I were not afraid I should be too tedious, I could reckon most
notable, and very prejudicial faults, which sundry great Captains,
governors, and Kings have committed, thorough a fond opinion they conceived
of their own sufficiency, and for lack of demanding counsel of them, that
were about them more advised and experienced. Seigneur de Lautrec.
I will content my self with one example recited by some hystoriographers, of
the late lord of Lautrec viceroy for the King in the kingdom of Naples, who
was so self willed in his opinions, that he had rather miss his enterprise,
then be helped by the counsel of other Captains. To whom the loss of the
said kingdom, and of all Italy was attributed. Pope Alexander the sixth,
Pope Alexander 6. Xerxes.
was greatly blamed by Guichardin for the same fault, who writes that he
never consulted but commanded. Xerxes King of Persia having determined to
invade Greece, said unto his counsel, I have assembled you together, to the
end it may not be thought that I have undertaken this enterprise on my own
brain: but I will that, without either further deliberating or diswading you
obey. He went away likewise faster then he entered in, and received there a
very great dishonor, and irrecouerable loss. There be but too many examples
of our time, whosoever would cote them, that are able to teach great
personages to distrust of their own senses, wits, advise, and sufficiency,
and to undertake nothing without good deliberation, least they repent
themselves long after, as it often happens. And in Titus Liuius, he which
only follows his own opinion, Decad. 5.
is rather judged presumptuous, then wise, for a man is not able continually of
himself, to consider, and know al things, or among many contrary reasons to
discern the best. Prudence required to discern opinions.
In which wisdom is required, that a man be not deceived through an
unfaithful counselor, who tends naught else then his own particular
interest. And the counsel of the wise carries greater commodity then of the
imprudent. For this cause Princes ought to take in good part, when they shall be
advised by their Chancelers and sovereign Courts according to their duties,
Princes ought to take in good part what their counselors say unto the^.
for the preservation of their honor, and benefit of their affairs: and not
to think that they pretend to make doubt of their power, but to esteem their
good will, when they see they judge but according to justice, equity and
benefit of the common wealth, opposing themselves to the importunities, false
suggestions and disguisings of the courtiars. In which the said Princes do
repose themselves, and rely upon the conscience, fidelity, allegiance, and
oath of their officers, according as the lawyers and Emperors have left
behind them written in the civil law, and our Kings in their ordinances,
especially Philip le Bell, Charles 7. and Lewys the twelfth, and by the law
inuiolably kept in Egypt, as Plutarque says, and I else where have recyted.
And if Princes take in better part the counsel of their Physician, to shun
and hate intemperance, and meats offensive to the stomache, then of a
flatterer who shorteneth their days: so ought they to esteem of their
officers, which have the laws in estimation, and just government, which
leads to a happy end, without listening unto such as desire an unbridled
power, which turns vpside down all laws, policy, justice, order and
states. For this cause our Kings have likewise ordained, that no regard
should be had to their letters, if they were not sealed with the great seal;
to the end that if ought had inconsideratly escaped their mouth, or that their
letters had been rashly signed and passed the signet, by reason of their great
business and affairs, or for not having been fully infourmed how matters
stood, it might the more easily be moderated and remedied. They willed
likewise all their letters to be examined by the sovereign Courts and
ordinary Judges of their realm. Eccle. 37.15
Ecclesiasticus also admonishes us To pray unto the most high, that he will
direct our way in truth, and that reason go before every enterprise, and
council before every action. Hence proceeds the ordinary clauses, had by
the counsel, advise, and ripe deliberation of our council. There are likewise
some that have well understood the saying of the wisema^: Where there is no
vision, Pro. 29.18.
the people decay to be meant of a good government, ruled by good council.
And the foundations of good counsels and actions, ought to be laid upon
piety, justice, and honesty, and to be executed with diligence, and prudence,
otherwise, they are altogether unprofitable. These two discourses concern in
especial the greatness, Of the comfort of the subjects ensues amity.
safety, and profit of Princes: because that of the comfort of their subjects
ensues amity, and of this amity, proceeds a ready will to expose their
persons and goods for the affairs of their sovereign.

CHAP. XXII. That one ought not to judge too readily of another.
Backbiters not to be listened unto. Symonides.
IT was not said without cause in the old time, that he which believed a
backebyter, committed no less offense, then he did.

And Symonides complained of a friend of his, that had spoken ill of him, of
his ears, and lightness of belief, which ought not to have place in any before
they be thoroughly informed of the truth. For by how much by speech a man
approaches nearer to the seat of understanding and reason which is in the
brain, by so much does it the more hurt and mar him which believes, if a
man take not very diligent heed, and the hearer partaketh half with the
speaker. It is also very strange, to see what care we have to keep the gates
of our houses shut, and yet how we leave our ears open to raylers: and even
as Homer Homer.
praised them which stopped their ears sailing on the sea near unto the
Syrenes, Syrenes.
for fear of being heald, entised by their melody and singing, and so fall
into the dangers that ensued thereon, so should not we give audience to tale
carriers, and detractors of men's good name, and if they chance to prate in our
presence, we should examine the whole, and take things in the best part
without giving too light credence thereto. Thucidides.
Thucidides the historiographer, in his preface greatly blamed such, as would
report of credit sundry things of old time, founding their belief upon an
uncertain brute, without taking pains to enquire further. The which Caesar in
like sort writes of the Gaulois, Comment. li. 7 Aristotle.
which caused a lie often times to be put in stead of the truth, And Aristotle
having given this precept to Alexander to be found true, adds that he
should not believe too lightly. And it was ever esteemed an act of a wise man,
to retain his judgment without discovering it especially in matters
uncertain, and to consider all the circumstances and consequence thereof. And
we ought to be as it were gardiens of the renown and good of our neighbor,
fearing least being men we should fall into that evil, which is reported of
an other. And we ought to put in ure the counsel of Ecclesiasticus. Blame no
man before thou have enquired the matter, Eccles. 11.7.
understand first and then reform: Give no sentence before thou have heard
the cause. The which principallye we ought to practice in the wonderful and
unsearchable works of God, and rather to think our selves short in our own
understanding, then to suspect that God failed in his providence, and in the
government of the universal world, and by no means to control the work
whereof we have no skill at all.

CHAP. 23. Of reprehensions, and force of the truth, with a description of
detraction.
MAny have said, that it is a great corsey to a man of courage, Liberty of
speech.
to be barred liberty of free speech. And the Emperors Augustus and Tiberius,
and Pope Pius the second have said that in a city that is not bond tongues
ought to be free. S. Ambrose.
And S. Ambrose writes to Theodosius the Emperor, that nothing better
beseemed a Prince, then to love liberty of speech, nor nothing worst for a
Priest, then not to dare to speak what he feels. And as Socrates writes
free speech, and discourse is the principal remedy of the afflicted and
grieved mind. Pyndarus.
And Pyndarus made answer to a king of Sparta, that there was nothing more
easy for a man to do, then to reprehend an other, nor harder then to suffer
him self to be reprehended. The custom of the Lacedaemonians was very
commendable, to punish him that saw one offend without reprehendinge him for
it, and him likewise that was angry when he was told of his fault. For a man
is bound to them that tell him of his faults, and admonish him of the right
way that he should hold. And a man ought not to suffer his friend to undo him
self though he would as Phocion says. Solomon describes in his Proverbs the
profit that it yields, Pro. 10.17 and 12.1 and 13.1 and 15.5. and 31
and how necessary a thing it is to the amendment of ones life: and one ought
not tarrye till the fault be committed, but to prevent it by admonition. The
which caused certain of our kings of France, and some other common wealths
have endured the same, that in public plays men should reprehend such notable
faults as were committed. The custom of Alexandria
And in Alexandria certain were appointed, to go some time in a coch through
out the city blaming such persons as they saw do any fault, to the end they
might be more afraid to do ill, and that shame might be of more force then
the law. And if at any time any mislike to have the truth told them as
Comicus has written it proceeds of the corruption of men, of their
haughtiness and ignorance. As Ptolomeus put Aristomenes his tutor in prison,
Truth enge^dreth hatred
because that in the presence of an Ambassador, he waked him out of his
sleep, that he might be more attentive to what was said unto him. Pope
Boniface the seventh, being returned home again to Rome, from whence he was
driven away for his dissolutenes, caused the eyes of Cardinal John, who had
told him of his faults to be put out. Fulgosus writes of Pope Innocent, that,
having been reprehended by some of the citizens of Rome, because he provided
not sufficiently against Schisms, he sent them back to his nephew for
answer: which was that he made them all be cast out of windows, albeit the
said Innocent before he came to that dignity, often times used toward his
predecessors, Vrbain and Bennet, l^ke reprehension. In the time of Honorius
the second they put Arnulphe to death because he so liberally rebuked vice.
Sundry Emperors have done the like. We have sundry examples in the scriptures,
1. King. 16.
of Baasha for killing the Prophet Iehu because he told him the truth.
Likewise of Achab, Asa, Ioas, and Ozias, 1. King. 22.2. Paral. 18.16.24, and
26. of Sedichias, of Ioachim, and of the princes of Judah. Ierem. 23.32. and 38.
But as the wise man says in the Proverbs, in the end, he shall be conned more
thank, which rebukes, then he that deceaueth by flattery. Notwithstanding
every man according as his vocation, the times, the persons, and places,
Observation in reprehension.
will permit him, ought to declare the truth to such as he sees need, with an
intention to profit and instruct the^, without any choler, disdain immodesty or
other passion, mingling with the bitterness of reprehension, the sweetness of
some praises. A man ought likewise to consider, that the egernes and sharpnes
of biting words, especially spoken to one that is in adversity, profits
nothing, being a kind of incontinencie, of a tongue mingled with malignitye and
a will to injury, carrying a very declaration of enmitye, which is the cause
that they which use it hurt them selves. As did Antiphon about Dyonisius the
tyrant, where a dispute being held between them what brass was best, he
answered that, whereof the Athenians made the statuas of Armodius and
Aristogiton: for this sour answer caused him to be put to death. And as
Plutarque said in the life of Phocion even as the honye which is sweet of his
own nature, engenders grief, and pain being applied to parts infected, so
do true admonitions the more provoke such as are in misery, if they be not
well sweetened and mingled with pitye, and consolation. Clytus an ancient
Captain of Alexanders, may serve for an example, who was slain for vsinge
too arrogant an admonition. Reprehensions ill beseeming at the board.
In like sort one ought not at the boarde to use such reprehensions as make men
knitte the brows, forgetting the occasion and place of pleasure: and there is
required a dexterity as it is written of Socrates, who beeinge desired at a
feast to speak, Socrates
and discourse of his art, it is not now time said he to discourse of what I
know, and in that for which the time now serves, Damaratus
I am no whit skillful in. And when Damaratus was arrived in Macedonia, during
the time that king Philip was fallen out with his Wife and Son, the king
having saluted and embraced him, demanded of him if the Greeks agreed well
one with an other: Demaratus who was very familiar with him aunsweared, K.
Philip.
it becomes you very well (O king) to enquire of the concord of the
Athenians and Peloponesians, and in the mean time suffer your own house to be
so full of discord and division. A captive which the said Philip caused to be
sold to him that would give most, bad him in his ear, to let down the fore
part of his robe, because he showed what was not comelye to be discovered:
the which was the cause of his delivery. An other being taken for a spy
said unto him, that he came to epsy his follye, in that without necessity he
put both his realm, and life in hasard. Some have compared reprehensions, to
the remedies of the spleen, which ought to be souer and sharp: so truth told
in fit opportunity is profitable, The force of truth.
and is of such force, as Eschines said that she surpassed all the
cogitations of man. And Menander wrote, that she comes into light although
she be not sought for, and defends her self easily against all the
deceates, craftiness, and wilines of men. 1. Esd. 4.38
And in the disputation that was held before Darius, truth was found the
greatest and most strong for ever: S. Augustine in the city of God, Augustinus
de ciuit dei, l. 2. c. 19
lib. 2. c. 19, calls her an eternal victory, and in the question, 108, ex
vtr. he says that It is better to be overcome of the truth, then to be willing
to surmount her in vain. To which purpose may very well serve, the summarie
description of the table which Apelles painted, Apelles table
after he was eschaped out of a false accusation, and an extreme danger. He
had pictured a Judge, with the ears of an Ass, having on the one side two
Ladies, Ignorance and Suspicion: before him stood false accusation with a
countenance full of rage, and fury, holding in the left hand a burning
torche, and with the right pulled a young man by the hear, lifting up his eyes
and hands to heaven, near unto whom was a man painted looking pale, earthly,
and a squint, which was envy: two damsels followed false Accusation named
Treason, and Deceat, behind whom stood a Lady all wailing and mourning which
was Repentance, which fastened her eye sight upon a very fair Lady
entitled Truth, declaring by this picture to all Princes and Judges, that they
ought not too lightly to believe. As Alexander closing one of his ears to an
accuser, said he kept the other for him which was accused. And it was
commanded Moses, straightlye to forbid the children of Israel, lying, false
accusation, and malicious detraction, Plato.
and cause them to keep justice, equality, and truth. I will not hear omit,
the advertisement given by wise Plato, commended so much by Plutarque, that
when one found any committing any fault, he ought to discende into him
self, and say priuatelye unto him self. Am not I such a one? To the end we
may avoid the like errors. When in like sort we would justify our selves
for any reprehension we might pray him that did it, to reserve that freedom
of speech, against he committed a fault him self. And it was not said amiss
of them of old time, that the beginning to live well, and repulse ignorance,
was to be reprehended, mocked, and blamed. Saint Basyl for this cause named
reprehension, the healing of the soul: and in the Proverbs 25. Pro. 25.12.
and 29.1.
it is called an ornament of fine gold. And in the 29. it is written, a man
that hardens his neck when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, Psalm.
and can not be cured. And David Psalm. 41. said that it was like the precious
baulme. We read even of the Emperors, Philip, Theodosius, and Valentinian,
that they did great penitence after they were admonished, as also did David and
other kings being reprehended by the Prophets. Augustine. Speusippus.
And Saint Augustine in his book of recantations acknowledged how he had
erred. But as Plato said, that Speusippus corrected other by the example of his
own life, so men ought to esteem those reprehensions that are made, without a
word speaking, thorough a single life, irreprehensible, and virtuous.

CHAP. 24. That anger hinders the truth, of the euilles which it bringes with
it, and of the means to resist it.
Physicians esteem the sickness very dangerous, when the face is disfigured.
Choler darkneth judgment and peruerteth reason
The which we may say of choler, which alters the countenance, speech, and
all the senses of man. It has been termed a fury darkning judgment. And as
in the dark a man is not able to discern his kinsman or friend from his
enemy, so amidst the smoke, and mystes of choler, truth can not be discerned
from falsehood. Alexander.
Alexander overtaken with choler, caused Parmenio, Chalistenes, Philotas and
other to be put to death, and with his own hand slew Clytus one of his
chiefest favorites. And after that his choler was apeased would have killed him
self. For this cause Anthenodorus, Augustus concelled by Anthenodorus and
Theodosius by S. Ambrose.
counseled the Emperor Augustus, the which Saint Ambrose did since to
Theodosius, that when they felt them selves enter into choler, they should take
heed of speaking or doing any thing, until they had repeated the twenty
four letters of the Alphabet. The which gave the occasion of making that holy
law, Si vindicari: and of the chapter Cum apud, to temper and slack the heady
commandementes of Princes. And the said Augustus, for having injured a
gentleman, whose daughter he had brought to his pleasure, and was cast in the
teeth with what he had done, and saw that him self had broken the law Iulia,
Ephesians. 4 26.
which condemns the adulterers, he was so mad with him self that for a time
he abstayned from eating Saint Paul counsels us That the Son go not down
upon our wrath. The manner of the Pythagoriens.
The manner of the Pythagoriens was much commended, that when they had once
uttered their choler, they would take one an other by the hand, and embrase
one an other before it was evening. And Plato beeinge demanded how he knew a
wise man, Plato.
answered, when being rebuked he would not be angry, Seneca.
and being praised he would not be too proud. Seneca writes, that such as
taught to play, at fence, and to exercise the body, commanded their scholars
in no wise to be choleric, because that clean marred the art: and he which
is not able to bear a little injury, A remedy against choler.
shall in the end have one mischief, heaped on an other. And against this it
is thought an excellent remedy not to be delicate, nor too light of belief,
nor to think, one may contemn and injury one as he lists, nor to have a
will thereto, and to use delays and protraction of time. The fagots of the
licturs
As Plutarque writes, that the carryinge of bundels of sticks bound
together, upon pollaxes, was to show that the wrath of a Magistrate, ought not
to be prompt and lose, for that while leasurelye, those bundels so bound
together were losed, it brought some delay and space to choler, which buyeth
her pleasure with peril of life, as sundry Poets have written. And there is
nothing that men dare not adventure and commit, when they are inflamed with
anger, except they retain the^ selves under the obedience of reason: Socrates.
For as Socrates said, it is less danger to drinck intemperately of puddle or
troubled water, then to glut ones appetite with revenge, when man's discourse
and reason is occupied with furye, and besides him self, before that he be
settled and purified. And Archytas said to one that had offended him, I would
punish you for this gear if I were not in choler. Architas.
And to bridle such choler it is not every man's skill, except he have been
used to it of a long time: consideringe that nothing can be comelye nor honest,
if it be spoken sharply, and in choler. The Pythagoriens in like sort by the
allegorical commandment, that they should not leave the bottom of the pot
or caudern, imprinted in the ashes, would teach according to Plutarques
opinion, that no mark or apparent show of choler should remain, the which
as S. Chrysostom says, is a fire, a hangman, a most difformed drunkenness, and
a mad dog that knows noman. Therefore it was that they of old time, by the
difformed monster of Chymera, which spit fire, described choler, and as they
which are possessed with unclean spirits some at the mouth and swell, so the
spirit, and speech of cholerike persons fometh, and often times dangerous
discourses escape the^. Which was the cause that Alexander, Menander, Seneca,
and others have written, how choler proceeds of baseness of mind, as also we
see it more incident to weome^ then to men, and to the sick more then to the
whole. And the fault is so measured, as he to whom the offense is committed is
persuaded. But by how much more the fault is greater, so much is his humanity
the more to be commended, when he pardons without being moved, and the
offender by so much the more bound, in that he sees his submissio^ accepted
for revenge and satisfaction. The destruction of 15. thousand souls, was
attributed to the choler of Theodosius, which afterward he greatly repented him
self of. It was likewise the death of Aurelian, and of the cruelty of the
Emperor Valentinian, as Macellinus wrote: the which so reigned in him, Many
mischeifes have ensued choler.

The death of Valentinian.


that if one had spoken but one word that had misliked him, he would change his
coulor and voice and he committed much injustice, in hinderinge true judgment,
in the end it was the cause of his death, and his intrals were so terribly
burned, that there was not found so much as a drop of blood. Others were of
opinion that he broke a vain in crying. Yet Salust thinks, that that which
in private persons is termed choler, in great ones is called fury and cruelty.
Plutarque likewise attributed the ruin of Sertorius, to that he was so
choleric, Sertorius.
which made him so vnacco^panable, and unmeet to live among the society of me^.
As also did Valerius, the death of Caesar, Caesar.
and Sueton greatly blamed for the same Tiberius and Nero. In like sort, to
those, which had arms so insolently of themselves, that they would command the
very laws to cease, the administration of justice was ever denied. And for the
maintenance of both, justice was reserved to the Judges, and to such as force
was committed, it was straightly commanded them to obey justice, and that she
aid force with good counsel of which if it be once destitute, greater harm
ensues then good. And among all estates, it is required, that they assemble a
counsel, to advise what may be profitable. But as the goodness of ships is
best perceived in a storm, so does a good understanding most discover it
self, when having just cause to be angrye, the mind is for all that quiet and
the judgment settled. And it is the property of a magnanimous heart to despise
injuries, How a good understanding is discovered.
which we read was ever don by great personages. And David made no account of
the words of Semey, nor the kings Antigonus, Philip, and Pericles, of those
whom they heard revile them. Solomon says in his Proverbs, that A man
inclyned to wrath, shall quickly be destroyed. And compares a choleric man,
to a City overthrown: and Solon makes him like to one that neither cared how
he lost friends, nor how he procured enemies. And in the first of
Ecclesiasticus it is written, that rashness in anger breeds destruction,
Eccl. 1.27. Rashenes in wrath whence it proceeds.
the which proceeds not, but of the inflammation of the blood about the
heart, of too great a heat and sodainnes, the which by no means yields the
leisure, to understand the circumstaunces which reason teaches which a man
that has received an iniurye ought to keep and observe, as above I have
touched, and it is only long sufferinge that in the end byteth. To pardon
is a testimony of a valiant mind. Col. 3.12.
And to pardon, is a sign of a heroical and noble heart: and as Homer
writes, the more excellent a man is, the less is his anger burninge, and
every gentle heart is easelye contented. Saint Paul writes to the
Collossians, As the elect of God holy and beloved, put on tender mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one an
other, and forgiving one an other, if any man have a quarrel to an other,
even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. And above al these things put on
love, which is the bond of perfection. And let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to the which ye are called, in one body, and be ye amiable. They
ought to be accounted wise, who knowing how apt of their own inclination they
be to choler, Wisdom is seen in te^perating of choler.
use notwithstanding such remedies as they think fit to retire themselves,
either in bearing patiently, forgetting, pardoninge, moderating of them selves
without beeinge too much moved, or breaking that which is easy to be dashed
in pieces of a servant, as did Calias, and Cotis, or in burning their enemies
letters before they see them, as Pompei did those of Sertorius, and Caesar
those of Pompei. The holy scripture does often times exhort us to forbear one
an other. To forebeare one another. Dion.
And whereas Saint Paul writes that we should portion a like to one an
others charges, he understands infirmities. Dion after he had restored his
country again to liberty, was counseled to put to death one of the greatest
enemies that he had now fallen into his hands, but he said that he had long
ago learned to surmount wrath, envy and all evil will, whereof the proof
consisted in behauing ones self temperatelye and courteouslye toward his
enemies, and that he rather chose to surmount in bountye and courtesy, then in
power: revenge proceeding from a base mind. We ought then to shun all
suspicion of contempt and audacity, rather casting the fault upon the
ignorance, mistaking, or lack of those which have offended us, to the end we
may escape that vengeance which is so often forbidden of the Lord, and which
proceeds from the same spring, as does the injury, and offense.
Notwithstanding, that anger is not to be blamed, which is used sometimes to
make men amend when they have done a fault. For as Aristotle writes in the
fourth of his Morales, Anger allowed.
even as disordinate anger is a fault, so is sometime the want of moderate
choler, or rather hatred of vice. And it seems that they, which are not
angrye, when it is required at their hands, to fear offenders, are very
evil advised and expose them selves to many injuries. For this cause Plato
called anger the sinew of the soul, for that it served to increase valor,
being moderate, and temperate. Anger the sinevve of the soul. Lactan. de ira
Dei cap. 17.
And Aristotle writes that it is an armor to virtue, but such a one as rather
moves us, then is ought moved it self. Lactantius in his book entitled of
the wrath of God, c. 17. writes, that it is necessary, that those things
which are naught, should displease such as are virtuous persons, and that he
which is displeased at evil, should be moved when he sees it wrought, so we
do decline to vengeance, not because men have offended us, but to the end
discipline may be kept, manners corrected, and licentiousnes repressed. This
kind of choler is lawful, which as it is necessary to man for the amendment
of lewdness, so is it found in God of whom man takes example: for as much as
we ought to chastise our subjects, so ought God to repress the vices of each
one. And to bring this to pass it is necessary that he be angry, and that it
is natural and good to be moved and stirred to wrath. Therefore, Iactant his
error.

Definition of anger.


anger ought to be defined, a motion of the spirit, lifted up for the
repression of sin. For the definition which Cicero, makes of the desire of
revenge, is not much different from this, but that anger which we call choler,
or fury, ought not to fall within man, being a thing vicious and unprofitable.
Notwithstanding I am of opinion that the divines will not be of Lactantius his
mind, in that he attributes any passion to God: for he works nothing either
with greef or pain. The old proverb holds that an Ant will be angry, and yet
we are not able to discern when she is moved, much less in God whose works
are unsearchable, and pass the capacitye of our understanding. Albeit the
holy scripture does often apply it self to our fashion of speech, who trouble
our selves with passions, in taking pity, or in punishing, or in seeing some
disorder. And S Paul writes that of our own nature we are the children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 6.23. Psalm. 103.10.
from whence we are delivered by Christ Jesus our mediator. David said Psa.
103. Psalm 86 15. Psalm. 143.9. Exodus 34 6. Nomb. 14.18 Nehe. 5.17. Ier. 15.13.
Io^l. 2.13. Jonas.. 4.2.. Nahum. 1.3. Deuteronomy. 9.14 and 32.39. Exodus 17.2. Psalm
78.41. Numb. 12.9. and 14.9. Exodus 22 22.
that God has not dealt with us, after our sins, nor rewarded us after our
iniquities. And Psalm. 86. he calls him a pitiful God, and merciful, slow to
anger, and great in kindness and truth And Psalm. 145. That the Lord is good to
all, and his mercies are over all his works. The which is likewise repeated in
Exodus 34 Numbers 14. Nehemiah 9. Jeremiah 15 Joel 2. Jonas 4 Nahum 1. A man
ought diligently to take heed how he commits those sins which provoke the
wrath of God, especially to be no idolatour, Deu. 9. and 32. nor to tempt God
Exodus 17. and Psalm. 78. nor to murmr against his providence, Nom. 12. and 14.
nor to be rebellious Deu. 9. nor to shead the blood of the innocent, Math. 25.
nor to molest the widows, and fatherless. Exodus 22. The holy scripture
speaks of the old and new man, and of the circumcision of the heart. So meant
the Philosophers when they said we were made of two parts, and that he which
made the worse, subject unto the better, was counted continent: and
contrariwise, he which made the brutish and unreasonable part of his mind, to
preceed and command the more noble, was accounted incontinent and worse then
it. For this cause is it required, that thorough the bit of reason we put back
and tame that felonious courage of ours, to submit it unto the most mild yoke
of the holy laws of God, Valerius.
which so much recommendeth unto us, peace, patience, and mercy. Valerius and
others have written, that injuries are surmounted thorough courtesy and
bountye, not by the revenge of a new hatred. Cicero.
And Cicero in his Oration for Murena and Demosthenes particularly, in that he
made before Alexander the great, to hinder the siege of Athenes, do amply show,
that it is an act nearest approaching unto diuinitye, Demosthenes.
to vanquishe ones own courage, repress his wrath, moderate victory, amplify
the dignity of ones enemy, command over ones self, and not too much to trust
in anger a mortal enemy to counsel. For as our savior Christ said the
violent that is to say such as can command over them selves enter heaven. The
ancient custom observed among the Princes and gentlemen of France, written
by Agathius deserves here to be recited: that when any one had a quarrel or
was at variaunce with an other, a great number of gentlemen would presently
present them selves in arms, The ancient on some of the french
and constrain those that had a mind to fight, to end their controversy, by
lawful and amiable means: which occasioned the subjects, a great deal more
willinglye to apply them selves to justice, which they saw so much esteemed
among their Lords and Princes. And it was one of the chief articles, in the
leage of the Grecians and all allies, 4. powers in the soul.
to undertake nothing by arms but by justice. The Philosophers set down four
powers to rule in the mind, reason, will, anger, and concupiscence: in which
they lodged four virtues, to every one, one, Prudence, justice, fortitude, and
temperance. So as they made choler to serve to fortitude, so it be not infirm,
or out of square.

CHAP. 25. Of the error of some Authors which have praised promise breakers
and the cruel, of punishments of such, what our gettinges and dealing with the
great ought to be, aduertisements to the readers, and of pardoninges.
I Ever found it a very strange matter in diverse authors who lacked no
judgment at all, It does not become princes to use deceate.
in that they produced those for example, who during the whole course of their
conquestes violated their faith with sundry Princes, and esteemed it very
necessary for a great Prince that he should learn to deceive. I do not in like
sort approve the opinion of Lysander, that where a Lions skin will not suffice,
it must be patched up with a foxes: Lizander.
confessing in deed that the truth is better then falsehoode, but that the
dignitye and price of each of them ought to be measured, and turned to
commodity and profit, saying further that children must be deceived with
trifles, Dyonisius. Policrates.
and men with oaths. The which likewise the tyrants Dionisius and Policrates
were wont to say, authorizing impietye lying and deceat. Which maxim has been
followed of sundry Princes, as king Pirrhus confessed him self to the
Athenians in recompense for their good cheer, counselling them ever to
distrust all tyrauntes, because they did ever observe or break their faith,
according as they served their turns in their commodities, profits, or
ambition. As in Thucidides an Athenian ambassador said, K. Pirrhus. An Alleman
proverb.
that a tyrant is a friend and enemy according to the time and season. There
is likewise an Aleman proverb, that it is for noble men to promise, and
clownes to observe. And in Sophocles, Ulysses taught Neoptolemus the son of
Achilles, to deceive by lying: and whereas the said child demanded how it
was possible to lie without blushing he aunsweared that such was the use in the
trafficque of men, and that one never is to be ashamed where any profitte
may be reaped. Caligula.
The which that wicked Emperor Caligula in like sort said, praysinge
impudency. Thrasimachus
Moreover I approve no whit at all the saying of Thrasimachus the
Calcedonian, that the pleasure and profit of Princes is the rule and definition
of all laws: Anaxarchus.
nor that which Anaxarchus said unto Alexander when he saw him so much
vexed, for the death of his friend Clytus, whom he had slain, that Themis
and Justice were set of each side a king to confirm his faults: nor that
which that vilanous stepmother said unto Caracalla, that whatsoever he
listed was lawful for him. But we will maintain that God, God and the laws
govern kingdoms.
and the laws are set over kingdoms, to punish such as violate the Majesty
of the laws, and that right blyndeth the profit and pleasure of Princes, and
that nothing is lawful, save what the laws permit. And it is certain, that
the higher any person is exalted, the more ought he to show him self
virtuous and true, In all actions what is to be considered.
as above we have noted. And in all actions a man must consider, the motife,
root, and counsel, with sundry other circumstaunces, and therein discover, if
there have been any cloaking, infidelity, trompery, peril or deceat, that
the bare matter may be perceived, and confront what ill soever is found under
an apparaunce of good, knowing that an evil beginning, can not but lead an
evil end. And if we should take away this first excellencye of sudden
conquestes, Power obtained by mischeafe of small durance
we shall find a tragical issue, and a change in extreme calamities. As
Quintus Cursius wrote, that power gotten by mischief endures but a while. The
which likewise the Prophets besides experience do in sundye places witness.
And the Duke of Valentinois Son of Pope Alexander, D. of Valentinois.
and others which Michiauel set before us to imitate, have had most miserable
ends, Machiauel a pernicious auctor.
after having been made a laughing stock unto their enemies. And the said
Author has not without just cause had his qualityes painted out by Paulus
Iouius, as one ignorant both of G^D, and learning, and so censured by the
counsel of Trente. And as accompanied with truth and virtue every kind of
life is sweet and easy, so does there ever ensue lyinge, sorrow, pain,
loss, repentance, and care, and it is impossible to have any joy or
contentment, if quietness of the mind, constancy, piety, justice, and full
assurance have not laid the foundation. And a good conscience carries a
calm with it self, which can not be found in falsehood against promise, and
trust, the which as every other kind of wickedness, is the occasion, and bruer
of her own torment, being a maruailous worker of a miserable life, with great
shame suffering many frightes, furies and perturbations of the mind, full of
unquietness and sorrows, Ier. 2.
as Jeremy the Prophet witnesses. And not without cause did Isocrates
entreating of peace, compare such men to Wolves and beasts, who while they
think to raven upon some pray cast them selves headlong into the snare, or
toil. And we may say with David that iniquitye is seated in a slippery and
dangerous place. Psalm. 27.15.
I have seen the wicked strong and spreading it self like a green Bay tree,
yet I passed away and lo he was gonne. For since that God is true, just,
constant and like unto him self, his judgments are ever found a like
against all the enemies of the truth, as it is said in Jeremy, Ier. 34.5.
and in Ezechiel speaking of Sedechias. Think you it is possible, for him that
breaks his promise, long to endure and reign? And since that Isaiah
terms righteousness the mother of peace, we must no whit marvel if lying,
and treason be punished by war, plague, Isaiah. Habacue. Haggaeus.
famine, sedition, and disorders in a realm: or if that which is attained by
leasing, and lewd means, be called by the Prophets a fire brane wherewith one
burns his own house, a heap of earth which one causes to fall upon him
self, and a pit to stifle and bury ones self in, and as silver put into a
rented sack, Euripides in like sort esteems whatsoever is unjustly added to
a house, as a plague and infected air, and every man may perceive such
gotten goods melt away as snow. This is it which Solomon means in the end
of his first chapter of Proverbs, Pro. 1.32.
that the prosperity of fools destroys them. I will not here forget, what
S. Chrysostom writes of upon the fifth of the first to the Corinthians, that
a little gain fraudulently gotten, Chrysostom.
is often times the occasion of the loss of great wealth though well come by.
And in vain do men lock their chestes with cheynes, springes and padlockes,
when they have enclosed therein deceat, a most violent theife, which desperseth
what ever it finds within the coffer. Dan. 11.45.
We read in histories and in Daniel, the miserable end of many, and among
other of Nabuchodonosor, and of Alexander the great, Pro. 11.4. and 20.17. and
21 7.
who left nothing to their heirs but their wickedness. We read likewise in the
Proverbs, that the riches of the wicked avail not in the day of wrath, and
that the bread of deceat is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be
filled with gravel. And that the roberie of the wicked shall destroy them: For
justice beeinge removed every state falls to ruin, and an inheritance
hastily purchased shall not be blessed. And God says by Jeremy, Ierem 17.11
that as the Partrich gathers the young which she has not brought forth, so
he that gets riches and not by right shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool. And he pronounces a curse on his head,
that builds his house by unrighteousness. An admonition to the nobility to
keep their promises faithfully.
And in Tobie, and some of the Psalms, a little is more worth with right, then
much heaped up in iniquitye. And it has not without cause been said in
ancient time, that whatsoever vice builds, it destroys. Which being well
considered it ought to stir up all manner of persons, who will not degenerate
from the ancient nobility which has taken foot and sure foundation upon
virtue, to be true and keep their promises, what soever should chance to
happen, and not to seek ought but by honest means. For if you will exempt
justice and truth out of a government, it is then no more then a very robbing,
as Saint Augustine affirms. To negotiate with princes.
And for as much as the inconstancy of Princes and almost of al other kind of
men is sufficiently apparent, and sundry inconveniences have ensewed, where too
much trust has bin yielded, the wiser sort and best advised have stood upon
their guard, have not been too light of belief and have so provided that men
shall not easelie break their faith with them or surprise them. I think
likewise that they have heald a very absurd opinion, Cruelty
that commend cruelty in governors. For he which delights in taxing can
never be beloved or esteemed of. I could answer them as king Alphonsus did
that such men deserved to be governed by Lions, Pro. 20.28.
Bears, Dragons, and such like beasts. For as Solomon writes the Kings
throne shall be established with mercy, the which together with subjects love
and justice is the very chain that holds together and maintains an
estate, and not force, fear, or great gardes as Dion declares in Plutarque.
God being willing to make him known to Moses, Exodus 34.5.
calls him self the Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to
anger and aboundaunt in goodness and truth. And the Grecians called the king of
their Gods Melchins, that is to say sweet as honey. And the Athenians called
him Memactis, that is to say succourable. And the holy scripture and sundry
Philosophers calls him a Father, a shepherd, a refuge, and protector of his
people. For to murder and torment is the office of a Devil, of fury, of a
hangman and not of a king or honest man. And subjects ought otherwise to be
accounted of then as slaves, as Bartole in his treatise de regimine ciuitatis,
declares it upon the seventh of Deutronomy, where kings are exhorted not to
lift their hearts up above their brethren, among which God had made choice of
them. For the puissance of a father, as Martian the Lawyer wrote l. s. de
paracid. consists in piety and mercy, no whit at all in rigor. It is written
in the second of the kings how the cruel Senacherib, after the angel had put
to death 155000. of his men, was himself slain by his own children. And in
the same book he writes of sundry kings and queens, abandoned of God,
pilled, and murdered for their cruelty. Like end had Ptolome surnamed the
lightning, and Ptolome Lamious, that is to say the babbler. Cambises killed him
self with his own swoorde, Princes murdered for their cruelty.
Xerxes was slain by his uncle Seleucus: Nicanor killed by Ptolome Kerapnos
Antiochus Ierax surnamed the sacre, because he lived upon pillage was in like
sort slain: as also was Seleucus surnamed the lightning because of his
violence. Antiochus the great, pilling of the temple was slain of his people,
as were Epiphanes, and Eupator, and the histories are full of an infinite
number of others which had like end for their crueltye and covetousness. A man
may see in an apology of Saint Ciprian against Demetrian, the names of those
which persecuted the church, The enemies of the church punished.
and how they have been punished, holding it for a maxim that there was never
no crueltye used against the Christian church that was not in short time after
revenged. Aristotle exhorted Alexander to do good to every one, and not to be
cruel, Theodosius.
rather to be praised for his clemency then conquestes. It is written of
Theodosius, that when he delivered his sword to his Constable, he willed him
to use it only against malefactors, and if he commanded any thing cruel or
unjust, then he should draw it against him self. As also the kings of
Aegipt would swear their Judges, that they should not obey them in ought
they demanded of cruel, unjust, or against the laws. The like did Antiochus
also write to the Cities under his obedience, that they should obey and keep
such his commandments, as oppressed none.

Antonius Pius held opinion of Scipio Africane, that he rather chose to
preserve one of his subjects, then slay one thousand of his enemies. Which I
greatly wish all kings would observe- Marecellinus terms the vice of
crueltye, the boche of the soul, proceedinge from the feeblenes and baseness of
the heart. And the said Antoninus said, that nothing renders an Emperor more
famous among al nations then clemency, and upon this and graciousnes, is the
assurance of the public weal founded as Valerius Publicola repeateth in Titus
Liuius and Plutarque. And Antigonus was wont to say that Clemency works more
then violence. One of the interpreters of the Bible councelled Ptolome to use
patience and long sufferinge, imitatinge the sweetness of God to the end he
might reign well. And Marrinus the Emperor wrote to the Senate, what good is
there in Nobilitye, if a Princes heart be not replenished with bountye and
sweetness toward his subjects? Plutarque mentions of the great captain
Pericles, Pericles.
that when his friends came to visit him in his sickness, and had put him
in mind of the great exploites he had made, of his victories, eloquence,
wisdom, and other singular virtues wherewith he was endewed, he then made
them answer, you clean forget the principal, and which is to me the most
proper, Phocion. A brave answer of K. Francis 1.
that hitherto I never in my life caused any man to wear a mourning garment.
Which was in like sort reported of Phocion, in respect of his great clemency.
With this agrees that article of the answer made by the late great king
Francis of famous memory, to the supplication, of those of Rochel, and of the
Isles adjoining, which greatly deserves not to be forgotten. Let others do,
and rigorously exercise their power, I will be always as much as in me shall
lie, prone to pity, and mercy, and will never use my subjects, as the
Emperor did them of Gaunt, for a less offense then you have committed, which
causes him at this instant to have blody hands and I thank God mine are as
yet without any stayne of my peoples blood, also he has together with the
effusion of his subjects blood, and the loss of so many heads and souls,
lost likewise their good wills and hearts for ever. And after the king had
thoroughly forgiven them, he caused the prisoners to be delivered, the keys
and arms of the city to be rendered, all his garrisons to be voyded, and their
ancient liberty and privileges to be again fully restored unto them. If I were
not afraid I should be too tedious, I could show a number of miserable ends
that chanced to other Emperors and kings for their cruelty. Tales the chief
of the seven wise men of Greece, Tales.
being demanded what in all his life seemed most strange unto him, answered an
old Tyrant. Which agrees with the saying of Ecclesiasticus, that all tyranny
is of small indurance. Eccles. 10.10
And in the rest of the history of Hester, Artaxerxes said that he purposed
with equity always and gentleness to govern his subjects, Esther. 13.2. Pittacus
thereby to bring his kingdom unto tranquillity, that might safelye live in
peace. And Pittacus said that a Prince by nothing becomes more glorious, then
when he makes his subjects to fear not him, but for him: the which was always
in time paste reported of the french men. And not only the tyrants them selves
have been hated and defeated, but what soever they have besides taken pleasure
in: as after that they of Ariginta were delivered from Phalaris that great
tirant, they by and by published an Edict, that from that day forward it shall
be lawful for no man to wear any garment of blewe, because his guard were
ever wont to wear cassockes of the same color. And after the death of
Domitian, they defaced his name in all places. And the month of October was no
more called by his name, as he had ordained it, nor April by Neroes, nor May
by Claudus, nor September by Tiberius, clean defacing their tyrannical and
unfortunate names. Philip.
Philip answered such as advised him to plant garrisons in the cities of
Greece, which he had conquered, that he rather chose to be called for a long
time courteous, then for a short time Lord. And as the wise man writes in his
Proverbs: In the multitude of the people is the honor of a King, Pou. 14.28.
and for the want of people comes the destruction of the Prince. Sundry have
said, that as he which diminishes his troop, can never be termed a good
heardman or shepherd, so he which causes his subjects to be unjustly
murdered, can never be accounted a good Prince. The Emperor Rodolph, was
wont to say, Rodolphe.
that he greatly repented, that ever he had been a severe Prince, but never
in that he had been gracious or bountiful. Martian.
Martian and sundry other Emperors have been of opinion, that a Prince ought
never to enter into wars, if conveniently he might avoid it, Discretion
required in reading
and retain peace. For this cause, we ought not to read Machiauel, and such
like authors, clean void of conscience, foresight, and religion, but with
great judgment and discretion, without trusting too much unto them; and to
confront their writings, and whatsoever else they have taken of tyrants
qualities, with Cannon rules and honesty, trying all things, and keeping that
which is good: 1. These. 5.21
according unto the council of S. Paul, in his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians: and of S. Ierom in his Epistle to Minerius, by following the
example of exchangers, Aug. l. de doct christ. c. 3.
which try their good money from the counterfeit. The which Saint Augustine in
his second book de Doctrina Christiana Chap. 3. applies unto the
Philosophers books, to the end they might serve to good use, taking them
back again of them, as of unlawful possessors It is also very requisite, as
I before mentioned, we should observe, how sundry hystoriographers, and in
especial the Italians, do never measure their actions by the intention and
conscience, or according unto the infallible rule of the word of God, but by
the events, and their own ableness, cunnings and subtleties, ever in
applyinge their vain discourses, to their end which they pretend, without
any consideration whether it be virtuous and lawful or no. And in this
respect have they given the name of Prudence unto some, which have been most
wicked, and miserablye have ended their lives: and to strangers which have been
endued with a good conscience, magnanimity, and have dyed happily, do they
yield most reproachful names. And we must confront their reproaches with other
aucthors more worthy of trust, and with the times, circumstances and
behauiours of those whom they write of. I do not for all that any whit allow
the injustice which is committed in not punishing such as are lewd. For as the
King S. Louis was wont to say: A fault not to punish malefactors. K S. Louis.
A Prince which may punish a fault, and will not, is as much culpable thereof,
as if he had committed it him self.

And that it is a work of pity and not of cruelty to do justice: and that
he which justifies the wicked, is not in less abomination, before God, then
he which condemns the just, as Solomon said: Homer writes that the scepter,
and the laws were given by God to Agamemnon, to the end he should minister
right to each one, and that Jupiter had Themis, that is to say right and
justice set by his side. Exodus 21.34.
And it is commanded, that the murderer should be pulled away from the
very alter, that he may dye, and be punished without remission. The which is
marueilousstraitly observed in Suitzerlande. And God is always like unto him
self executinge righteousness and judgment upon the earth, and hating all
iniquity and vice. Sigismond the Emperor having pardoned one of a murder,
which afterward committed another, said, that it was he that had committed the
second, and that Princes ought not to dispense or pardon, without very urgent
cause, any which has deserved punishment. And if he cannot quite the civil
interest of his subject, how can he quite the pain which God has ordained by
his law? And often times too great meekenes causes the magistrates and laws
to run in contempt. And both the one and the other is to be found fault
with, ^. Sam. 15.12 1. King 20 42 and 21 16.
if it be not tempered. Saul was reprehended of God because he slew not
Amelec. And the Prophet said to Achab, that he should die because he had
pardoned Benadad the King of Siria, who had deserved death, as also because he
caused Naboth to be murdered. The holy scripture does also teach us, that
the wrath of God is appeased by the punishment of the wicked, and that his
vengeance extends over all people for their iniquity, and contrariewise his
blessing does spread it self upon whom soever he chasteneth. The wicked
shall be afraid and kept back, but the righteous shall be preserved from the
contagion of them that work iniquity. For this cause the book of the law
found again in the time of Josias, is called the book of the alliance of the
Lord, the which he commanded the Priests to deliver to the King. 2. King.
22.10
Samuel followinge this rule put it into the hands of Saul, and according unto
the tenure thereof, Josias yielded himself the feodarie, and vassal of the
Lord. Likewise the law which was given in the Arc, was called the covenant
of the Lord. And Solomon said unto God: Lord, thou have chosen me to reign
over thy people, 2. Chron. 6.11
and to judge over thy sons and daughters. For this cause our Kings were ever
willing, that none should regard the pardones they yielded, if they were
grounded upon so ill a foundation. As also Micheas the Prophet detesteth, and
curses in the name of God all such as obey the wicked ordinances of Kings,
who for this cause have had especial care and commandment to administer
justice, esteeming themselves rather armed with the sword to chastise the
wicked, then to repulse their enemies, and are the ministers of God for the
peoples benefit, as the Apostle says. Rom 13 4
And to this end they establish good and learned Judges in all places that are
void of passions, if they follow the laws; otherwise they should bring
into the flock the Wolf, which they ought to chase away, and render
themselves culpable of the death of those innocents that such pardoned men
should kill, and so grace should never be without cruelty.

CHAP. XXVI. The definition of Lying.
THE Philosophers were never wont to content themselves in declaring the
property of virtues, except they opposed unto them their contrary vice, to
the end, that the lothsomnes thereof being well regarded, the other might be
found more agreeable. Definition of a lie
So have we of purpose discoursed of the truth, before we com to show the vice
of lying, the which we may define by a contrary signification unto the truth
when one speaks of things uncertain, contrary to that which one knows,
making the^ seem other then they are. S. Augustine writes to Co^sentius, that
it is a false signification of spech, with a will to deceive. And when one
speaks more or less then is in deed, it is a member of injustice, turning
topsie turuie all humane society, and the amity due unto our neighbor: for
since that speech is given unto us, to make manifest what we think, and to
instruct his understanding of whom we speak: It is a foul fault to abuse
it, and to behave our selves in other sort toward our neighbor, then we
willingly would he should toward us: for as much as he which desires and
expects from us the truth is deceived and led into an error: and having
afterward in time discovered the lie, Liars lose al credit.
he will no more believe us, and we shall lose the means to be able to
instruct for ever. For liars only gain this, that albeit they say and speak
the truth, yet shall they never be believed. And in the holy scripture
idolatry, hypocrisy, superstition, false weights, false measures, and al
cosinages are called lying, to the end that by so disformed a name, we should
the rather eschew them. The liar is detested of God, and called double of
heart and tongue, because he speaks one thing and does an other. And for
very good respect sundry of the ancient doctors have written, that the
truth being depraved, there are engendered an infinite number of absurdities,
Socrates.
heresies, scismes, and contentions. And Socrates was wont to say, that it
proceeded from a good will, to enforce it self to remove the foolish opinions
of men, and that it was not possible for him to approve a lie, nor to dissemble
the truth. And Homer writes of the great and valiant Captain Achilles, that
he did more hate and abhor lying, Achilles.
then hell, or death. And it is written in the old and new testament, that
God does abhor all lying, and that the true, are gracious in his sight: yea,
that a thief is better than a man that is accustomed to lie, And lying is
contrary to nature, aided by reason, and servant or handmayd to the truth.
It is written in Leuiticus: Eccles. 20.24 Leuit. 16.11.
Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.

CHAP. XXVII. The effects of Lying.
Al wickedness proceadeth of lying
PHilo in his first book of the contemplative life, sets down, all kind of
wickedness to proceed from lying, as all good does from the truth. And if we
well consider the causes, of the seditions, troubles, heresies and quarrels,
which alter whole estates, public quiet and man's conversation, we shall find
all to proceed from the infected fountain of lying. And that Achab and the
most part of the Kings of Israel, the Emperors Nero, Commodus, Maximinus,
Julius, Valencius, and sundry other as well of old time as of ours, have
thereby been ruyned. 2. King. 5.27. Acts 5.5. Esther 7.10. 1. King 13.4.
Gehazi the servant of Elisha was stricken with a leprosy. Ananias and Saphira
fell down dead. Haman was hanged on the tree he had prepared for Mardocheus.
The hand of Jeroboam was dried up. Craesus King of Lidia drove away Solon,
rejecting the truth he had told him, Craesus.
which for all that afterward saved his life, and Dionisius the tyrant of
Sicil, not being able to make his profit of that which Plato had declared unto
him, Dionisius.
nor to wash away the stayne of tyranny, was constrained in his banishment to
confess, that that which he had heard of Plato, made him the better able to
carry so great a change. Genesis 39.20.
Thorough a lie Joseph was cast in prison, and S. Chrysostom sent into
banishment, and an infinite number of other holy and great personages have
been maruelously afflicted, and many realms and common wealths have even
had the very beginning of their ruin from thence. Chrysostom
The said Chrysostom, in the 28. Homely upon John, says, that nothing is
so vnfirme or unconstant as lying, for what aid or pillar so ever it can come
by, it weakeneth so as it causes it to fall of it self.

CHAP. 28. The punishments of Lying.
IT is written in the Proverbs: Pro. 19.5. W^^ 1.11. Eccles 20.25.
He that speaks lies, shall not escape: and in the book of wisdom: The
mouth that speaks lies, slays the soul: and in Ecclesiasticus: The
condition of liars are dishonest, Aegiptians.
and their shame is ever with them. The Egyptians ordained death it self for
a punishment to perjured persons, and to such as declared not the very truth,
in their declaration which of necessity each one was to make yearly, both
touching his name, and the means he had to nourish his family. The Scithians
and Garamanthes followed the same law, Scithians and Garamantes, Persians and
Indians.
and there was he condemned that had prognosticated any false things to come.
The Persians and Indians deprived him of all honor and farther speech which
lied. The Gimnosophistes, Chaldeans, barred them al companies and dignities,
and condemned to remain in perpetual darkness without speaking. Nestorius.
And Nicephorus recites how the very worms did eat the tongue of the cosener
Nestorius in his life time. Popiel K. of Pologne.
Monstrelet writes of Popiel k. of Pologne, who had ever this word in his
mouth: If it be not true, I would the Rattes might eat me: that he was so
assailed by rattes in a banquet, that neither his gards nor fire nor water
could preserve him from them. Other do assure us that an Archbishop of Magence
died of the like death. Artexerxes. Solon. Joshua. 9.21.
K. Artexerxes made one of his soldiers toungs to be nailed with iij nails
that had made a lie. The laws of Solon imposed great pains upon such, Traian.
Cebalus.
and for that cause did the Gabaonites lose their liberty. The emperor Traian
surnamed the good Prince, took away from the son of Cebalus the kingdom of
Dace, which we term at this day Tra^siluania, and Valachia, only because he
caught him in a lie, and told him that Rome the mother of truth could not
permit a liar to possess a kingdom. Cirus in like sort told the k. of Armenia,
that is was most manifest, Cyrus.
a lie was not capable of pardon, as Xenophon writes in his 3. book of his
Pedia. Alexander.
After that one had red unto Alexander the great a history out of Aristobulus,
wherein he had intermingled certain counterfeit praises, he flong the book
into the river, saying the said writer deserved to have bin flung in himself:
because men ought to study to search out the truth, without which nothing can
be well don, and that it was a shame and great damage, when a lie should put good
words out of credit. And he found fault with another, when he compared him to
Hercules. If he had in this sort remained all the rest of his life, and that
prosperity and flattery had not rendered himself more insolent, he had bin
worthy of much greater honor. I could here very well allege how in Almanie the
lie has bin always extremely hated and shunned as it were a plague, and
bastardes could never obtain the prise of any ocupatio^ whatsoever, nor take
degree in any art or science, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
as also in the old testament they were excluded both out of the church and
sanctuary For they are ever in doubt which of the sundry mignions that their
mother entertained was their father. For this cause Philo Alexandrin, compares
those with Idolaters, who through ignorance of their creator and his bounty
call upon many, and declares that a multitude, as much to say as a plurality
of gods is very athisme, and the ground of lying, banishing for ever from
thence life everlasting.

CHAP. XXIX. That the perjured and blasphemers are detestable liars, and the
pains for them.
CIcero was of opinion that there was no difference between the liar and the
perjured person, and that God had ordained to each like punishment, and that he
which was accustomed to lie, did easily periure himself. The which opinion
sundry doctors of the church have in like sort held. Others notwithstanding
have thought that they have offended more deeply, which abuse the name of God
to confirm their lying, the which sort of people deserved death by the laws
of Plato and Egypt, as committers of sacrilege. And the Prophet Ezechiel
calls it the profaning of the name of God, and the spoiling him of his
truth. Eccles. 23.11 Chrysostom.
He says also that he which despises his oath, shall never escape. And it is
written in Ecclesiasticus, that A man that uses much swearing shall be filled
with wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his house. Saint Chrisostom
made sundry homilies and sermons to the end we should hate and leave all
oaths; and that there might never be among men following the commandment of
our savior, but yea, yea, and nay, nay, without blaspheming the name of God by
swearing. And he greatly marueiled to see us so ready to obey the laws and
ordinances of Princes albeit they be very hard and unreasonable, and that of
Gods commandment so expressly given unto us not to swear at al, Plato 2. de
legibus.
we make so little account, whereof also Plato greatly complains, and that men
cover themselves with a lewd custom which every man ought to enforce himself
utterly to abolish. The said doctor in like sort writes, that it is
impossible that he which much swears, should not forswear himself. As we
read of the oath rashly made by King Saul, 1. Sam. 14.39
whereby he was constrained either to put to death his innocent son, or to
remain perjured: And God revenged upon his race, and people, the great
slaughter that he made of the Gabaonites contrary to the oath sworn unto them
by his predecessors. And the other tribes of Israel having sworn that they
would not give their daughters in marriage to that of Benjamin, because they
would not break their oath, chose rather to council them to ravish their
said daughters.

And Titus Liuius shows that the Petelins in Calabria, Titus Liuisu.
and the Sagontines in Spain, chose rather to dye a most miserable death, then
to break the faith they had plighted. It is written in Zechariah: zecha. 5.2.4.
I saw a flying book, the length thereof is 20, Cubits, and the breadth 10.
the curse whereof shall enter into the house of him that falsely swears, and
it shall remain in the midst of his house and shall consume it with the
timber thereof, and stones thereof. Now that all is full of blasphemies, oaths,
and periuries, we greatly ought to fear a most sharp chastisement of the
wrath of God, for so ordinary a contempt of his holy name and follow the
counsel of Ecclesiasticus: Agesilaus.
Keep thy mouth from being accustomed to swear: for that carries great at
ruin withal. K. Agesilaus having understood that Tisaphernes K. of Persia
had broken the promise which he had sworn unto him answered that therein he
had done him a very great pleasure: because that by his perjury he had
rendered himself odious and enemy both to the Gods and men. Si duo de iu. l.
vlt. de cr^stel. and ad leg. lul. rep. Gel. li, 7. c, 18
And truly all policies and matches are clean turned topsie turuie, if the
promise be not observed. Titus Liuius in the beginning of his history, greatly
commends the common wealth of Rome because it was governed by faith and
simple oath, not by fear of laws, or chastisements. It was also the principal
charge of the Censors of Rome, as Cicero writes to punish the perjured,
against whom there is great threats in the holy scripture: and in Leuiticus,
not only the perjured man is condemned, but they which are consenting thereto
and know him, and do not reveal him, to the end that the holy name of God be
not profaned, contrary to the first table of commandments, which forbids
us to take it in vain. The which has been the cause that some divines have
esteemed it a greater and more heinous sin, then murder forbidden by the
second table, the rather for that if proofs be wanting against the murderer,
men have recourse to his oath. Solomon in his prayer that he made at the
dedication of the temple, demanded the punishment of such as should periure
themselves. The Egyptians and Scithians put them to death, the Indians cut off
the tops of their feet and hands, for an example to show the offense they
had committed against God and their neighbor. Saint Lewys the King caused
their lips to be feared with a hot iron: Punishment of perjured persons
in Zuiserland they fasten their tongue with two nails, and in some Cantons they
make them dye like felons, or pull out their tongue. And against them there are
sundry ordinances made by the Kings of France, which we ought to observe, Pro.
10.31.
especially against blasphemers the which God in Leuiticus would should be
stoned unto death. It is written in the Proverbs: The tongue of the froward
shall be cut off. And Justinian the Emperor ordained by sundry laws, that such
should be executed. And not without cause have the divines accounted blasphemy
much more worthy of punishment then any other fault and wickedness, which as
Samuel says are chiefly committed against men, whereas blasphemies are
directly against the honor of God and in despite of him. And by some decrees
of the Court, they have been condemned to a most grievous fine and to have
their tongue perced thorough with a hot iron, and after to be hanged and
strangled. Lib. 2. cap. 17
It is worthy to be considered what John Viet a Physician in his history of
the deceites of devils and sundry other writers have testified of some that
have been visibly carried away by devils, in calling upon them or giving
themselves vno them. Pope John the 12. John 12.
was deposed and afterward put to death, Justinian.
for having broken his oath made to Otho touching Berangare. Justinian the
son of Constantine the fourth, for having violated his faith given to the
Bulgares, and perjured himself in assailing of the Sarazins, was deposed from
his imperial crown and banished. I omit an infinite number of other, who have
received like punishments for their periuries. Pericles.
Pericles being required by a certain friend of his to sooth a certain matter
for his sake, answered: I am thy friend as far as the altar, that is to
say so far as not to offend God. To which that which is written of Hercules
may be very well referred, Hercules.
that he was so religious and virtuous that he never swore in all his life but
once; and it was one of the first things that children were forbid as
Fauorinus testified: and the better to retain and keep them from this vice,
there is a very ancient ordinance at Rome that expressly forbids them to
swear. And the Prophetisse of Delphos made answer unto the Lacedaemonians,
that every thing should prosper better and better if they forbad all oaths.
Also it was in no case permitted to the Priests of Jupiter to swear, for that
often times an oath ends in cursing and perjury. And Stobeus writes that
for this cause the Phrigians did never swear. They which periure themselves as
an ancient father says very well, show suffycient testimony how they
despise God, and fear men. And if one thoroughly examined all estates, and
whereto every offycer is bound, Oath of magistrates and officers.
to God, to the king and to justice by his oath, he should find a marvelous
number of perjured. Cicero in his oration which he made for Balbus says, that
what oath soever he that is already perjured can take, yet must one not believe
him, and in the end shall carry his own pain. For what shall remain to God,
if he be spoiled of his truth, making him a witness and approuer of fashood?
Therefore Joshua when he would have had Acha^ to confess the truth unto him
said, Joshua 7.19.
My son I beseech thee give glory unto the Lord God of Israel, declaring
that God is greatly dishonored if one periure him self, and by the like
coniuration that the Pharisees were wont to use in the Gospel, it appears
that they commonly accustomed this kind of speech. If we will then live with
quietness of mind, without destroying our selves, we must eschew all lying and
perjury, follow our vocation, and observe whatsoever we have promised to God
and men.

CHAP. XXX. That lying, in doctrine is most pernicious, and that one ought
carefully to search for the truth.
Man treated for the service of god.
EVery man confesses, yea the very Pagan Philosophers, that men were created
for the service of God, and that above all things they should make account of
religion, which gives the only means to unite and reconcile man to God, for
his salvation. Cicero and Lactantius in sundry places declare, besides that we
find written in the old and new testament that only by serving of god men
differ from brute beasts, and the good from wicked: and that the authority of
Philosophy consists in the searching out of the principal end and sovereign
good of man. And since that godliness is the scope of the rest, it is
requisite that it be fixed; and immovable, and yet there is nothing wherein me^
err so much as in that which ought to be most known. The cause of the error
proceeds, Godliness the scope of other virtues
as in sundry places S. Augustine writes by the testimony of the scriptures,
for that the most part measure, the said service rather according unto their
own blind brain, then by the rule given in the word of god, and according to
our corrupt reason, through the hereditary fall of our prime parents, who were
not able to comprehend (as the Apostle says) the divine and heavenly things.
From thence has proceeded the multitude of Gods, when they have thought that
one was not able to suffice and provide for all, and so were sundry kind of
services in show inverted which might plese the common people and the creature
taken in place of the creator, nothing in steed of infinite. Basil.
S. Basil in a proeme writing of the judgments of God, greatly lamenteth that
the church was so severed in divisions. And searching into the cause thereof, he
remembered, that passage in the book of Judges, where it is written, that Every
man did that which was good in his own eyes. Since then that no error is so
dangerous, Judge. 17.6.
as that which is committed in religion, for as much as our salvation,
quietness, Error in religion most dangerous.
and happiness depends thero^, it is very requisite that we apply thereto what
sense or understanding soever is within us, and according to the opinion of S.
Augustine, if it be a leude part to turn the waifaring man out of his right
way, then are such as teach false doctrine much more to be detested: because
thorough such a mischief, they lead men to destruction, turning them from the
eternal felicity, and infecte the most pure doctrine which is our spiritual
food, and so separate men from the catholic church, without which is no
salvation. S. Augustine in his 4. book of the City of God, reproves Varro and
Pontifex Sceuola, who were of opinion that it was very expedient men should be
deceived in religion, because that there is no felicity or rest, but in the
certainty thereof, and in an infallible truth. And Chrisippus said, that
without divinity, and the doctrine of god none could take any principle at al
in the discipline of manners. And Polibius shows that there was nothing which
so much adua^ced the Romans as their religion, albeit it was not pure. S. Paul
writes to the Corinthians, that he had prepared them for one husband, 2. Cor.
11.2.
to present them as a pure virgin to Christ. And the Prophets call lying
adultery. And S. Chrysostom upon the argument of the Epistle to the Romans
shows, that al mischief proceeds from the ignorance of the scriptures, as
our Savior Christ imputed unto the Jews, that they were deceived not knowing
the scriptures nor the power of God. Matthew. 22. Mat. 22.29. Marc. 12.24
Mark. 12. And if it have been said of the ancient fathers, that the word is
a medicine to the grieved spirit, a man may well say it is also poison being
falsely taught. The which moved the prophets and Apostles so carefully to warn
men to beware of false prophets, seducers and wolves, which speak not by the
mouth of God, neither are sent by him, because there is no comparison to be
made, between the straw and the corn, nor between an infected river and a
good spring. Again we are exhorted, to stand in the ways and behold and to
ask for the old way which is the good way, and walk therein, Ier. 15.4.
to the end we should not wander from that life thorough desearts, but find
rest for our souls. And we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that at the end of
the sermons, every man searched the scriptures to see whether those things
they had hard were so. For God by Isaiah sends us back to the law and to
the testimony, because if they speak not according to this word, it is for
that there is no light in them, as who would say that they were abused and
remained in darkness. And S. Peter caught nothing when he fished by night,
until he cast out his net into the sea at the commandment of our Savior,
John. 21.3.
as some ancient fathers have gathered hereon. What ever we do without the
word of God profits us nothing, and it shall be said unto us as in the
first of Isaiah, who has required these things at your hands? And if they
say that the holy scripture is hard and not easily to be understood, God
protests in Isaiah that he has not spoken in secret, Isaiah. 45.19
neither in a place of darkness, and his doctrine is not obscure nor
doubtful, but ready to instruct us to perfection, to lighten us, and guide us
to salvation. And in an other place he says that the word of God, is as the
words of a book that is sealed up, Esaiah 49.11 2. Cor. 4.3.
to the unbelievers. And Saint Paul wrote to the Corinthians that if his
Gospel were hid, it was hid to the infideles that were lost. For this great
Prince making his alliance with his subjects and creatures to save them,
delivered all in clear and simple terms. And Saint Augustine writes that
whatsoever appertains to salvation is manifestly set down in the scripture,
and whatsoever is obscure in one place is manifested in another: and in the 15.
Chapter of the same book he gives us a notable rule how to discern
figurative speeches: as if we be commanded to do well, straight we are
forbid the evil, and so is it no figure, for in that one shall find the very
scope of the scripture, to wit the glory of God and charity; but contrariwise
if taken according unto the letter, if it seem to command ill, and forbid the
good, then may we easily judge it to be a figure: whereof he gives us sundry
examples. And Saint Paul in his second to Timothe, 2. Tim. 3.16.
shows that the whole Scripture, is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct, in
righteousness, that the man of God, may be absolute being made perfect unto
all good works. The holy ghost the spirit of prudence.
The holy ghost is likewise called the spirit of prudence and discretion,
enterteyned by meditating of the scriptures, contrary unto the Philosophers
books where leaves are only gathered, and not the true fruit. And after
that the Prophet Baruch had set down what a number of mischeifes grew by the
carelessness of hearing of the word of God, and that we should draw from the
fountain of wisdom, he exhorts us to Learn where is wisdom, where is
strength, where is understanding, that we might know also from whence comes
long continuance and life, and where the light of the eyes, and peace is. The
holy Scripture is also called the word of reconciliation, of life, of peace,
and of salvation, and there is not almost one line thorough out the hole Bible,
which does not pull us by the ear and sleeue to awake us out of the sleep of
this world, and to pull us out of the clammie vanities, wherein we hang, that
it may bring us to the glory and presence of God, which is our salvation. The
which moved S. Augustine, Chrysostom, Jerome, Theophilact, and other doctors,
to exhort the laytie, the simple people, artificers and all kind of persons,
daily to exercise themselves in the reading and meditating of the holy
scriptures, adding that they which have found a gold, or silver mine,
travail to dig the earth, and endure most pestiferous ouerheating of
themselves, so as they may gather some few drammes of gold and silver, and
ought we that have so rich and precious a treasor in the holy scriptures, to
neglect and not search it out being called thereto by God? Yea we see what
toil men take in harvest season, and yet how slack and sluggish we are to
reap our celestial wheat. And the said holy scriptures are better
understood of a modest idiote, then of an arrogant Philosopher. And as Saint
Basile wrote the lamb wadeth thorough the streams of the scriptures, when the
Elephant swimmeth. And in 119. Psalm, it is said that this word of God
serves for a rule, and correction to youth, and lightneth and gives grace to
the humble. And the most ancient truth, says Tertullian is the most
certain. It is also called a testament and alliance, because we find therein
the legacye of eternal life, and an immortal succession, in communicating of
all the riches, The scripture called a testament and alliance.
merits and perfections, of our Lord, and savior Christ Jesus, thorough the
faith which we have in his promises. It is given unto us, for a buckler
defense, and safegarde against all assaults, for a present medicine, comfort,
instruction, and counsel in all affairs, and for a guide to lead us through
the straights of this world. It is also called the square, balaunce, judge of
all nations, the Canon, The Scripture called a square and ballaunce.
and rule to live well by, and the very touchstone which discerns truth from
falshoode. And S. Basile wrote that it resembled a great shop full of all kind
of medicinable drugges, where each man might find a fit salve for his sore.
And it is to be feared, which God threatened in Ezechiel that he will take away
the force of bread from the unthankful. And in Amos, that he will send a
famine not of bread, but of hearing of his word. And in the Apocalips, that he
will take away the candlestick, as much to say, as that his word shall be no
more purely preached. And we ought well to weigh the saying of Solomon in his
Proverbs, that where there is no vision understanding hereby the preaching of
the word, there the people decay, For this cause S. Peter exhorts us so to
speak, 2. Pet. 1.19.
as it be agreeable to the word of God, which he terms to be a light that
shines in a dark place. And S. Paul requires of us that our charity may
abound in all knowledge and understanding to the end we might follow what
were best, Romans 15.4.
be entyre, and able to teach one an other, for as much as Whatsoever things
are written before time are written for our learning, that we thorough patience
and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope. This was the reason why the
Council of Cartharge forbadde any thing to be read in the Church but the
very scripture. L. cunctos pop.
And the Emperor in the Code, shows the difference between the Catholics
and Heretics, by the Apostolical and Evangelical doctrine. And Constantine
after that he had assembled the Council of Nyce, gave in charge to three
hundred and eightene Bishops which were there present, to follow this rule,
that they should ever dissolve al questions, by the books of the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles. The which Saint Augustine ever mainteyned, Cont.
cresc. L. 2 c 22. and de ba: cont. don. l. 5. c. 17. and cont max: l. 3. c. 13
Marks to discern true religion
judging all from thence. And the auntience fathers have given three principal
marks, by which the true religion may be discerned, that it serves the true
God, that it serves him according unto his word, and that it reconcileth that
man unto him which follows it. The shadows are passed, and the veil of the
temple clean taken away to the end that all men might enter in. Our Savior
also in the prayer that he made to god his father, when he was ready to enter
into the combat for our redemption, and to fasten our bonds to his cross,
prayed that he would sanctify his in the truth: that is to say, that his
Church might be adorned with the true light. The which I have the rather
amplified, because that Pontanus, and Quintus Cursius wrote that Alexander the
great much commended superstition, accou^ting that above al other things it was
that which guided and gained the multitude. Superstition.
And it were a very easy matter to show how much it prevailed for a time, and
what multitudes of people have bin easily drawn to embrace a strange and
untrue religion. But to the end that we may both discern and shun the enemies
to this truth, and follow the right way of eternal life, we must have recourse
to the fountains of this doctrine, and meditate therein and on that which may
concern the glory of God, and love toward our neighbor; The gospel is the
sustenance of our souls.
and often to pray unto him which is the true wisdom, and take council of the
divines, and pastors of the Church. For as the young plants, have need of
watering and our bodies of food, so must we for the sustenance of our souls,
often call the gospel to memory, as it is commanded in Deutronomie, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall
rehearse the^ continually unto thy children, and thou shall talk of the^ when
thou tarriest in thy house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down and when thou risest up. 1. Tim. 4.13.
And S. Paul exhorts Timothe, to give atte^dance to reading. For by that god
speaks unto us, reformeth our life, inspireth into us, and makes sauory
eternal life, and strengthens us against the dangers of this world. The
saying of Epictetus, deserves to be here greatly commended. Epictetus.
If we have any understanding at al (says he) what should we do but praise god
daily, and sing unto him Psalms, and actions of thanksgiving? in digging and
plowing of the earth, in trauail, and in rest. And what? o great God, mighty
are thou in having bestowed upon us, these thy instruments wherewith we plough
the earth, and more mighty which have given unto us hands, but most mighty in
that thou have given unto us the increase, without thinking thereon, and to
take breath in sleeping: for by no means can we attribute these things to our
own industry: if I were a nightingale, I would do as the nightingales do, but
since that I am a reasonable creature, I will praise God, without ceasing, and
so I beseech al you to do the like. Simplicius.
Simplicius who translated him, adds, that he which is negligent and slack in
the service and honor of god, cannot be careful of any other cause. For this
cause sundry have well said, that religion did link and unite us together to
serve one God almighty, the savior of us, and that it was the guide of all
other virtues, and that such as do not exercise themselves therein, are like
the^ which go to the battle without a weapon. What religion requires.
Sundry likewise affirm, that in our late nauigations they have discovered
sundry sorts of people stragled in woods, without either laws or magistrates,
but none without some service or shadow of religion the which as of ancient time
we have bin taught, requires of us in substance, that we render an entire
obedience to God, that we consecrate to his glory our thoughts, words and
works, and refer our selves and what ever is in us, to his honor, and the
succor of our neighbor, otherwise it is but hypocrisy, and sacriledg. The
which makes us to run to the merciful god, which has made satisfaction for
us, The bible translated into french by the commandment of S. Louis.
and is our paier and creditor, to which scope all ceremonies tend. We read in
the histories of sundry emperors and kings, that they have bin meruelously
given to the reading of the bible. And k. S. Louis, willed that his subjects
should read it, having to that end made it to be translated into french. The
which our historiographers do also writ of k. Charles the 5. surnamed the wise,
and our most gracious, and valiant K. Henry raygning at this present, has
confirmed the same by his especial privilege and commandment. And if there
be any which abuse the same, it is by their own fault, in that they suck
poison out of the same flower whence the Be takes honey. Notwithstanding as
men ought not to cast perles and precious stones to swine, nor holy things to
dogs, and often times the ignorant and unconstant do turn the scriptures to
their own ruin, as our Savior and S. Peter witness, Some kind of books
not fit every man should read.
so is it very requisite that in the reading thereof, men carry a sound
judgment, and certain books to be forbidden to be read of every one, and
not to give strong meat unto such as have need of milk, and in this point
is it very convenient to follow the decree of the Council of Trent in those
places where it is received, Heb. 5.12. Gregory Nazianzene.
and the instruction of their Curate and Pastor Gregory Nazianzene in his
apology makes mention of the custom of the Hebrews, who never accustomed
all ages to every kind of doctrine, nor revealed their secrets, but to such
as were of a sound judgment. Jerome. Ambrose. Augustine.
The which S. Jerome marketh well in the beginning of Ezechiel, and S. Ambrose
upon the 35. Psalm, and S. Augustine li. de spir. and lit. allege for example
the Cantickes, which some for their own pleasure have very disorderly applied.
I leave to the judgment of every man, whether we have now less occasion,
then had the Prophets to complain of some pastors, which they termed by the
name of thieves, Zozom lib. 6. cap. 5.
wolves, dumb dogs, seducers, idols, covetous, voluptuous, hypocrites, and
by sundry other most detestable names. The dream, or vision of S. Anthony,
where he imagined he saw certain swyne, and moyles, defiling the altar, is
verified in this time. Our duty is to beseech at Gods hands that it well
please him, to send us such as be good, that they may search naught else then
his glory, and nourish their flock with good and wholesome food. For from
thence as Pliny does witness comes the good wool, that is to say, L. 1. de
consensu euan. c. 18.
good life. S. Augustine commended the saying of Socrates, that both God, and
man will be served as he commands. The which he applies to the service of
the true God, who commands, that nothing be either added or diminished unto
his word. And says, that for this cause the Romans allowed the service of
all gods, having for that end builded a Temple to all gods called Pantheon,
and yet would never receive the true, to wit the God of the Hebrews. Because
if they had served him otherwise then he commanded, they had not served him at
all, but their own fictions, and if they had done as he had ordained, then had
they clean rejected and set aside all other Gods. 1. Sam. and 11 13.
For the principal service of God consists in obedience, as Samuel said
unto Saul. The Prophets called it a spiritual chastity, not to swerve
therefrom, nor to think that whatsoever we find good in our own eyes
pleases him. And as Nahas the Ammonite, would by no means receive them of
Iabes a city in Judea, which he had beseaged, to his mercy, until he had put
out their right eye. And when the Philistines, had subdued the children of
Israel, they disarmed them even to their knives. So did that Apostata Emperor
Julian, Dioclesian, and other, who studied in what they could, to make the
Christians continue in ignorance, and blindness, never enquiring of the will
of GOD or order of the primative Church, Eusebius. lib. ^ 33.
and under a great pain, made them to be disarmed of that word, which the
scripture calls the knife of the spirit. Josephus. lib. 2. Josephus.
contra Apionem, sets down the custom which the Jews observed every
week in reading of the holy scripture, so as each man understood it and
knew it by heart. The which Socrates lib. 5. cap. 22. shows was also
observed in Alexandria, and it may be seen by that which is written of our
Savior, Luke. 4. Acts. 5. 1. Tim. 4 When in the time of Josias, 2. Kings 21,
the book of the law, after it had long line hid was found again, he made
great estimation thereof, and said unto the Priests: 2. King. 22.13
Go ye and enquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all Judah
concerning the words of this book that is found: for great is the wrath of
the Lord, that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not obeyed the
words of this book, to do according to all that, which is written therein
for us. We must likewise imagine, that such as have taken upon them to teach
the way to that happiness which all men covet to attain unto, have been but
counterfayte, except they have laid the foundation out of the holy and
Canonical scriptures: and the lies wherein their fathers lived, led them
into error, according as Amos wrote. We ought therefore often to pray unto
God with David, Solomon, and Saint Paul, that he will give us wisdom and
understanding, and open our eyes that we may follow that which may be most
agreeable unto him, without deceiving of our selves. S. Jerome.
Saint Jerome in his Epistle to Laeta, says excellently well, that reading
ought to follow prayer and prayer reading. A man might very well impute the
cause that so many provinces have been made subject unto the tyranny of the
Turk, so many disorders, corruptions, wars, seditions, maladies, The effects
which ensue the contempt of gods word.
murders, and other calamities have happened, to the contempt of this word,
according to which a man will not reform, his life, nor his strange opinions,
nor supporte one an other, knowing that this word teaches naught else then
peace, concord and amity: and that we may be wise as serpents which to save
their head lay open their body, and with their tail stop their ear against
the enchanter. So let us spare nothing for the mayntenance, of this doctrine so
long a go left unto us, without dissoluteness, sects, or discentions, for
there is nothing so well established which discord can not ransacke, and as
Saint Augustine, Augustine.
says very well, the knowledge of the true doctrine, humility, Q. Capitolius
and patience, entertayneth concord. And Quintius Capitolius in Titus Liuius
says, that partiality poysoneth and infecteth commonwealthes, making such as
would gain say not to consider what is most expedient, as we find by
experience in France, and have too many examples both at home, and abroad. The
Emperor Maximilian the second, had often in his mouth, that it was a greenous
sin and error, to raygne over men's consciences, as the laws carried it. I
can here affirm that if men did know the truth, and the happiness which
follows the knowledge of true religion, the voluptuous man would there
search his pleasures, the covetous his wealth, the ambitious his glory, the
only mean which can fill their heart, and satisfy their desire, and it
serves us for a guide to lead us unto God, whereas the false does clean
withholde us from him.

CHAP. XXXI. That those which defer their amendment, do wrappe them selves
in a dangerous lie.
WE have already showed, that if they which name themselves Christians would
but follow their profession, vice should not reign so plentifully. For who so
would believe the promises of God, and setle therein a full assurance, and
consider what a great blessing is prepared for such as fear him, and what
everlasting punishment is ordained for the wicked; he would set all his care in
seeking how to please and obey him, which has honored him with so manifold
blessings. The disorderly life of a Christian proceeds from infidelitye.
And this is the very true cause, that we so much lament their follye and
misery, which do ever defer the amendment of their disordered life
proceeding only from their infidelity, and want of believing, of the
threatninges of the judgments of God, who will render to every man according
to his works, to whose self we must render account, of all our idle words,
thoughts, and affections. The hour of death uncertain.
Moreover every one knows that the hour of death is uncertain, and we
indifferently see the young dye as well as the old, and that nothing is more
common than sudden death, Demonax.
the which caused the great Philosopher Demonax, to warn the Emperor Adrian
and such as lived at their ease, in no wise to forget how in very short time
they should be no more. K. Philip.
And an other did often times put King Philip in mind, that he should
remember he was a man. And the Emperor Maximilian the first, Maximilian.
did always cause to be carried about with him among his robes, whatsoever was
necessary for his burial, as one that was always booted, and ready to
depart. We must not excuse our selves with the patience, bounty, and mercy of
God, We must not abuse the patience of God.
except we be determined to amend, and thereby be drawn to repentance, so
much commanded in the holy scriptures: but still be afraid of his
judgments, and call to mind that which is so often written, 1. Cor. 6.9.
that neither the unrighteous, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
dronkardes, nor raylers, nor extortioners, nor murderers, nor gluttons, Gal.
5.20.
nor such as are full of wrath, Envy, contentions, seditions, or heresies,
shall inherit the kingdom of God. And every one shall reap what himself has
sown. And Saint Paul adds that they which are of Christ have crucified the
flesh together with the affections and concupiscence thereof. Therefore
Ecclesiasticus exhorts us, to make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord,
Eccles. 5.7.
and not to put off from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord
break forth, and in our security, we shall be destroyed and perish in time
of vengeance. And the wisdom of God in the beginning of the preuerbes of
Solomon, does amplye exhort us to receive in dew time his correction, and not
to reject his council, and that the foolish are slain thorough their ease,
but he which will obey, shall dwell surely, and rest without fear of evil. Let
us consider that the most just GOD does recompense the good, and punish the
wicked, and pays not every night, nor every Saterdaye, but as Valerius
says, counterpeaseth the slackenesse of his deferred punishment by the
greeuousnes thereof when it comes. And the afflictions of this present time,
Romans 8.16.
(sent unto the good to contain them in their dewtie) are not worthy of the
glory which shall be showed unto us as S. Paul says. And all the delights and
pleasures of this life, are turned into sowernesse, and it is the act of a
Christian, to look that at the hour of his death, he run to none but to God
and himself, nor take care of ought else. For we shall have enough to do,
without taking such carke and care, for the affairs of this world, and to
premeditate thereof gives great advantage. Our savior in Saint Luke said
unto him which still delights himself in heaping up of riches: O fool
this night will they fetch away thy soul, from thee: Luke 12.20. Amendment of
^^^e and repentance.
then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided? The prophets
and Apostles, very often admonyshed us to amend while there is time, to the
end we should not tarry until the gates of repentance, were fast locked up,
and barred. The which our Savior would also teach us by the parable of the
foolish virgins, Mat. 25.10.
who were suddenly surprised, and shut out of the hall where the bridegroom
made his feast, to the end that after the confession of our sins, we might
run to the promises and mercy of God, Isaiah 55.6.
and dispose our selves to a new and holy life. Isaiah warns us to seek the
Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is near: and it is
to be feared if we over slip the opportunity, least he will leave us. And if
such as search the riches and vanities of the world, forget nothing, which
may further them, I pray you with what feruentnesse ought we to search God and
our salvation? Isaiah 66.2.
Let us take heed, least that reprooche in Isayah be not cast in our teeth, I
have spredde out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people. Ierem. 5.3.
And Jeremiah writes: Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed, thou
have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made
their faces harder than a stone, Heb. 3.7.
and have refused to return: For this cause Saint Paul to the Hebrews,
puts them in mind of that in the 95. Psalm, To day if you will hear my
voice, harden not your hearts. The accustoming of our selves to sin, and the
examples of other greatly harm us. For when men see the elder sort to fail,
then does youth take example thereby, and being ill brought us follows the
same train, all the rest of their life. But by little and little this custom
must be changed, and nothing is so hard as Seneca says, but the understanding
of man surmounteth it, and is able to attain what ever it seeks. Let us call
to mind what God says in Isayah, Your refuge in falshoode shall be made
void, your covenant with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with
hell shall not stand: when a scourge shall run over and pass thorough, then
shall ye be trodde down by it. Now therefore be no mockers, Hearken ye and
hear my voice, Hearken ye and hear my speech. And he says in Jeremy,
Jeremy. 13 16
Give glory to the Lord your God, before he bring darkness, and or ever
your feet stumble in the dark mountains, and whiles you look for light, he
turn it into the shadow of death, and make it as darkness. Can the Black
More change his skin? or the Leoparde his spots? Nothing hard to a good
will.
Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. We must then
undertake the good way, guyded thereunto thorough the assistaunce of God, and
what diffycultie soever we find, yet to strive to come to our pretended end,
and we shall find the paths of justice pleasant and easy. We read in
hystories that sundry Pagans, have overcome their evil and natural
inclination; and what ought a Christian to do? If riches, honors, and
pleasures slack us, let us call to mind the sundry threatninges in the holy
scriptures, against the rich, the proud, and ambitious, and have all our own
greatness in suspicion, and enjoy all things, as not possessing them, and let
it be the least part of our care, 2. Cor. 5.20.
the affairs of this world. We must remember how Saint Paul prays us to
be reconciled to God, to watch and be sober, and to live well, while we have
the light, and while it is called to day, not being able to assure our selves
thereof in time to come. And that we may the better be brought thereto, we
must shun all lewd companies, and evil livers, and acquaint our selves with
persons which have the fear of God, as Saint Paul warns us, Evil company
to be shunned.
yea in no case to meddle with men of evil life. Let us not then be Christians
in name only, as we have before declared: and let us be patient in adversity,
modest in prosperity, in our dewtie temperate, in our life just, charitable
toward our neighbors, toward the poor sweet and tractable, in our
conversation loving peace, integrity, and truth, beseeching to this end by
earnest prayers the aid of God thorough his holy spirit, and imagining that
we are always in the presence of God, his holy saints and Angels. And since
that we are the heirs of God, and coheyres with Christ Jesus, the temple of
the holy Ghost, and fellow Bourgeses with the saints and servants of God,
let us be ashamed to defile that temple and holy company, thorough the
lewdenesse of our life. And call to mind over and besides that we find so
much marked in the holy scriptures, The heathen of singular virtues.
the excellent virtues of the heathen as the innocence and abstinence of
Aristides, the integrity of Phocion, the holiness of Socrates, the charity
of Cymon, the te^perance of Camillus, the thriftinesse of Curious, the
uprightness, gravity, justice, and faith of the Catoes, yea the sobriety of
the very Turks, and an infinite number of examples so much reco^mended unto
us, the which may make us blush; as our Savior said unto the Jews, that they
of Sodom, Tire and Sidon, shall be better entreated then they except they
repented, and amended their lives. I know that therein lies great
difficulty, but a man must surmount all for the good that ensues thereon: and
as Cursius writes, Physicians cure the greeuousest diseases by bitter and
sharp remedies. And Cicero wrote unto Octauian, that men never apply salues
to grievous wounds, but such as do as much smart as profit. And there is no
good without pain, Cicero likewise in some places, and Plato in his Phedon, in
Gorgias, and in Axiochus, describe the strange kind of punishments that are
prepared for the wicked in the gayle of vengeance, which he calls Tartarus, a
place of darkness and torments; and that the good are heaped up with all
happiness and prosperity, and sent to paradise, or a garden which he sets
forth to be the most pleasant that may be, and termed to be the place of
judgment and the field of truth. And in the tenth of his commonwealth he
writes, that neither the pains, nor rewards in this world, are ought, either
in number or greatness, in respect of what each of the^ are in an other life.
Whereof we are better certified, in the holy scriptures, to the end we should
be reconciled unto God, without differring, or longer wallowing in the filth of
sin, for which we ought most earnest to beseech of him pardon, disposing our
selves wholly to obey him, since that he is our father, and rendering unto him
all homage and fealty, for whatsoever we hold of him in chief, calling upon
him in all our business. And since that he has pomised to hear, and provide
for all, let us not abuse his bounty, but in dew time reconcile our selves
unto him, Luke 12.35.
as Saint Paul exhorts us. I will not here forget the exhortation which our
Savior makes in Saint Luke Cap. 12. how we should have our loins guirde
about, and our lights burning, to be ready at the instant to perform what
he commands us; our faith being always accompagned with this ready
obedience, as we see by experience in Abraham the father of the faithful, and
in sundry other, whose names are celebrated in the 11. to the Hebrews, how
they left all respect of commodity, as soon as they were called. This is that
which we beseech at Gods hands in the Lords prayer, that his will may be done
in earth as it is in heaven, as much to say, as that he give us grace to be so
prompt and ready to do his will, as are the Angels that are in heaven, who no
sooner receive any commandment from god, but at the instant put it in
execution. For since that God is our soueraygne Lord, which commands nothing
that is not reasonable, and for their profit whom he will employ in his
service, we ought not to co^sult or descant, if we should obey what he
commands, nor be more slack or slow to accomplish his will, then are his
creatures without soul, which as it is written in sundry of the Psalms and
Prophets, leave no one jot to do in whatsoever their creator commands
them. Our Savior Christ in Saint Luke, said unto him that was so ready to
follow him, marie upon condition that he might first go unto his own
house, and take his leave of such his friends as were there, No man which
puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, Luke 9.62.
is apt for the kingdom of God. And we must not as we have said let slip
the opportunity to do well, or receive that good, which God presents unto us
when it is offered, but to serve him readily, for fear least if it be once lost
it be no more possible to recover it, being as old writers report bawlde
behind and not able to have any fast hold laid thereon. This is that, which
our Savior said speaking unto the Jews: Yet a little while is the light with
you, John. 12.35.
walk while you have light, least the darkness come upon you, for he that
walks in the dark knows not whether he goes. Which afterward they had
by experience good proof of. For by reason that they did not receive this
light which was then offered unto them, they were thereby deprived thereof, and
became most miserable, not knowing the time of their visitatio^, having
rejected those benefits which God was willing to have bestowed on them. Mat
22.4.
We read in S. Matthew. cap. 22. that such as were invited to the marriage of
the kings son, excused themselves, some alleging their merchandise, other
their domestical affairs, and other hindrances to be the cause. The king
being extremely angry with them, for that they so little regarded the favor
and honor which he had offered the^, pronounced the^ unworthy of his
liberality, and never after to be received into his house. And in the 24. chap.
of that gospel mention is made of the evil servant, which said in his heart,
My Master does differ his coming, Mat. 24.8.
let us drink, eat, and be merry, and in the mean time that he was so
careless, came his master, and put him in the rank of hipocrites where there
was weeping, and gnashing of teeth: the which teaches us by no means to be
slothful, as we have in Jeremiah the example of the pismire, which prepares
her meat in summer, knowing that in winter she nether shall have time nor
leisure: and likewise of the swallowe, Pro. 5.6 Ierem 8..7
turtle, and storke who observe the time of their coming, that they may not be
prevented with cold, which is so contrary unto their nature. Our savior
Jesus Christ, in like sort reprooueth the Scribes and Pharisees: Mat. 16.6.
for if men return not unto him and leave their evil way, they have occasion
to fear his justice. For in the 13. of the Prophet Hosea, he protests, that
the fault lay not in him that we are not saved, and that none is the cause of
our ruin and destruction but our own selves. And we must not resemble them of
whom it is said in the 24. of Saint Math. that they never believed they should
be surprised or overtaken. For as S. Paul says in the first to the
Thessalonians, the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, a fit
hour to convey ones self secretly into the house, he does mean to rob:
and as the lightning, which no sooner is perceived, then it vanishes away. We
have before greatly esteemed, and commended Fabius Maximus, for that by delay,
and temporising, he clean brake the fury of Hannibal; Fabius Maximus.
but such wisdom prevails not with God, in respect of whom nothing is more
wholesome, then a readiness to execute what he commands, which is not without
very great reason, and for the especial good of such as obey him. In the
first of Zephaniah God says: I will visit the men that are frosen in their
dregs, as much to say that they chose rather to lie wallowing in their fylth,
then to hasten the preventing of the judgment of God. zepha 1.12.
Let us then cast away, every thing that presses down, and the sin which
hangs so fast on, Heb. 12.1 ^
and let us run with patience the race which is set before us, and let us so
run as we may carry the price. And let us crave at Gods hand, with the
Psalmist, that he will break in sunder the cord which so fast tyeth us, and
deliver us from all vain desires, slothfulness, and delays which are so
dangerous. Here I will crave of the reader, if it please him to hold me
excused, in having been so tedious in this discourse of so great weight and
importance.

CHAP. XXXII. That ignorance is a lie, and the gappe of great inconvenience.
Plato in his second and seventh book of his common wealth writes, that
ignorance is a spiritual lying, which we ought to shun. Ignorance.
And in Timeus he terms it the sickness of the mind, and the occasion of
evil. And in the tenth of his laws; He adds that the soul receiving and
comprehending the divine understanding, conducteth all things rightly, and
happily: but if she be once joined with ignorance, she works clean
contrary, and the understanding is unto the soul, as the sight is unto the
body. And in his discourse of the sovereign good, he says that ignorance is
a most dangerous matter to fall into great personages, which ought to serve
as a light and example unto the people. And Pythagoras his counsel was, that
above all things we should have a care to keep the body from diseases, the
soul from ignorance, Eccles. 4.25.
and the city from sedition. And Ecclesiasticus bids us to be ashamed of
the lies of our own ignorance. Ciril.
And Isaiah sets it down for the fountain of al evils. And as S. Ciril
wrote, there is no mischief, which ignorance does not undertake. Augustine.
Falsehood and doubt the daughters of ignorance.
S. Augustine in his third book of the city of God, was of the same opinion,
and placed it amidst the temporal pains of this life. And from this lewd
mother of ignorance, have two daughters issued, to wit, falsehood, and doubt.
This is the reason why Solomon says in Ecclesiastes: Eccl. 2.14.
that the wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness.
For ignorance makes one fearful, base minded, unconstant, like unto beasts,
and such as are dead, and as Cleanthes was wont to say, suffers it self to
be deceived, and to deceive: besides, it knows not how to use that well which
it possesses. It is rash, takes the false for the true, the uncertain for
the certain, vice for virtue, and as Menander said, it believes not what it
sees, For this cause k. Philip, K. Philip.
when he gave his son Alexander to Aristotle to be instructed by him,
exhorted him in any wise to apply himself unto Philosophy, to the end he
should do nothing whereof he might repent. Sundry other have likewise been
of opinion, that knowledge was the true substance of felicity, and the
efficient cause of wisdom profitable to all mankind. Solomon writes that
men are adorned and preserved by wisdom: And from thence receive infinite
benefits: and for the most part all great Captains of ancient time were given
to learning. Theodosius.
The Emperor Theodosius the second with his own hand copied out all the new
testament and the Psalms. Vespasian.
As Titus Vespasian, did the whole history of Josephus: and other al Homer.
Epaminundas
It is written of Epaminondas, who obtained so many and great victories, that
he was instructed by the Philosopher Licides, and that through learning he
became much more valiant, just, and modest. The like has been reported of
Julius Caesar, of Augustus of the Scipioes, Fabius, and Catoes: and that life
without learning, The life of man without learning a very death
is but a very death, and as a man buried while he is yet living. For as a
Philosopher said, the understanding sees, hears, and lives: all the rest
is blind and deaf, wanting reason. And high dignities, estates, and riches,
does greatly blemish such as possess them, unless truth be joined
therewithal, which causes all to be well used. The Poets described one
Tiphon an enemy to knowledge, as a man puffed up, proud, and scattering all
things by his ignorance, for there is great difference between the judgment,
contentment, sight and feelinge of a learned man, Zeuzis.
and of one that is ignorant. As upon a time that great painter ZeuZis, not
being able to satisfy himself, in beholding the excellent workmanship of a
Picture, answered an ignorant man; You would not demand of me, why I so
much admyre it, if you had my eyes: which was the occasion that Plato said,
Hos. 4.6. Col. 1. Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 14. and 15. Ier. 8.4,
that for to love well virtue, wisdom, and the truth, Philosophical eyes
were required. And it is written in Hosea: that for lack of knowledge the
people were destroyed. And Saint Paul exhorts us carefully to avoid
ignorance, and diligently to search the knowledge of the will of God. And the
Prophet Jeremiah complains: Shall they fall and not arise; shall he turn
away and not turn again? Wherefore is this people of Jerusalem turned back
by a perpetual rebellion they gave themselves to deceit, and would not
return? Pope Pius the second, Pope Pius 2.
said that his books were his treasor. And a Philosopher being demanded, if
the King of Persia were not most fortunate, made answer, I know not what
virtue and learning he has. Alexander.
And Alexander said that those discourses which he had learned in
Philosophy, made him much more valiant, advised and assured, as well in wars
as all other enterprises. And not without cause Menander called ignorance a
voluntary misfortune; and Seneca esteemed the unwise man, Alphonce.
to be unthankful, of small assurance, and angry with his own self. One
told Alphonsus that a King of Spain said, that a Prince ought not to be
endued with learning: then he cried out that it was the voice of a beafe, and
not of a man. And termed ignorant Kings, crowned Asses, saying, that by books
men learned arms, and should thereby know more, then their experience would
teach them in a thousand years. Sigismond.
And the Emperor Sigismonde persuaded a County Palatine, that was already
well stricken in years to learn Latin. Petrarque rehearses of one Robert
King of Sicile, Petrarque.
that he was wont to say: he had rather be deprived of his Realm, then of
his learning. And we read in sundry hystories, that it has been inflicted
to many as a punishment that they should not be admitted to learning. And it
was not without cause said of them in old time, that nothing was more
pernicious, then an ignorant man in authority, as I could show by many
examples: and the deliberations of the ignorant, can not be but very
ambiguous, slow, and without effect. Leonce.
Sundry have blamed Leonce the Emperor, for that he could neither write nor
read, and Pope Paul the second, for that he hated such as were learned. Paul
2
Pope Celestine the fifte, deposed himself by reason of his ignorance.
Celestine 5.
And the Emperor Julian, to the end he might molest the Christians, forbad
them the reading of all good books. But the good Emperors and Kings have
founded Colleges, Colleges founded by good Kings.
and Traian found five thousand children at school, thereby to drive away
and banish the vice of ignorance. And for the most part al Princes have aided
themselves by learning or at the least made show of esteeming it. Aristotle
said, that it were better to beg and be needy, then unlearned: because the
one has need of humanity, the other of money, which may more easily be
recovered. He said likewise, (as Plato and Demanes) that there was as much
difference between a learned man and an ignorant, as between a live and a
dead, a whole and a sick, a blind and one of clear sight, or as between the
Gods and men. This made Menander to write, The scope of Learning.
that learning increased and doubled the sight. Yet men ought not to esteem
one that has red much, except he wax the better thereby, no more then as a
bath which serves to nothing except it be cleansed. And if we be accustomed
in a Barbers chair to behold our selves in a glass, much more ought we by a
lesson, sermon, or lecture, to examine our selves, and see how our spirit is
purged of sin, and how much we thereby grow better. And we must together
with a good nature ioyn the contemplation of learning, the better to inform us
of our duty, and afterward to put in use and practice that good which we have
learned, for as Plato wrote, The end of Philosophy, From conte^plation must
proceed practice.
and of our studies is that by the search which we have made of natural
things, we may be lead to the knowledge of God, and use that light which is
bestowed upon us, to conduct our life to piety, all good works and virtue.
Even Demosthenes wrote to a friend of his, that he was glad he followed
Philosophy, which detested all dishonest gain and deceit, and whose final
scope was virtue and justice. The which with much more certainty we may
auerre of the holy scripture, wherein we ought to exercise our selves for fear
of falling into that threatening which God pronounced by his Prophet, because
thou have rejected knowledge, therefore I will cast thee off. S. Augustine
handling that place of S. Paul to the Romans, where he speaks of the
ignorance of the Jews, writes, that in them which would not understand or
know, ignorance was a sin: but in them which were not able, nor had the
means how to know or understand, it was the pain of sin. So the not
knowing of God or of our selves, before we were instructed by the word of
God, was the pain of sin unto condemnation, but after we have heard the
word, ignorance is of it self a most grievous sin. For as S. Bernard
writes, they which are ignorant, and either for negligence or slothfulnes do
not learn, or for shame enquire not out the truth, are void of all excuse.
And if the Egyptians counted it a most intolerable calamity, to endure but
for three days the darkness which God sent unto them by Moses: Exodus 10.22
how much more ought we to be afraid, when we remain all our life long in
the night of ignorance? I could to this end allege sundry examples of
inconveniences that have ensued through ignorance of the natural causes of the
Eclipse of the Moon, and Sun, of the impressions which are fashioned in the
air, and of a superstitious fear of the Celestial signs, and how by the
ignorance of the Mathematikes, of Cosmographie, Inconveniences ensuing by
ignorance
Chorographie, and Geographie, they have not been able to know their way, nor
to judge of the height of a wall to be scalled, nor of the passages, rivers,
marshes, and proper places to pitch a camp, or retire themselves into, and
how much sundry historiographers have failed herein, but that I may not be
too tedious, I will refer the reader to the Greek, Latin, and French
histories. For this cause we ought to enforce our selves to learn, and to
profit in the knowledge of the truth, that that in Jeremiah may not be
reproched unto us: Ier, 5 21
You have eyes and see not, and have ears and hear not.

CHAP. XXXIII. That one ought not rashly to borrowe money, nor answer for
another man for fear of lying.
IT is greatly to be presumed that the principal cause, which moved them of
old time to council a man not to be surety for an other, nor to borrowe money
without very urgent necessity, or good pawn for the repaiment, was for fear
one should be found a liar, which is a vice accompanied with impudency, and
injustice. The Persians.
The Persians in like sort, as Herodotus witnesses blamed greatly two sins,
the one of owing, the other of lying. Alexander.
The which also moved Alexander the great after the victory which he obtained
against Darius, Sophie.
to pay and aquite his soldiers debtes: and Sophie the wife of Justin, to
answer sundry debts of the subjects of the Empire, out of her own coffers;
and Solon at Athens, to establish an abolishing of al debtes, Solon.
which he termed by a word which signified a diminutio^ of charge; Nehem. 5.11.
and sundry other to do the like in Lacedemon, and Nehemiah to restore again
the burdens and exactions. And in Deuteronomie every seventh year called the
year of freedom, Deuteronomy. 15 2.
debts could no more be demanded, to the end this vice of lying might be met
with, which accompanies the disabilitie of restoring. Phocion.
The which likewise was the cause of the answer which Phocion made unto them
which demanded of him to contribute where every man had very franckly given:
Nay, I should be much ashamed to give unto you, and not to restore unto him,
pointing unto a creditor of his own. And Seneca writes, that often times he
which lends money unto his friend, loses both money and friend. Aulus
Gellius. l. 7. c. 18. Seneca.
and l. 16. c. 7. tells of one which termed an oath a plaster of them which
borrowed. Aulus Gellius
And to the end the Boetiens and sundry other might be kept from borowing,
they tied a collar of iron about such as paid not at their day, Banquerouts
fastened to a collar.
and they stood long time open to the reproach of such as passed by. The
father of Euripides was in like sort handled. And Sueton writes that Claudus
was so served before he was chosen Emperor. And Hesiodus parents to avoid that
shame were constrained to quitte their country. That is worthy of marking
which Pausanias writes that the Athenians before they gave charge to any
Captain, Tit. de legate.
either by sea or by land, acquitted their debts, otherwise no account was made
of him. And according to the disposition of the law, one that is endebted ought
not to take upon him the office of an Ambassador. I have seen this same law
of the collar observed in certain Cantons of Zuizerland, to make men thereby
the better to keep their promise. In Saxe they made them prisoners which did
not acquit themselves. The law of the twelve tables was far more severe:
The law of 12 tables rigorous.
for if one did not pay what he borrowed, they would give unto him a short
peremptory day, in which time, if he did not acquit himself, they sold him,
or he was given to his creditour to serve him as his slave: and if he had many
creditors, they might dismember him, and take every one a piece. Such a law
notwithstanding, was not long since in use, L. 20. cap. 1.
as Titus Liuius and Aulus Gellius have written, and was repealed at the
request of the tribunes of the people and afterward by Dioclesian. Indians.
Among the Indians likewise, if the debtor did not discharge himself in his
prefixed time, they might take from him either a hand or an eye, and if he
dyed indebted, they would not suffer him to be buried, until his children or
friends had answered it. We read in the second book of the Kings, the
miracle which Eliseus did, 1. Kings 4.1.
to pay the debte of a widow, from whom her creditor would have taken away
her two children, to have served him for want of payment. Pro. 22.7.
And it is written in the Proverbs, that the borower is servant to the man that
lends: and so is it in the law 3. C. de Nouatio. Titus Liuius, and
Plutarque, in the lives of Coriolanus and Sertorius describes the sedition
which fell out at Rome, Sedition at Rome for debts.
which was abandoned of many, because the creditoures lead as slaves their
debtors, Abissius.
and detained them in most cruel bondage. Aluare which wrote the history of
the Abissius, sets down that debtors were delivered as bondmen to their
creditours: and some others have written that in the realm of Calicut, Calicut.
upon complaint made to the Bramains against the debtor, they gave the
creditour an instrument wherewith he might make a circle in the earth, and
therein enclose his debtor, commanding him in the Kings name not to depart
from thence until he were satisfied, and so was he constrained either to pay,
or dye there for hunger. At Athens there was a Judge which had no other charge
then to see debtes paid: the Tribunes likewise at Rome, had the like charge
against the greater sort. And by the civil law, if a man called one his debtor
which in deed was not, he might lawfully have an action of the case against
him; so odious was that name. As touching the inconveniences of suretiship.
Solomon sets them down in the Proverbs -- He shall be sure vexed that is
surety for a stranger, Pro. 6.1. and 11 15. and 22.26.
and he that hates suertiship is sure. Be not among them that are surety for
debtes, if thou have nothing to pay, why causest thou that he should take
thy bed from under thee? And in Ecclesiasticus: Suretiship has destroyed many
a rich man, and removed them as the waves of the sea. Ecclis. 29.29.
For the condition of the suertie is sometime worse then his that borrows,
because not making account to pay it, he is prosecuted, and put in execution,
and often times constrained to help himself by very sinister means, to his
great disadvantage. The which agrees with the old Proverb: Be suertie, and
thy pain is at hand. And according to the opinion of Bias, he which loses
the credit of his word, loses more then he which loses his debte. I do not
for all that mean by this that charity should therefore wax cold, nor that
there should be any let why both in word and deed, we should assist and
help the necessity of our neighbor, according unto such means as God has
bestowed upon us.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of lying ingratitude.
THE unthankful man has ever been accounted a more dangerous liar, The
unthankful man a more dangerous liar then the debtor.
then the debtor: for as much as he is only bound by a natural obligation to
acknowledge the benefit which he has received, and notwithstanding
impudently dissembleth the same, thinking it a sufficient excuse, for that he
can not be by law constrained thereunto as the debtor, and shunneth him whom he
ought to seek, breaking that conversation, and humanity, which preserves the
society of men. He despises God, his kin, and friends. And through this
impudency, he is even driven to al vilanie, and mischief, and makes him
self a slave, and ought to be grievously chastised as Xenophon writes. And
Plutarque interprets Pithagoras symbol of not receiving of swalowes,
Pythagoras Simbole.
that a man ought to shun ungrateful persons. The which has been an
occasion that many have refused great presents, fearing that they should not
have means to requite the same, and thereby to avoid the suspicion of
ingratitude which has always been condemned for a most manifest injury and
injustice: and under the word ungrateful have all vices with a curse been
comprehended. The Romans likewise, in the middle of their city, caused a
temple to be builded, and dedicated it to the Graces, The temple of Graces.
Hesiodus.
thereby to admonish every man to love peace, and detest ingratitude, and to
render to every one, according to Hesiodus rule, (a man famous among the
Philosophers) with increase, and greater measure, whateuer we have received,
imitating therein (as Cicero says) the fertile lands well labored, and
sown, which brings forth more then four fold increase. For this cause
Xenophon among the praises which he gave unto Agesilaus, reputeth it a part of
injustice not only, not to acknowledge a good turn, but also if more be not
rendered then has been received. And if we be naturally inclined to do good to
them of whom we conceive good hope, how much more are we bound to those at
whose hands we have already received a good turn. For it is in our power to
give, or not to give, but as Seneca writes, it is by no means lawful for a
good man not to render again the like pleasure which he has already
received, and shows that he is most miserable which forgets it; The
ungrateful of worse condition then serpents
and that the ungrateful man is of worse condition then the serpents, which
have venom to annoy an other, but not themselves, whereas he is in perpetual
torment, making that which he has received seem less then in deed it is,
judging it in himself a most dishonest part not to acknowledge it, and yet
against his own conscience gives place to his covetousness, and often times
wishes them dead to whom he is most bound. The histories are full of
plagues, and miseries sent by god to the unthankful, and of praises that have
been given unto those, which have acknowledged even toward very beasts,
that good which they have received, and of the great expense, and travail
taken by many, to take away the very suspicion of ingratitude, to which for
brevity sake I will refer you. I will not for all that forget here the example
of K. Pirrhus, who greatly lamented the death of a friend of his, K. Pirrhus.
because thereby he had lost the means to requite those benefits which he
had received of him, and greatly blamed himself, in having before so long time
differred it. And it was not without cause said by Publius Mimus, Pub. Mimus.
that who so receives a benefit sells his own liberty, as who would say,
that he made himself subject to render the like. And that we may be the
rather stirred up to preserve this humane society, and thankfulness, Thanks
rendered unto god for his benefits.
we must account what we receive of greater value then in deed it is, and what
we give to be of less, and not suffer our selves, to be overcome by
benefits. Through the whole course of the holy Scripture we read, how the
Saints and Patriarchs, have been diligent and careful, in praising of God,
and rendering thanks unto him for the benefits and favors received at his
hands, and greatly lamenting the unthankful, showing the miseries that
lighted upon them; Even God complains in Isaiah, Isaiah. 14.
and the rest of the Prophets, that he nourished and brought up children, but
they rebelled against him: and that beasts had more judgment to acknowledge
their benefactors then men. Hos^a. 2.8.
And reproched them in Hosea: that they did not know that he gave them corn
and wine. And complained in Deuteronomie: that the people being waxed gross,
Deuteronomy. 32.25
and laden with fatness, forsook God that made them, Michah. 6.^
and regarded not the strong God of their salvation. In Micah, he calls more
amply to mind his benefits bestowed on the Jews, and asks what he has
done, to see himself so ill acquitted? and yet declares, that the Lord
requires of them suerlie to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble
themselves, to walk with their God: and sundry other like passages are there
in the Bible. And Solomon writes, Pro. 17.13.
that He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
Senec. l. 2. de benes. c. 6
The laws of Athens, Persia, and Macedonia, were in time past highly
commended, for giving judgment against the ungrateful: yea, The ungrateful
by laws condemned to dye.
so far as they condemned him to the death; as it was in like sort in the law
of Periander. As touching Lycurgus, he would ordain nothing therein,
esteming it a most monstrous thing, K. Philip.
that a benefit should not be acknowledged. It is written of K. Philip, that
he put one of his soldiers out of pay, and proclaimed him a villain, and
incapable of al honor, because he was found unthankful, and caused to be
printed in his forehead this word Ungrateful, And for this cause it was
written of Socrates, Socrates.
that he would receive nothing from any man how great a personage so ever
he were, except in short time he had bin able to have requited him with the
like. And sundry Philosophers and great Captains have sent back great
presents, when they were offered unto them: yea, and forbad their Ambassadors in
no wise to receive any, Liberties and franc^ises upon vntha^kf^lnes to be
revoked.
(as we will hereafter declare) fearing least they should thereby remain more
bound, and unthankful. And by the oracle of Apollo, an ungrateful person ought
to be rejected and blamed throughout the world. And it was lawful to revoke
liberties and franchises for ingratitude, into the which we our selves fall, as
Cicero in his oration of the consular provinces declares, except we
acknowledge what was in our liberty to receive, or were offered unto us: and
be thankful as well for the benefits which we receive at Gods hand, as for
those which he adorneth our neighbors withal, declaring thereby his good will
which he bears toward men, which are as one body of many members. And if
that which Publius Mimius was wont to say be true, that what soever is given to
a good man binds every man, then have we great occasion to be thankful unto
God, for that good which he bestows of our neighbors. Furthermore we ought
to esteem adversities, Adversity a blessing and testimony of the good will of
god toward us.
as great blessings, and testimonies of the good will of God toward us,
thereby to humble us, and retain us in that discipline and due obedience,
which we owe unto him, as we have marked heretofore. And we ought to take as
great pleasure, in calling to remembrance, what benefits we have received in
time past, as in those which are in present offered unto us, thereby to prick
us forward to acknowledge them, by faith, hope, charity, patience, good works
and giving of thanks and to aspire unto riches more certain: otherwise we
shall clean turn from us, the course of those benefits and gifts of God,
which through men, as a mean he bestows upon us, and render our selves most
unworthy of all. Cicero in his oration for Plancus, calls thankefulnes the
mother of all other virtues, Thankfulness the mother of other virtues.
and says, that there is nothing so inhumane or brutish, as to suffer our
selves to be found unworthy, and very beasts to surmount us, in acknowleging
of benefits bestowed. As in sundry histories a man may see it evident that
very Lions, Bears, serpents, dogs, and other like beasts, have acknowledged
the help which has been done them, sufficiently to confound such as remain
ungrateful. 2. Tim. 3.2. Pro. 17.13. Pliuie.
And S. Paul among the vices, and wickedness, that shall happen in the latter
time comprehends unthankfulness; and Solomon in his Proverbs writes, that
evil shall not depart from the house of the unthankful* Pliny wrote not
without cause that an ill, and over dear bargain, is always unthankful
because it condemns his master of folly, and lightness. We ought not then so
much to cast our eye upon those which seem unto us to live more at their ease
then our selves, as upon an infinite number of other that are less, and which
have not so much health, friends, and commodities; whereof we have cause to
thank God, and shun this so great a vice. Princes ought in like sort above al
things to detest it, and to use liberality, Liberallitie of princes.
to the end they may provoke and draw every man to embrase the good and
happiness of their estate, and hold men still diligent in their service, in the
duty of good men. De bello Ing. Sylla.
And as Salust rehearses Bocchus the king of the Getules, had reason to tell
Sylla that it was a less shame for a king to be overcome by arms then by
courtesy. And before he wrote of the same Sylla, that he never willingly
would receive a pleasure at the hands of any, except he might very speedily
requite them, and never asked his own of any, studying above all things to
make multitudes of nations fast bound unto him.

CHAP. XXXV. That lying has made Poets and Painters to be blamed, and of the
garnishing of houses.
PLato wrote, Poets banished Platoes common weal.
that Poetry consisted in the cunning invention of fables, which are a false
narration, resembling a true, and that therein they did often manifest sundry
follies of the gods; for this cause he banished and excluded them out of his
common wealth, as men that mingled poison with honey. Besides thorough their
lying and wanton discourses they corrupt the manners of youth, and diminish
that reverence which men ought to carry toward their superiors, and the laws
of God, whom they feign to be replenished with passions and vice. And the
principal ornament of their verses are tales made at pleasure, and foolish and
disorderly subjects, clean disguising the truth and history to the end they
might the more delight: and for this cause have they bin thrust out of sundry
cities. Among other, Archilochus chased out of Sparta.
after that Archilocus came into Sparta, he was presently thrust out, as soon
as they had understood, how he had written in his poemes, that it was better to
lose a man's weopens then his life, and forbad ever after al such deceitful
poesies. Hence grew the common proverb, that al Poets are liars. And it was
written of Socrates, Socrates not brought up to Poetrye.
that he was ill brought up to poesy because he loved the truth. And a man
might say, that this moved Caligula to condemn Virgils and Homers books,
because of their profane fables, which S- Paul exhorted Timothy to cast away.
Plutarque tells of a Lacedemonian, Tirteus
who when he was demanded what he thought of the Poet Tirteus, Hieron.
answered that he was very good to infect young men's wits. And Hieron of
Siracusa condemned Epicarinus the Poet in a great fine, because in his wives
presence he had repeated certain lascivious verses. And Viues writes, Ovid.
that Ovid was most justly sent into banishment, as an instrument of
wantonness. He which first invented the Iambique versifying, to byte, and
quippe, was the first that felt the smart.

Archilochus.
And Archilocus the Poet fell into confusion, through his own detractions, as
Horace and sundry other have written, and Aulus Gellius reports that Orpheus,
Homer, and Hesiodus gave names and honors to the gods. Pithagoras.
And Pithagoras said, that their souls hong in hell upon a tree, Iuuenall
still pulled of every side by serpents, for their so damnable invention. And
Domitian banished Iuuenal: and Pope Paul 2. Eusebius
and Adrian 6. held them as enemies to religion. Eusebius in his 8. book and
first Chapter de Preparatione Euangelica, sets down an example of a Poet,
who for having lewdly applied a piece of Scripture to a fable, suddenly lost
his natural sight, and after that he had done penance, it was restored to him
again. And as touching Painters, they have been greatly misliked of, for
representing such fictions, Painters Simonides
and Poetical deceits. For as Simonides said: Painting is a dumme Poesy, and
a Poesy is a speaking painting: and the actions which the Painters set out
with visible colors and figures, the Poets reckon with words as though they
had in deed been performed. And the end of each is, but to yield pleasure
by lying, not esteeming the sequel and custom, or impression, which hereby
give to the violating of the laws and corruption of good manners. For this
cause the Prophets called the statuas, images, and wanton pictures, the
teachers of vanity, of lies, deceit, and abomination. And Lactantius
writes, that a counterfeit took the name of counterfaiting, Habac Isaiah 3.
and all deceit (as we before declared) springs from falsehood and lying.
This was it which moved S. John, Deuteronomy. 27.15.
in the end of his first Epistle to warn men to keep themselves from images:
for an image does at their fancy counterfeit the body of a man dead, but is
not able to yield the least gasp of breath. And idolatry, is properly, such
service as is done unto Idols. We read how God especially forbad it in the
first table, and how long the Romans and Persians lived without any use
thereof: and how the Lacedaemonians could never abide that an image should
stand in their Senate. Augustine.
There has been in sundry councels mention made thereof and S. Athanasius
more at large discoursed thereof in a sermon he made against Idols: and S.
Augustine in his book de fide and Simbolo, and upon 150. Psalm, and in his
eighth book of the city of God, and Damascene in his 4. book and 8. C. The
occasion of so free passage given to Poets is, for that their fables slide
away easily, and cunningly turn them selves, to tickel at pleasure, whereas
the truth plainly sets down the matter as it is in deed, albeit the event
thereof be not very pleasant. Plato.
Plato in like sort compared, the disputes in Poetry, to the banquets of the
ignorant, who use Music in steed of good discourse, and in his third book
of his commonwealth, he forbids Poets or painters to set down or represent
any thing dishonest or wanton, for fear of corrupting of good manners.
Aristotle.
And Aristotle in his Politiques, the third book, and 17. Chapter would have
all vile words to be banished. And Saint Paul to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.3.
that any uncleanness, foolish jesting, Tertullian.
or talking should be once named among them. And Tertullian an ancient
doctor of the Church, called Poets, and certain Philosophers, the Patriarchs
of heretics. This which I have spoken of must not be understood, of Poesies,
wherein much truth and instruction is contained, nor of pictures which
represent the acts of holy and virtuous personages, nor of fables taken out
of hystories, whereof, there may grow some edifying: but only of that which
is lascivious, and grounded upon naughty argument, rendering youth effeminate,
and men more given to wantonness, pleasures, passion, and vain opinions, then
to virtue, clean turning away the honor that is due unto God, or to good
edifying; for according unto the commandment of God, Cherubyns were made. The
admonition which Epictetus gave to such as were too curious in pictures,
Epictetus.
ought by no means to be here forgotten: Trim not thy house (says he) with
tables and pictures, but paint it and guild it with Temperance: the one vainly
feeds the eyes, the other is an eternal ornament which cannot be defaced.
The same does Plutarque teach in the life of Dion, Plutarque.
that more care is to be taken for the hanging and adorning of the palace of
the soul, then of the outward. And the same Philosopher did not much out of
the way warn us, that we should take heed that the skirt of our garments
should not carry a stinche of life.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of backebyters, mockers, and evil speakers, and why the
Comedians, stage players and Iugglers have been rejected.
WE have heretofore showed that our mouth ought to serve our neighbor, as well
to preserve him in honor as in profit: and for that our Lord God commands,
Leuit. 19.11.
that we should neither deal falsely, nor lie one to another. He forbids
us, either to deprave or deceive any: for deprauing and backbiting is an enemy
unto the truth, to the weal, and honor of our neighbor, Exodus 20.16.
and forbidden by God in the commandment of not bearing false witness: and has
ever bin accounted as manslaughter, and stealing away of the renown, which we
ought to esteem, according to the saying of the wise man above great riches.
Pro. 6.1.
Plato in his common wealth greatly praised the laws of Lidia, which punished
backbiters, Lib. 3.
as murderers, neither do we want sundry examples which show what mischief
has ensued through backbyting. We have one in Hester c. 3. Ester 3.1.
of the mischief which Haman pursued against the Jews, which K. Ahashueroh;
and of Doeg, which through his backbiting was the cause of the death of 85. 1.
Sam 22.18 1. Sam. 24.10
persons that did wear a lynen Ephod, and sundry other myseries. And David did
attribute unto slanderers all the evil which Saul had wrought against him. The
backbiter is in degree near unto the flatterer, and hurts three persons, the
absent, of whom he speaks, the present, which gives ear unto him, 2. Cor.
6.9.
and himself. And it is written in Ecclesiast. that hatred, enmity,and
reproach attends the backbiter. And S. Paul writes that railers shall not
inherit the kingdom of God: Ephesians. 4.31.
and to the Ephesians: Let al bitterness and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all malitiousnes. Be ye courteous one to
another, and tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's
sake forgave you. Solon being demanded what was more cutting then a knife,
answered, a slanderous tongue, the which David calls a sharp razor, and hot
burning coals. The same writes S. James in his Epistle more at large. And as
it is taken for a sign of health, so is it a sign of a sound understanding to
be exempt from al words that may do harm. Pro. 18.21.
And not without cause said Solomon, that death and life are in the power of
the tongue, Sup. psalm. 57.
and more perish thereby then by the sword. And adds, that he which keeps
his tongue, keeps his life. S. Augustine shows that the truth has written
in our hearts this commandment: Do unto an other, as thou would be done unto
thy self. And S. Ierom upon Isaiah in like sort says, even as we would not
that men should speak evil of us, Isaiah. 14.
no more ought we to deprave our neighbor. S. Paul wills us not so much as
to eat or drink with the railers: 1. Cor. 5.11.
and so did S. James. Al kind of mockery ought also to be shunned, which is a
reproach covered with some fault, and which accustometh the mocker to rail, and
lie, Mockery.
and moves more then an injury when it proceeds from a will to outrage, and
a malice without necessity. The which moved some to term it an artificial
injury. Solomon writes in his proverbs that God does abhor al mockers, the
which Isaiah comprehends C. 38. and 57. The lieutenant of K. Darius put to
death one of his soldiars which had railed upon Alexander, Raylers and mockers
punished.
saiing that the part of a soldiar was to fight, not to rail. Antigonus caused
one to dye for the like cause, 1. King. 2.23.
and they of Alexandria were well chastised by Vespasian, and diverse children
were torn in pieces for mockinge of Elisha, with wild bears. At the least
we ought to resemble the Phisitio^s which Hipocrates made to swear, that they
should not bewraye the secret and hidden faults and evils. Gregory.
And Saint Gregory in his Morals compares the backebiter unto him, which
blows the powder that flasheth into his own eyes, and hinders his seeing.
For this cause ought we to follow the council given unto us by Saint Peter:
1. Pet. 2.1.
that laying aside all malitiousnesse, and all guile, and dissimulation, and
envy,and all evil speaking, as new borne babes we desire the milk of the
word, that we may grow thereby. And above all things, followinge the
council of Demosthenes, we must take heed of speaking ill of the absent, or
giving ear unto the backebiters, as Alexander Seuerus was wont to say and do.

And for as much as comedies are compounded of fixions, Comedies.
fables, and lies, they have of diverse been rejected. Plays.
As touching Plays, they are full of filthy words, which would not become
very lacqueys, and courtisanes, and have sundry inventions which infect the
spirit, and replenish it with unchaste, whorishe, cosening, deceitful,
wanton, and mischeeuous passions. Atheneus writing of the invention of a
Comedy, and tragedy, says, that they have ever been invented in a time of
vintage and drunkenness. And for that, besides all these inconveniences,
Comedians. and stage players.
Comedians, and stage players, do often times envy and gnawe at the honor of
another, and to please the vulgar people, set before them sundry lies, and
teach much dissolutenes, and deceit, by this means turning vpside down all
discipline and good manners, many cities well governed, would never at any time
intertaine the^. And the city of Marseilles, Marseilles.
has been maruelously praised in ancient time, for that she always rejected
such kind of people. And the Emperors Augustus, Anthony, Frederick the first,
and Henry the third, caused them to be driven out of their Empire. And the
Tribunes banished one Neuius out of Rome. Chrysostom.
And S. Chrysostom, in his 17 homily upon S. Matthew. says, that there is no
peril upon the sea so dangerous, Theaters.
as are the Theaters and places of Commedies and plays; and declares at large
what dissolutenes, disorder, factions, mischiefs and inconveniences have
ensued thereby. Seneca.
The like does Seneca declare in his first Epistle of the first book, Caelius
Rodiginus. Augustine.
and Caelius Rodiginus in his 5. book and 7. Chapter. And S. Augustine in his
City of God commends Scipio, for that he forbad the use of any such pastimes
as an enemy to al virtue and honesty. And says that the devils under the
similitude of false gods erected them. Lacedaemonians.
The Lacedaemonians also would never permit such plays and acts, for fear
somewhat might be imprinted into the peoples breast, contrary to the laws and
truth. For as the Apostle writes: 1. Cor. 15.33.
Evil words corrupt good manners. And this caused the good king S. Louis to
banish them out of his court. K. S. Louis. S. Jerome.
And S. Ierom toward the end of his first book against Iouinian writes, that
tragedies are full of contempt of marriage and good laws. And Seneca wisely
wrote in his Epistles that it is very dangerous to be present at al shows.
Seneca.
And by some counsels have they been flatly forbidden For the subject thereof
is filthy and dishonest, and the action of the players leaves an impression of
wantonness, whoredom and vilanie in the soul of the assistants, and that which
they see so dissolute and vile, when it is joined with words and deeds,
(whereby the Comedians enrich their filthy and dishonest subject) infecteth
more the spirits, and wrappeth them in passions, then drunkenness it self would
do. And in Cassiodorus, k. Theodorick writes a long letter to his Provost, K.
Theodoric.
that he should hinder all such spectacles, as corrupted manners and honesty,
and raised nothing but quarrels, and contention the which moved Aristotle in his
Politiques, to exhort all magistrates to forbid such plays, Aristotle.
and banish al vile words out of their City. And Saint Paul exhorts the
Ephesians: that no corrupt communication proceed out of our mouth: and adds,
Grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom you are sealed unto the day of
redemption. I would wish that Theaters might be defaced, and no occasion
given for such plagues to enter within cities and houses, according to the
opinion of Saluian Bishop of Marseilles, esteeming all such spectacles to be
a very apostasy, and leaving of the faith of Sacraments, and Christian
religion; and therefore as the occasion of so great mischief they ought to be
shunned. Plato:
Plato his opinion was, that governors of commonweals should in sort not
suffer tragedies to be rehearsed, except they had been first considered of by
censors and judges, and found good, and full of mortality, without any one
the least word that might be offensive to chaste ears. Aristotle.
And Aristotle in the end of the eight book of his Politiques, forbids all
youth to be assistaunt thereat.

CHAP. XXXVII. That accusers, talebearers, false pleaders, and curious persons,
are of the same brotherhood of lying.
SInce that all the virtues of the soul ought to be applied unto charity,
Slanders and false reports
then are slanders and false reports to be greatly eschewed, proceeding out of
the same shop of lying. The slanderer does ever unjustly accuse and ought to
be punished, with the same manner of punishment, as the party accused should
have been, if it had been found true: as the Emperors Theodosius and
Honorius, ordained in the latter law, and Tranquillus in Augusto. And in
ancient time they marked them in the forehead with a hot iron, as Pliny
reports in Panegyr, C. de calumni.
and Cicero in his oration pro Roscio. The Emperors Tiberius, Nero, Vitellius,
and sundry other taking pleasure therein, have been the occasion of much
mischief. When Agesilaus king of the Lacedaemonians, Agesilaus.
at any time had heard any praise, or disco^mende one, he was wont to say, that
he was as well to consider the behavior of him that spoke, as his of whom he
spoke. And after that a Roman Knight, had showed unto Augustus the Emperor,
that that was most false which had been reported of him, he humbly besought
him, that for ever after he would have great regard, of what was laid to the
charge of any person of quality, that it might be done by good men, and of
an approved truth. God forbids us to judge lightly, or to give credit to a
sole witness, and if our sight, our hearing, and our taste often times deceive
us, no doubt so may our judgment. The Emperors Titus, Vespasian, Nerua, and
Traian, Punishment of talebearers.
made talebearers to be whipped and banished. Domitian, Anthony, and Macrinus,
thrust them out of the Empire, saying: that who so did not punish them
encouraged them. And Leontius the Emperor after that he had put Justinian to
flight, caused two of his tale bearers to be trayled by the feet and burned.
And after the death of Apollodorus and Phalaris the Tyrants, they caused such
hell hounds to be fleede, and burned, and put them in the rank of the
accursed. The which was likewise done in the time of the Emperor Pertinax, and
after the decease of Maximinus, Pro. 18.8.
and his son. Solomon wrote, that the words of a talebearer are as
flatterings, and they go down into the bowels of the belly. And Pliny the
younger calls them robbers and thieves. And Ecclesiasticus abhors them and
all such as are of a double tongue, and thanketh God (as also did David in
sundry Psalms) that he had delivered him from the snare of the false tongue,
Dan. 6.24. Devil.
and talebearers. And Darius made the accusers of Daniel to be devoured by the
Lions. the word of Devil is as much to say as an accuser. Doeg by the tale he
carried to K. Saul, 1. Sam. 22.18 Aristobulus.
caused the Priests to be murdered. Aristobulus the K. of the Jews, thorough
a false report put to death his own brother, Herod.
and afterward died for sorrow. Herod in like sort caused his wife and son
to be murdered, and had like for grief to have died after that he was better
informed of the truth: as also it befell to Constantine the Emperor,
Constantine.
who was the cause of the death of his own son and mother in law: Francis D.
of Bretaigne.
and to Francis Duke of Bretaigne that caused Gilles his own brother to be
slain. We read of the end of Seian, Tiberius, Plautian, and Seuerus. Many
Emperors have put men to death with hearing of them, and there is no person
whatsoever be he never so upright and innocent, Remedy against accusers.
but through such helhoundes may very well be brought into trouble. As Socrates
in Xenophon, and our own experience may teach us. And to be able to avoid
all slanders and reproach, we must observe that instruction which S. Paul gives
to the Ephesians, so holily and wisely to behave our selves, as no occasion or
place be given to the accuser. He gives the like advise in his 2. 1. Pet. 2.12.
Epistle to the Cor. and S. Peter in his first epistle, wills us to have our
conversation honest, that they which speak evil of us, as of evil doers, may
by our good works which they shall see glorify God. For good men by their
virtue and innocence do quench reprooch, as fire is quenched by water. False
pleaders are such as betray their clyents, and dissemble the truth, False
pleaders.
l. praeuaricatores de verb. sig. titulo ad senatusc. Turpil. which sets
down a punishment for slanderers, false pleaders, and wranglers. Such plagues
did Plato banish his commonwealth. A man likewise may name them false pleaders,
which do not acquit themselves of the charge committed unto them, and pass
it over as it were only for a fashion to be dispatched of it. The which is also
to be understood of soldiers suspected of treason or failing in service of
importance.

And for as much as the condition of accusers and talebearers is much supported
by curiosity and babbling, and thereby has great alliance with envy and
malice, and is engendered through idleness and folly. I have placed those curious
men in the same rank, which desire so earnestly to know the imperfections of
an other. And such should do very much for themselves, if they would bestow
that same desire upon their own faults to amend them, Curious persons.
shutting their windows and lopeholes that look upon their neighbor, to the
end they may have better sun, and more wholesome wind from some other part,
and thereby better inform themselves of the private government of their own
family, and of matters fitter for them to know. They shall find enough at
home to pass away their time withal, without rese^bling the Lady faries, that
some say do never use the aid of their eyes but abroad, and out of their own
houses. It was never lawful for stage players among the Turiens to talk of
any citizen, except he were either an adulterer or curious. And by the law of
Locres, if any man coming out of the country, should ask, what news were
sturring, he was by and by greatly fined, to the end curiosity might not have
too much place. Anthony.
Sundry write that Antonie the Emperor, going one day to the house of one
Ouilius a Senator, demanded of him how it was possible for him to recover so
great store of Pillars of Porphire, to whom he made answer, that when you
enter into an other man's house, you must learn to be deaf, and dumme. The
which the Emperor took in very good part. And as we fear those winds
which blow about our ears our clothes, and customers and farmers when they
pry too near into small trash and private business, so ought every one to look
to such curious persons, and when they once accost the^, to answer them that
the retreat is sounded, and the hens have espied the Kite, and so shift from
them as soon as they may be able. For nothing can enter into their ears but
what evil so ever they can hear, like unto cupping glasses, which draws
nothing from the skin but the naughty blood that is within it, Eccles. 21.21
and many times they interpret all to the worst. Ecclesiasticus admonished us
not without great cause, to take heed of being ouercurious in matters
superfluous and says: that A fool will peep in at a door into the house,
but he that it well nurtered will stand without. And S. Paul in the end of
his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and in his first to Timothy, Li. 10
de confessi.
blames such as are curious. S. Augustine teaches us to change this
curiosity, into a care to amend our life, and to know that which appertains
unto our salvation: and Tertullian wrote that it ought to take no place at all
with us, since that Jesus Christ was manifested unto us in the gospel. And
according to the Greek proverb alleged by Cicero, each man ought to busy
himself in the art which he knows, and in his own vocation. Of this vice
Bartole writes upon the law, Doli mali de Nouatio. nu. 5. Tertullian. Voyages
into far countries.

Death of Aristotle. Death of Pleny.

Remedies against curiosity.


chap. 17. I could here impute to curiosity a great part of the art of
navigations, and voyages into far countries, whence nothing is brought home
but strange customs and corruption of manners: in like sort the death of
Aristotle not being able to comprehend the secret of Euripus, nor why the sea
in the straight of Negrepont every 24. hours, flowed and ebbed apace 7. times:
and of Pliny smothered in the flames and vapors of Montgibel, and the heresies
of sundry other persons. And that we may the better keep our selves from
sinning herein, we must accustom our selves not to be too much inquisitiue
after matters that are lawefull, nor make account of inuenters and coyners of
news. As Phocion answered upon the brute of Alexanders death: Phocion.
deliberate of your affairs: for if the news be true to day, then will they
be true to morrow. Socrates.
The answer which Socrates made, to him which asked him what the world was,
seems worthy to be here remembered: that ever since he came to any judgment,
he applied his time to search his own self, thereby to know himself the
better: which as yet he could not attain unto, and when he should then would
he imploye himself to other things which might serve him for naught, or not
import him so much. He was wont likewise to say, Geometry and Arithmetike.
that it was enough to learn so much geometry, as might make him know, and
maintain his own land from his neighbors: and so much arithmeticke as to
keep the account of his own money, moueables, and merchandise. And in the
ancient time they were greatly seized, which unprofitably consumed their
brain, in the superfluous search of matters buried in obscure darkness,
uncertain, and frivolous.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Flatterers.
WE have before declared how necessary a matter it is, Flatterers.
for one to have near unto him such entire friends as will always tell him
the truth without flattery. For flatterers as S. Augustine says, do poison
men's understanding, and still drive them into further error, making of a
Thersites an Achilles, and of a little fly, an Elephant, having no other scope
in the world but deceit. And that which yields unto them so large a field
is self love, and over winning of ones self, which clean takes away right
judgment, Self love blind
and is blind in regard of what it loves, except it fall out among such as
have of long time been accustomed and taugh, more to esteem honesty, then
that which naturally springs up with it. Plato his followers would ever
counterfeit his high sholders, Aristotle's his stammering, Alexanders his double
chinne and shrilnes of speech, and the Poet Ennius, his drunkenness. And in the
time of Tiberius the Emperor, Tiberius
a flatterer said unto him, that since his pleasure was that every free city
should be free of speech, a man ought not to be silent in that which he knew
would prove profitable: and after he had prepared sundry men's ears ready to
give him hearing, he began in this sort. Hearker O Caesar, wherein we find our
selves agreeued with thee, and there is no man which dares openly to tell thee
thereof. It is for that thou make no accont of thy self, but abandonest thy
own person, and afffictest thy body with the continual care and travail
which thou take for us, never yielding unto thy self thy dew rest, either
by day, or night. And as he went on further with the same discourse, one cried
out. The liberty which this man uses will cause him to die, other said he
will mar the Emperor. Princes have always been subject to flatterers: for
as the bigger the tree is, the mor fat there is for worms to remain in,
Princes subject to flatterers
so the more wealth a man is of, the more is he sought of flatterers, which
address themselves to that part of the soul which is most unreasonable. The
Emperors Augustus, Titus, Niger, Alexander Seuerus, Frederic the second, and
sundry other held them in great hatred: Augustus.
yea Augustus being come into the Theater, Flatterers banished the courts of
princes.
when one that was present cried out, O good and just Lord, showed himself
highly displeased therewith, and forbad that any should call him any more Lord,
as Sueton writes. And Philip surnamed Gods gift, Constantine and sundry other,
banished them their courts, as the very ruin and plague of Princes: and at
Athenes they were put to death. A wise Abbot wrote of Charles the 3. that above
all things he took heed, that flattering courtiers should not ravish from
himself, the favor of his benefits: as they are who^ they term sellers of
smoke. For besides the mischief which they work, they swerve with all change
of fortune, and leave men as lyce do a dead carkas, or flies an empty chychen.
Iouinian.
And Iouinian the Emperor compared the^ to the ebb and flowing of the sea,
Agesilaus.
and said that they only adored the rich robes of Princes Agesilaus K. of the
Lacedaemonians was wont to say that they were far more dangerous then either
thieves or murderers. And Isocrates, Isocrates.
and since his time K. Alphonsus were wont to say that of all mischeifes, K.
Alphonsus.
that were possible to happen to a Prince, the greatest was, when he gave ear
to flatterers: and counseled the^ to shun the^ like fire, Hos. 7.3.
plague, and wolves. The which the Prophet Hosea confirms, and Solomon in his
Proverbs. Julian.
The Emperor Julian, being one day highly commended by his courtiers, for that
he was so good a Iusticer, had reason to say, that if those praises had
proceeded from any men's mouths, who had durst condemn, or mislike his
actions, when they should be contrary thereunto, then had he had occasion to have
esteemed thereof. Dion. Quintus cursius.
Dion attributed the hatred, which was conceived against Julius Caesar, and his
very death to flatterers. And Q. Cursius shows that great segneuries and
kingdoms, lie by that means more desolate then by wars. Vopiscus.
Vopiscus sets down flattery, as the principal cause that corrupts
Princes. Philip de Comines.
And Philip de Comines, renders the reason thereof to be, for that Princes do
lightly ouerwin too much of themselves, and of those who^ they find agreeable
unto their humor. One of Alexander his lieuetenantes on a time wrote unto him,
Alexander.
that he had in his government a boy of incomparable beauty, and that if it so
liked him he would send him unto him: He wrote back unto him, O accursed and
mischeuous caytife, what have thou ever known in me that thou shuldst thus
dare to flatter me by such pleasures? Likewise having on a time understood,
that one with who^ he ran a race, had suffered him to win the wager, by his
swiftnes, he grew marvelous angry: Dionisius.
contrary to Dionisius of Siracusa the elder who sent Philoxenes the Poet to
the gallows, with such as were condemned to die, because he wuld not flatter
him nor yield unto him in Poesy. For as Aristotle declares in the 1. book of
his Politiques, Tyrants greatly take pleasure in being flattered, Tyrants
delighted with flattery.
and favor the wicked. Some are of opinions that flatterers are far worse the^
false witnesses or false coyners, because they infect the understanding. And
Antisthenes judged the^ more dangerous then ravens, Plato:
for that they do but devour the bodies of such as are dead. And Plato in
Menedemus calls them inchanters, sorcerers, and poysoners. Theopompus and
Atheneus witness, that the Thessaliens clean rased a city of the Melians,
because it was named Flattery. One demanded of Sigismonde how he could endure
flatterers about him? Sigismonde.
he answered that he knew not how he gave ear unto the^, of his own nature
hating the^. For albeit that they clean ouerturne and ruin kingdoms, yet have
they commonly better entertainment then plain dealing or virtue. As Alexander
said that he loved better the idolatry of Ephestion, the^ the sincerity of
Clitus. Seneca.
And Seneca his book natural. quaest. writes, that flattery is of that nature
that it ever pleases though it be rejected, and in the end makes it self to
be received. Thales, other say Pittacus being demanded of all beasts which was
the most cruel, answered that among Princes the flatterer. Phocion said to K.
Antipater, Phocion.
Thou can not have me both for thy friend and flatterer. Atheneus and sundry
other aucthors do impute Alexander his faults and changes, his delicatenes,
drunkenness, Alexander.
dissolutnes, and the murders which he committed to his flatterers: he
remained a time without burial, and his conquests occupied by strangers, after
the massacre of such as were nearest unto him. The which ought to move us to
cast off that opinion which we hold of our selves, and so to consider of our
imperfections and faults intermingled among our actions, Remedy against flattery
that we suffer not our selves to be abused by flatterers, and as a man would
say make litter of our selves for their pleasure. For they transform
themselves into all shapes (as the Polepus and Cameleon) that they may please.
And it was not amiss said of him, that the flatterers of Princes do resemble
those which infect, and taint a common spring, and which put out the eyes of
the guide, and are the occasion of the subjects harm, No man so pestilent as
the flatterers.
as the wiseman near a Prine is the cause of the universal wealefare. Other
have said that there is no kind of man more pestilent, nor which sooner marred
youth, then the flatterer, presenting an inevitable bait of pleasure,
wherewith they are deceived. And if the said youth look not well about them,
and hold a hard hand over their appetites, it is quickly entrapped: and they
are among Princes like fowlers which take birds in their snares by
counterfeyting of their call.

CHAP. XXXIX. That envy is a miserable lie, and of the means to remedy it.
All christians are one body where of Christ is the head
FOr as much as all Christians are members of one self same body, whereof Jesus
Christ our savior is the head, those gifts and graces which each one has
perticularly received at Gods hands, are for the ornament, pleasure, and
profitte of all: as beauty and the agilitie of one of the members of the
body, is common to all the rest, which are distinguished, and separate, each
one having a particular office for their mutual weal. And in that the members
do so knit and join themselves together, it is not accounted of their free
accord, but as a satisfaction dew by the law of nature. So does neither the
foot, nor the hand envy one the other, though the one be adorned with
ringes, and the other be at rest, but as Hipocrates and Galien wrote, there is
a kind of divine consent, and accord, betwixt all the members of the body.
And the very true badge to discern a Christian by is mutual love, the which
Tertullian named the Sacrament of faith, Christian love
and the treasure of a Christian name. And as the holy scripture teaches us,
we are not to our selves, but to God, who most freely bestows all things
upon us, to the end we should impart the same unto our neighbor. And we ought
to esteem, whatsoever any man possesses, not to happen unto him as by chance
or fortune, but thorough the distribution of him, Mal. 2.10.
who is the sovereign master, disposer, and Lord of all. And as it is written
in Malachie, Have we not all one father? Has not one God made us? Why do we
transgress every one against his brother, and break the covenant of our
fathers? And it was wisely set down by an ancient father, that upon
whatsoever we possess we ought to engraue this title, It is the gift of God.
And S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6.20 Gal. 3.15.
that Love enuieth not, and if ye bite and devour on an other, take heed least
ye be consumed one of an other. Notwithstanding whosoever he be that is
already possessed and replenished with this mischeuous vice of envy, Envy.
he violateth the dispensation of God, and is himself mightily afflicted at
the prosperity and good of his neighbor, whereas he ought to have reioysed
thereat, as though he had been partaker thereof: and even as if he were
greeuouslie payned in the eyes, he is always offended, not able to abide any
clearenesse or light, but gnaweth and consumes himself as the rust does iron.
Socrates.
This moved Socrates to term this vice the filth, slime and impostume of the
soul, and a perpetual torment to him in whom it abides, a venum, poison or
quick silver, which consumes the marow of the bones, taking away all pleasure
of the light, of rest, and of meat. And the wise man in his proverbs writes,
Pro. 14.30. Job 5. Eccle. 30.24. and 31.
that envy is the rotting of the bones, and in Job, that it slaieth the
idiote, and in Ecclesiasticus, that it shortneth the life, and there is nothing
worse then the envious man. And in the Pro. that he shall be filled with poverty,
and through envy man is made inco^patible, And Plutarke writes that it
fills the body, with a wicked and pernicious disposition, and charmeth it
self bewitching and darkning the body, the soul, and the understanding. For
this cause Isocrates wrote to Enagoras, that envy was good for nothing, but in
that it tormented the^ which were possessed therewith, which evil, the envious
do no whit at al feel, but contrariwise make it an argument of their virtue.
As Themistocles in his youth said, that as then he had never done any thing
worthy of memory, in that there was no man whom he might perceive did any ways
envy him. And Thucidides was of opinion that a wise man was ever content to be
envied. This passion does often engender enmity and mislike, which is flatly
forbidden of God except it be against sin. Remedy against envy.
This was the very cause why the Philosophers did give us council, to praise
our enemies when they did well, and not to be angry when any prosperity befell
them, to the end we might thereby be the further off from enuiyng the good
fortune of our friends. And can there be any exercise in this world, able to
carry a more profitable habit to our souls, then that which clean takes
away this perverse emulation of jealousy, and this inclination to envy, a
sister german to curiosity, rejoicing in the harm of an other? And yet this
is still tormented with an others good. Both which passions proceed from a
wicked root, and from a more savage, and cruel kind of passion, to wit
malice. And not without cause did Seneca stand in doubt, whether envy were a
more detestable or deformed vice. And Bion on a time seeing an envious man
sad, demanded of him whether any evil had betide him, or good to an other.
Description of envy.
Neither was envy amiss described by a Poet, imagined to be in a dark cave,
pale, lean, looking a squint, abounding with gall, her teeth black, never
rejoicing but at an others harm, still unquiet, and careful, and continually
tormenting her self. And the same Poets have written, that the envious were
still tormented by Megera, one of the Eumenides, and furies, Megarein likewise
in Greek is as much to say as to envy. We ought then to consider that a
great part of these things which we commonly envy, is attained unto by
diligence, prudence, care and virtuous actions; to the end we should exercise,
and sharpen our desire to honor, and seek by all means to attain to the like
good, Agis K of Lacedemon.
without envy. Some report, how Agis K. of Lacedemon, when it was told him
that he was greatly enuyed, by his competitors, made answer. They are doubly
plagued: for both their own lewdnes does greatly torment them, and besides are
grieved at that good which they see in me and mine. For envy, both makes the
body to be very ill disposed, and changes the color of the countenance,
therefore was it termed the wiche and fever hepticke of the spirit. Aristotle.
Pliny
And as Aristotle and Pliny wrote, that in the mountain of Care, and in
Mesopotamia, there is a kind of scorpions, and small serpents, The nature of
certain Scorpions and serpents.
which never offend, or harm strangers, but yet do deadly sting the natural
inhabitants of the place so envy never does exercise it self, but upon such
as it most frequenteth, and is most private with. And most wisely was it said
of the ancient fathers, that the envious man is fed with the most dainty
meat, for he does continually gnawe on his own heart, and shorten his life,
Hannibal.
and often times is the cause of great sedition and ruin. Hannibal often times
complained that he was never vanquished by the people of Rome, Bellisare.
but by the envy of the Senate of Carthage, as also did that great Captain
Bellisare, being thereby brought to extreme beggerye. I do not exempt hence,
their fault who, when they have attained to any science, or particular
knowledge, that might be profitable, and serviceable to the common wealth, will
never impart the same to any: but choose rather to die, and let such a gift
received from God, be buried with them, defrauding their successors and
posterity thereof, who shall in the end receive dew chastisement therefore:
the only cause of the loss of so many and excellent inventions.

CHAP. XXXX. How pride, ambition, vain boasting, and presumption are lying,
and how all passions lead clean contrary to what they pretend, and who may
be termed men of humility, and of the means which contains us therein.
^ide.
Diverse have set down two impediments as chief hinderers of the truth, to wit,
despair, and presumption. And the wise Bion said that pride kept men from
learning, and profit. And Ecclesiasticus terms it the beginning of sin. And
Philo in his book of the contemplative life shows, that the spring of pride
is lying, as the truth is of humbleness. And Aristotle wrote in his morales,
Aristotle.
that the proud boasting man, does feign things to be which indeed are not, or
makes the^ appear greater then they are, whereas the desebler contrariwise
does deny that which is, or does diminish it, but the true man tells things
as they are indeed, holding a middle place between the presu^ptuous and the
dese^bler, as we have before touched. Augustine.
S. Augustine showed how pride was the beginning of al mischief: and upon S.
Mat. entreting of the words of our savior, he makes pride the mother of
envy, and says that if one be able to suppress it, the daughter shall be in
like sort. And in the 56. Epistle which he worte to Dioscorides he says, As
Demosthenes the Greek orator, being demanded what was the first precept of
eloquence, answered, to pronounce well, being demanded what was the 2. answered
the like, and so to the 3. In like sort says he if I be asked of the precepts
of religion, I will answer that the 1.2. and 3. is humility. Humility.
And S. Chrysostom in the homely of the perfection of the Gospel says that
the very foundation of our Philosophy is humility. For arrogance is always
accompanied with folly, audacitie, rashness, insolency, and as Plato writes
solitariness: as if one would say, that the proud is abandoned of all the
world, ever attributing to himself that which is not, never measuring his will
according to his force, having much more brag then matter of worth. S.
Augustine compares him, to a ship tossed with winds without a pylote. And an
ancient father writes, that presumption is the mother of all vices,
Presumption.
and is like unto a great fire which makes every one retire back. We read in
the works of ancient Physicians, how some that were of a melancolicke or sad
humor, thought their own selves to be some senseless thing, or beast.
Aristotle and Gallen yield us sundry examples thereof, and how some in their
own fancies imagining wonderful matters through the illusions of wandering and
transported wits, constantly affyrmed, that they saw, and did that which
indeed was not, as he which believed all the ships that came into the haue^ to
be his own: and other that thought they saw, and heard players upon a wide
stage, as Horace writes. Such are the Proud which delight them selves in
their own foolish inventions. Dan. 4.20.
There is in Daniel a notable example of King Nabugodonozur, and of
Sennacharib that was slain of his own children, after that the Angel had
discomfited his army. And likewise of Antiochus and sundry other which proves
that most true which our savior says, that he which exalts himself shall be
brought low, and he which humbles him self shall be exalted. And that which is
written in Ecclesiasticus The beginning of man's pride is to fall away from God,
and to turn away his heart from his maker. Eccles. 10.13.
For pride is the original of sin, and he that has it shall power out
abhominatio^ till at last he be overthrown. I touch no whit at all here the
Licantropie, Licantropie.
when as sundry certainly perceive a change of humane shape, their mind and
reason remaining in their accustomed order, referring my self to that which
many have written thereof. All wits in like sort that are given to prejudice,
and opinions, judge otherwise then they ought Solomon says in his Proverbs,
that all that are proud in heart, Pro. 16.5.
are an abomination to the Lord, and that among the proud is nothing but
strife, and counsels us not to haunte the^, nor to be too conversant with
over far reaching heads, adding that the pride of a man shall bring him low.
Ier. 50.32.
In Jeremiah God says, The proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise
him up, and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour al round
about him. And in Isaiah they are sore threatened, and he says that the
magnificence shall be brought low, and that pride destroieth all commonwealth and
states. As also in Ezechiel, and in the 1. Tob. 4.13.
of Abdias it is written, the pride of thy heart has deceived thee. And in
Tobit, In pride is destruction, and much trouble, and in fiercenes is scarcity
and great poverty. K. Philip.
The son of Agesilaus wrote unto K. Philip, who much gloried in some of his
victories, that if he measured his shadow he should find it no greater then it
was before the victory. The same poor king was slain of one to whom he
refused to minister justice, and histories declare how his successors through
their disloyalty fell into great calamities. And yet was he praised among the
rest of his virtues, for that one of his people said unto him 3. times every
morning, to the end he should not wax too haughty, Remember thy self Philip
that thou art a man. Theodosius the Emperor had often times the like warning
given him by his wife. Theodosius. Alexander.
Arrian in the 7, of his history recites, how Alexander demanded of certain
wise men of the Indies, why as soon as they had espied him, they stamped upon
the ground with their feet; they answered him that no man held ought saving
the ground upon which he trod, and that they esteemed him like other men, save
only that he came so far, to put him self and other to much more pain, and
that when he should die he should enjoy no more earth, then of necessity to
cover his body: but ambition clean turned him from following of any good
council, and for a good time was he afterward deprived of any burial.
Nicanor, when he went about to assail the Jews, sold them before he came
near them, but in the end he was overcome: as in like sort the Marquisse of
Gast in our time, at Cerisoles, Marquess of Gast.
divided among his favorites the spoil of the French, and prepared sundry
ropes to lead them prisoners, and to put them to ransom, and yet in the end
his self was vanquished. Herod glorying in his raiment and the honor which was
done him, was shortly after eaten up with worms. Like unto this pride was the
vanity of Caligula, Caligula.
and of diverse other which must in any wise have their feet to be kissed.
Sigibert found fault with Charlemagne, Charlemagne.
because that after he was chosen Emperor he despised the fashions of France.
For the same cause was Alexander reprehended. K. Lewys, the 11. was wont to
say, that when pride was on horseback, mischief and shame was on the croper.
Alexander. K Lewis 11. Comparison.
And as husbandme^, rather allow of those ears which bow down, and wax
crooked; then such as grow streigh, as thinking least store of grain to be in
them, and as it is written that if a stone be hunge upon the bough of a tree to
weigh it down, it shall carry the more fruit, and as valleys are commonly more
fertile then mountains, and as the more liquor a man puts into a vessel
the more vain air goes out, and the empty hogsheade carries a greater
sound then the full; so the more that men arm themselves with virtue, vanity,
hypocrisy, and lying does depart, not seeking preferment before other but in
honest actions, and the more that a man shall think of his vices and
imperfections, the more shall his wings fall from presumption. Experience
teaches us, Man's imbecility.
that infancy is but a foolish simplicity, full of lamentations, filthiness,
and harms, as it were laid open to a main sea, without a stern: and youth
but an indiscreate heat, outrageous, blind, headie, violent, and vain: man's
estate, trouble, and vexation of mind, full of repentance, and plunged in
care. Old age a noisome languishing and full of grief, still feeling the
excess of immoderate youth: and all man's life consumed in tears, trouble, and
grief, where pleasures are the fevers of the spirit, goods torments: honors
heavy charges: and rest unquietness it self, and to pass from one age to an
other, is to fall from one mischeife to an other, drawing toward death. With
good discretion did Solon call towns, boroughtes, and villages, the retreates
of man's miseries, full of noysomnesse, travail, and fortune. And Aristotle
terms man to be the disciple of imbecillitie, of inconstancy, of ruins, and
diseases. All which ought to make us humble our selves. The old proverb is
common, who knows himself best, esteems himself least. For if any man
seem to himself that he is somewhat, when he is nothing, Gal. 6.3.
he deceives himself in his imagination says S. Paul. This is also the
reason why the prophet Abacuc writes that the just man lives by faith: and
that they which exalt themselves shall have a fall. Sundry writers make mention
of K. Sesostris, that he made himself be drawn by four Kings which he held
captives, and one of them ever used to turn his face backwarde, and being
demanded why he did so, answered, that in beholding the wheels, how the
highest part became lowest, Sesostris.
he remembered the condition of men: with which answer the same Sesostris
became a great deal the more civil. Saladin
Saladin after his death, made his shirt to be carried at the end of a lance,
and to be cried that of all the Realms and riches he had, now nothing was
left him but that. In sundry places does the holy scripture, impute this
quality of pride left to them which distrust in God, and presume of them
selves. And would to God each one would practice the exhortation of S. Paul to
the Philippians, Phil. 2.2.
To be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord and one
judgment. That nothing be done thorough contention, or vain glory, but that
in meekness of mind, every one esteem other better then himself. Looking
not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of an
other man. And to the Romans he desires them, Romans 12.10.
to be affectioned to love one an other with brotherly love, in giving honor
going one before an other. Herodotus tells of one Apricus King of Egypt,
Apricus.
who was so insolent that he would say that there was neither God nor man
could abate him, or dispossess him of his kingdom: but shortly after Amasis
put him by it, and he was strangled by his own subjects. The like does Ovid
make mention to befall to one Niob. Goliath was slain by David. Julius caesar.
Julius Caesar was so arrogant, as he would say, that it should stand for a
law, whateuer pleased him. Other Princes have had this word in their mouth,
I will it be so, never considering that their wills ought to be measured by
the will of God, The will of princes ambitious.
justice, and laws, for the preservation of their estate, as king Theopompus,
and the Emperor Alexander, Seuerus, were wont to say, and as we recited
before of King Antigonus, good Princes ought to esteem nothing honest and
lawefull, that is not so of his own nature, and agreeable to the laws. And as
touching such as are ambitious, they never do ought that is entirely pure and
neete, but ever in their actions you shall discern a kind of bastardie, full
of faults dispersed according to the diversity of the winds, which drive
them forward: and never measuring themselves, do daily commit notorious
errors, and ruin themselves in undertaking more then they are able, or then
is honest. Whereupon it is very necessary that the counsel of Ecclesiasticus
be put in practice: Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee,
Eccles. 3.21. and 23.2.
neither search the things rashly that are too mighty for thee, and burden
not thy self above thy power, while thou live. Plutarke in the life of Agis,
Ixion.
applies the fable of Ixion, which was tormented in hell, and of him which
found a cloud insteede of Juno, to such as are ambitious and ungrateful. And
so do some other refer that which Homer in his Odes recites of Sysiphus, who
continually rouled the stone which he was never able to carry to the top of
the mountain, Sisiphus. Phaeton.
and of Phaeton who would needs guide the horses of the sun. It has bin an
old proverb, that he which aduaunceth himself further then he ought,
receives more the^ he would. They rese^ble the fisherman in Theocrites, who
satisfied his hunger with dreams of gold And with very great reason may a man
impute, all sects, heresies, and divisions, Heresies co^bats and vvarres
imputed to ambition
foolish enterprises, combats, and unnecessary wars, to the ambition of
unquiet and moving spirits, which never content themselves in their vocation:
for this cause S. Gregory Nazianzene wrote to Procopius, that he never saw any
good issue come of any counsel or Synod, by reason of ambition, which did more
impare controversy the^ amend the^. And Aristotle in the 2. of his Politiques
shows, that the greatest part of faults which men commit proceeds from
ambition or covetousness: as there are infinite examples of factions, which have
long time endured in France, England, and Italy. Hesiodus writes that the
unwise do not understand that the half is more the^ the hole. For this cause
it often chances that they lose what ever they have gotten and which
peaceably before they enjoyed, The ambitious often loose what they get.
through a gredines of vndewly getting from other, as we see it fell out, and
so does it every day to a number, which have not retired themselves in dew
time, not being able to stay the course of their fortune. The which in the
end Antiochus full well understood: for after that he was vanquished, and
that the Romans had taken from him the province of Asia, he was wont to say
that he esteemed himself much bound unto them, for the learning which they
had taught him, and for their gratiousnes and courtesy, which they had used
toward him: for when I enjoyed (says he) so large a circuit of country I
could not content my self, nor set an end to my ambition, or desires: but
since such time as the Romans have abrydged my limittes, they have so gnawen
my wings of ambition, that I am more content then I was: and now my care
needs not to be so great, to govern well, my little kingdom which is left,
before not being able to be satisfied. Augustus the Emperor said that he
wondered how so great a king as Alexander, Alexander.
who had conquered all Greece, Egypt, and Asia, and yet could not be quiet
except he might still be in hand with new business continuing war, not
considering that it was both as great a virtue, and redounded as much to his
glory, by wholesome laws and ordinances, to establish the government of a well
pacified monarchy, as it was to conquer it. I greatly commend the council of
one Democrites, The Council of Democrites
that a man should ever propose unto himself and covet things possible, and
be contented with the present, and with that portion and measure, which it has
pleased God to yield unto him, and to fashion himself according to that
faculty and mean which is given unto him, never coveting the manuage of any
greater affayre then appertains to his own estate, as the Psalmist, and S.
Peter exhorts us. They have always in like sort been highly esteemed of,
which have stayde the violence of their desires, and moderated the unbridled
fierceness of their ambition, To moderate ambition.
by prudence, and will with regard of honesty. As we read of Lucullus,
Dioclesian, Curious Cincinnatus, Scipio, and sundry other. The very same moved
Traian to write to Plutarke, that he did more admire the contempt, which the
said Cincinnatus, Scipio, Dioclesian.
and M. Porcus made of great estate and wealth, then he did at their victories.
The said Dioclesian, answered him which egged him forward again to reenter
into the Empire, that having once escaped the plague, Pro. 28.25.
he would no more drink poison, and was contented to become a gardener.
Concerning such as are proud in heart, Solomon says that they stir up
strife. For as Saint Paul says: We have nothing which we have not received
from God, nor we must not glory in our wisdom, in our strength, nor in our
riches, as Jeremy exhorts us. 1. Cor. 4.7. Jeremy 9.23.
The miserable end of such as have vaunted in their strength, is fully set
down before our eyes, in Exodus of Pharao, of Absolon, of Roboam, of Iesabel,
and of Beneadad. 1. Rings 14.19. and 20. of the K. of Assiria, and of Babylon,
of Nabugadonozor Daniel 3. and 4. and in sundry other places as well scripture
as histories. Plato, or rather better Ecclesiasticus and S. Augustine have
taught us, that experience sufficiently shows unto such as take heed thereof,
that all passions, concupiscences, and greefes of the soul, are for the most
part accompanied with inconveniences, which in show a man endeavors to
shun by them, and yet they lead to the contrary: as the vice of ambition is
followed with dishonor, Passions lead to the contrary.
dissoluteness and pleasure brings grief and repentance, delicateness and
daintiness breeds travail, stubbornness contentions with loss, and
unshamefastness, and while they seek to shun blame, fall into further
infamy, peril and enmity: and for fear of refusing one that is importunate,
sustain great losses and suites. He likewise which vnconsiderately makes a
promise, is often constrained to break it: and to possess goods which one has
not deserves, gives occasion as Demosthenes says, to commit many follies,
The last perfection is subject to alteration.
and to become unfortunate. As also Hippocrates said, that it is most perilous,
when a good disposition aryueth at his last point; because whatsoever is in the
last perfection and excellency is subject to change, by reason of the
feeblenes and imbecillitie of the body. And our life is a pilgrimage unstable
and unconstant, and we contain within our selves the matter of all diseases.
And not without cause did Thales the Milesian call vice, the most harmefull
matter of the world; Vice.
because where that is, it loses all, and destroys what ever was before
builded. God reprocheth in Isaiah: that they have kindled a fire, Isaiah. 50.11
and are compassed about with sparks, and have walked in the light of their
feet, and in the sparks that they have kindled. Wisd. 11.13.
And it is written in the book of wisdom, that wherewith a man sins, with
the same shall he be punished. And S. Augustine teaches us, that every
disordinate appetite, carries his own pain, as we see sundry examples of
such, which while thorough murder, usury, falsehood, theft, or other vilanie,
they seek to enrich themselves, do contrariwise lose what wealth soever they
before had, besides the pain, and punishment which they endure. This is that
which Solomon says, Pro. 10.24. and 14.12.
that what the wicked fears shall befall unto them. And that there is a way
which seems righteous to a man, but the issues thereof are the ways of
death. And it was a common saying of old, that the proud fatt themselves with
vain hope, which by little choketh them, as water does to him which has the
dropsy, or naughty fat to man's body, or the grease of an horse, when it is
melted. I will not speak of pastors, which have only the bare name, Pastors in
name.
never executing ought which apertaineth to their charge, employing those
blames which the holy scripture gives them: and yet no man would have a
servant ignorant of the charge, which is required of him. Hypocrisy.
It were not impertinent to discourse here, of the hypocrisy and lyinges,
which is found in all estates and officers which acquit not themselves
faithfully, were it not for fear of being too tedious. We may say, as that
great Captain Marcellus did unto his soldiers, and also Xerxes to his, I see
many bodies, countenances and garments of Romans, but no Roman. And how
far are we estranged from our principal, and important profession of
Christianity? Rightly may they cast us in the teeth, as God by his Prophet
Malachie did unto the Jews: Mal. 6.6
If then I be a father, where is my honor? if I be a Master, Faith without
works is dead
where is my fear? considering that in vain does man boast of faith without
good works, from which it is no less separate then heat is from the Sun.
and the shadow from the body as we have above declared. Who are to be named
men.
For we ought not to term such men (as S. Chrisostom most excellently said)
which have hands, a head, feet, and some reason, but such as remain in the
truth and fear of God, and have a lively faith working by charity. As
Solomon shows in the end of Ecclesiastes saying: Eccles. 12.13
Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.
Even the greatest part of the Philosophers have maintained, that man's felicity
consisted not in this life but in another, and that his scope is to refer
this life to the knowledge and service of God to enjoy all bliss eternally in
an other. But now in this old age of the world, of all good things there
rests naught, but the name, and a vain shadow. Remedies against pride.
Now that we may be delivered from a vice so pernicious as pride is, we
must fall into due consideration of our own vanity, our faults, and
imperfections, and remember that we are but filth, worms, dust and
putrefaction, as the Psalmist says, and as Aug. upon John says, very
devils, and Satan's, except God of his mercy show pity upon us. The
Birthday is in Greek called Genethliae, the beginning of travels, and death
Thanatas, thence up to God. And Menander said, that life and misery were two
twins, which increase are nourished and live together. Aristotle also upon
the question which was propounded unto him, what man was answered that he was
the example of imbecillitie, pray of time, sport of fortune and envy, the
image of inconstancy, and seat of phlegm, choler, and rumes. And Solon
called Cities, the retreates of miseries, tears, and sorrows. The which is
more plainly set forth unto us, both in holy and profane histories. Some
have compared man to a bubble made of a drop of rain, and to the dream of a
shadow. It is said of the Pecocke, when he spreads abroad his goodly
plumes, The nature of the Pacocke.
if he look down upon his feet, he shuts them in again for shame, and
remains abast: so we considering the excellency of our soul in his own
nature, have great cause to boast in God which has given it unto us, and
through his bounty has vouchsafed to honor us far above all other
creatures: but looking back how this nature has been corrupted, and
esloyned from her first original, there remains naught to us but shame. And
if there be any good in us, it proceeds from the liberality of God, by
whom if we be not continually supported, we shall fall into all misery and
mischief. All good proceeds from god.
Let us likewise considered how many great personages, fearing to be too
much exalted, have refused Empires, Kingdoms, Bishoprics, Abbayes, and other
dignities. And have accounted themselves happy, when God has done them the
honor to humble them, and bring them unto him through sundry afflictions.
Philo the Jew writes, that the occasion why Leven was forbid unto the Jews
at the feast of Easter, Why leven was forbid unto the Jews.
was to teach them to have a great care to keep themselves from pride and
presumption, into which they fell which held any good opinion of their own
selves, and puffs themselves up therewith, as the dowe is with the leven.

CHAP. XLI. That Painting is Lying.
FOr as much as sincerity, simplicity, roundnesse, and truth, Paynting and
disguising.
are proper to such as are virtuous, and all disguysing has been accounted
odious; It is not without cause that sundry have blamed and found fault with
paynting, which serves not but to delight such as are licentious, and
proceeds as Saint Ciprian and Chrysostom wrote, from the Devil a liar, and
deceiuer. And if Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3 Tit. 2.
and Saint Paul exhort weomen not to have their appareling outward, as with
broydered hair, and gold put about, or in putting on of apparel, but what is
comely to weomen making profession of the truth through good works, much
less will they allow of paynting. God in Isaiah reprehendeth the daughters of
Sion, because they minsed as they went, and decked themselves too curiously.

Among other things he says: that because they were haughty and walked with
outstretched necks, Isaiah 3
and with wandering eyes walking and minsing as they went, and making a
tinckling with their feet, therefore shall the Lord make the heds of the
daughters of Zion bald, and discover their secret parts, and in that day
shall take away the ornament of the slippers, and the calls, and the round
tires, the sweet balls and the brasselets, and the bonnets, the tyres of the
head, and the sloppes, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the ear rings:
the rings and the mufflers, the costly apparel, and the vailes, and the
wimples, and the crisping pinnes, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and the
hoods, and the launes, and the men shall fall by the sword for suffering such
pride of women. Deuteronomy. 22.3.
In Deuteronomie it is written: The woman shall not wear that which pertains
voto the man, neither shall a man put on a woman's raiment. And we must glorify
God in our bodies, and in our spirits, 1. Cor. 6.20.
which are his, and the temples of the holy Ghost (as S. Paul says) and take
heed of giving offense to any. It is without all doubt, that there chances
sundry great imperfections to children, when weomen with child go too
strait laced. Tertullian in his book of the rayments of weomen, would have
them simple and differing from common maidens, and such as were nice and
drunken. S. Ciprian, and S. Ambrose upon the like argument, and S. Chrysostom
upon the 12. to the Hebrews, forbid painting to women, and say that they give
occasion of offense, and cause men to sin, and wallow in the stye of the
brickle vanities of this world. And Sueton tells how Augustus called gorgious
garments, Gorgious raiments.
marks of pride, and nestes of riotousnes. And many old doctors of the
Church, have greatly complained against such as curle their hair, and above
all things reproved the use of wearing of perwigs. And Clement Alexandrin
writes, Lib. 3. praed. c. p. 2.
that as a man would judge one to be ill at ease, which wears a plaster on
his face, or one that has been scourged to have been punished by law, so
does painting betoken a diseased soul marked with adultery, as Iezabel was
found fault with and punished. And Platina reprehendeth Pope Paul the second.
The ancient fathers called it a corruption and stain, if many colors were
mingled together. And Homer speakinge of a piece of yuorie that was colored
red, writes, that it was poluted with a stain. A man may rather say so by
ones face. As also Horace called Lentiscus a liar, Archidamus.
because he blacked his hair. And K. Archidamus told an Orator which had done
the like, that he carried a lie in his head, K. Philip.
and therefore could say nothing well. K. Philip said as much to one of
Antipaters friends, from whom he took away his office, after that he
understood that he curled his hair, Mariadge without doure.
and beard, telling him that he which in his hair was falls and a liar, could
hardly be loyal in any good affair. This is the reason why Lycurgus forbad al
kind of painting, and artificial garnishing to be used in the city of Sparta:
ordaining in like sort that maidens should be given im marriage without dower,
to the end that for want of money none should remain unmarried, nor any
sought for their goods, Sparta a well governed city.
but respecting the manners of the maiden, each one should make election of
virtue, in her whom he would marry. A Lacedemonian being demanded by a
stranger, why there was no law made against adulterers? Why said he, should
there be any, since all riches, delicatenes, al painting, and outward
garnishing is forbidden in Sparta, and shame to do ill, honesty and obedience
there has all the authority, and pre-eminence. And if a painter would take it
grievously, and for a great injury offered unto him, if any other should add
any colors to the picture which had finished, especially upon the
counterfaict of Princes, which themselves would hold for a great contempt, and
by the civil law, L. sistatuas.
the child may have an action of the case against him which shall deface the
portract of his father. We may well imagine how much it displeases God, if by
painting we seek to correct his work, and pollute his temple as S. Ierom
writes in an Epistle to Laeta, and against Heluidie. And S. Chrisostom upon
the ninth of S. Matthew. adds, that it makes us resemble strumpets, and
hasteneth wrinkles before old age. Titus Liuius tells of one Vestale
Postumea, Posthumia vestale.
that she was accused under color of appareling her self too netely. S. Peter
would have a Christian woman which makes profession of godliness, to live
holily, as if she were of a religion well reformed. And it was excellently well
written by Tertullian, that the force of faith is such, that it is perceived by
man's understanding, Tertullian.
by his countenance, garments, and every action. And Plato said, Plato:
that they which were curious in bedecking of their body, despised the care of
their soul. It were not amiss, if every one that were curious were served, as
a Treasorer of Dionisius K. of Sicil was, who bragging to Aristippus of the
garnishing of his house, and furniture in all respects, the said Philosopher not
seeing where he might spit without marring, Aristippus.
cast his phlegm in the face of this Magnifico, telling him that he saw
nothing less filthy.

CHAP. XLII. That Witches, southsayers, sorcerers, and usurers, are replenished
with lying, and how a man may exempt himself frrm them.
Southsayers witches and astrologers.
SOuthsayers, Wytches, and Astrologers, judging without the compass of the
order of nature, have always been detested and condemned, thorough the whole
course of the holy Scripture, in that they durst foretell of things to come:
except it were, of that, which they might make conjecture of, thorough the
said order, by long experience, and observations given from hand to hand,
followinge the ordinary course of the heaven, common rules, and as God has
been accustomed to do at all times, having all in his own hand, moderatinge
and guyding the course of heaven, and the issues of all enterprises: as
Pindarus wrote that a good husband ought to foresee a tempest many days
before: and sundry Philosophers by speculatiue astrology, have foretold the
dearth, and plenty of fruits as should fall out that year, following the
said rules and signs which have been accustomed to precede, and when
experience answers to the cause. For otherwise they are not able to foretell
ought without lying, and ayding themselves with Art, long experience and
revelation of the devil, the father of lies, to whom they have whollye
abandoned themselves, as S. Augustine shows in his book of the city of God.
Li. 24. c. 11.
Aulus Gellius writes, that if they foretell any thing that is good, and
deceive thee, thou shall attend them but in vain. If they threaten thee
mischief, and lie, thou art also miserable, fearing in vain. If they answer
thee according as thou fear, thou art unfortunate before it happen. And if
they promise thee happy success, the attending of that hope will so trouble
thee, holding thee still in suspense, that that very hope will take away the
flower and fruit of thy joy. Judicial science is but vain. Ptolome.
And this proceeding which depends of the variable senses,of many which
observe, it is both hard and false. And that judicial science is but vain,
as Ptolome shows it in his Quadripartite, adding very wisely, that the
opinions of Astrologians are not the decrees of sovereign Judges. And many
years pass over before one self same constellation of heavenly bodies do
again appear. And the most part of the accidents of this world being
unfortunate, the knowledge thereof would breed great inconveniences and
travail. Lib. 3.
Tacitus had reason to write, that whatsoever depends of destenie or the
divine ordinance, cannot be avoided, albeit it be foretold. The which opinion
Plutarque is likewise of in the life of Hannibal. A man has enough to do to
digest things present, without busying himself with future, Francis marquisse
of Salusses.
and we read of great inconveniences that have ensued too much trust given to
Prognostications, to which some have attributed the revolt of Francis Marquisse
of Salusses, both harmfull to him, and all France. And to such prognosticators
swallowed up in the gulf of lying, Icarus.
the fable of Icarus is applied, who fell from heaven into the sea, because in
flying to high his waxen wings were melted. Porphyre.
Porphiry who greatly esteemed of oracles, was yet constrained to confess,
that devils or gods foretold of natural things, by the order of natural
causes which they observed, and of things which depended of our will, by
conjectures taken of our actions: but as they are more sudden then we, and
of a more sharp eyesight, so do they prevent and go before us, in such sort
that as natural things are false, and humane accidents moveable and
uncertain, so are they subject to lie: that is to say, that they cannot
foretell any things of us, but what they learn out of our own actions, nor of
natural things, but what they read in the course of nature: for neither
Angels nor devils can read in stars that which is not, Prophets.
nor in men that which they know not, as did the Prophets inspired of God, who
seem to have touched as in a history, whatsoever happened more then one
hundred years after. The which causes us to admire the mightines, and truth
of God, creator of the whole world. Besides what need we be so curious to
understand what should happen unto us, when we can by no means avoid it.
Does it not double ones misery, as Demonax said? Aristotle likewise in the
fourth of his Ethicques, finds fault that their cosinages and lyings went
unpunished. And the Romans made sundry ordinances to banish them Italy as
Tacitus writes: yea, the lawyer Vlpian says, Lib. 12. Latem apud. S Si quis
de minor.
that the cunning man, which shall tell any thing of one that stole ought which
was lost, shall not be quit for an action of the case, but shall be grievously
punished. The Greeks also term a wiche Mantin, which approaches the French
word Menteur. As touching prophesies, which have bin made through the
inspiration of God, concerning alterations of kingdo^s, we have always found
them prove true, whereas the answers of the Pagans oracles, Prophets. li 4.
were ever uncertain and obscure, as Eusebius declares. Wherefore following
the commandment of God, the ordinance of France, especially the iij estates
assembled at Blois, the 36. Article, and sundry councels, which have
excommunicated witches and sorcerers, we ought to abandon such as liars and
pernicious abusers, who are not able to judge of spirits, Deuteronomy. 28. Exodus 12.
the hour of death, and marriages. And it is impiety to be too inquisitiue
therein. God himself in Leuiticus adiudgeth them to dye; Lib. 9. c. 9.
and as Eusebius recyteth in his Ecclesiastical history, the Emperors
Augustus, Tiberius, Galerius, and Maximinus, caused them all, either to be
banished, or put to death: as also they did those priests which stirred up to
cruelty. 1. Sam. 15.23
And Samuel said: that Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft. 2. King. 23:24
And in the second of the Kings, Josiah took away them that had familar
spirits, and the southsayers. And in the first of the Chronicles, 1. Chro.
19.23.
it was imputed unto Saul for a great transgression which he had committed
against the Lord, Ier. 50.36.
in that he sought and asked council of a familiar spirit. And it is written in
Jeremy, that a sword is upon the southsayers. Isaiah 44.25.
Other translate it liars. And Isaiah blamed them, and says, that God will
destroy the tokens of the southsayers; and turn them into fury, and
commands only to take council of himself, and his word: because that if we
refer not our selves thither, the morning will no more shine unto us. Eneas
Siluius makes mention of a virtuous Prince, Eneas Siluius.
who was very bountiful to learned men, and being demanded why he was not so
to Astrologers, said, that the stars governed fools, and that wise men
commanded them, and that it apertained only to ignorant Princes, to honor
Astrologers, witches and southsayers. Scipio. Lycurgus.
Scipio as soon as he arrived in his camp, did fourthwith banish al sorts of
witches and tellers of fortunes. Lycurgus did the like. And if we mark it well,
we shall find that they cast and sow in the air, as it were in a sea, without
any judgment, and at the adventure of ambiguous words, tending to al sorts of
accidents, passions, De not. deo.
and chance, of a hundred perhaps one falls out right, which was never
foreseen or thought by them, and for the most part we see the contrary
happen of that which is prognosticated. Cicero for this cause writes, that
Plato was wont to say, that he marueiled when such people met together, how
they could abstain from laughter, Ier. 10.2.
seeing the cosening tricks which they played. And God by Jeremy commanded us
not to be afraid for the signs of heaven: from whence these abusers say they
take their foundation. Homer.
And Homer bringing in the gods deliberating of things to come, Daniel.
declared thereby how it passes man's capacity as Isocrates writes: yea,
Daniel in the end of his prophecy, says, that he understood not the words
of the Angel, speaking of the end of the world. The which makes me greatly to
condemn such as have written thereof, and especially Leouitius, End of the
world.
who sets it down to be in the year 1583, and yet he forgeth an Ephemerides
of nigh hand 30. years after that year. Astrologers likewise foretold of the
year 1524, that such an other conjunction should meet as was at the time of
the flood, and that all the face of the earth should be covered with water, and
there was never seen a more fair and dry year then that was as Viues
writes. In short, that kind of people have skill of any thing, but to tell
true. For sorcerers, the laws of the 12. Tables, and sundry other, Sorcerers.
have condemned them to death, as worse then murderers, most wicked and
abominable enemies both unto nature, and mankind. The title of the Code, de
maleficiis, and the law neminem, contains this curse that the cruel
pestilence eat them out and consume them. Li. 4. de ciuit. dei c. 3.
And God condemns them in Exodus c. 2. Leuit 20. and 21. Deu. 18. Isaiah 3.
Iere. 19.17. and 50. For such sorceries Iehu made queen Iezabel to be eaten
with dogs. It is very requisite that Judges take great pains and be very
severe herein, because they grow so common, and God threatens that he will
root out the people, which shall leave them unpunished. Deuteronomy. 18. Lib. 11
S. Augustine also greatly detesteth them. And the reason why the Cananites
were rooted out is expressed in Deuteronomy. to wit for the abominable sorceries
which they used. And Plato in his laws condemned them to die: for they
renounce God and all his religion, they blaspheme him, they do homage to the
Devil, they vow their children unto him, they promise to draw unto him
whatsoever they are able, they poison men, beasts and fruits, they are
incestuous, and work much mischief. Of Usurers.
And as touching usurers Plutarque in his book which he made, to which I
refer the Reader, is of opinion that no kind of people of the world, are so
notorious liars, nor which use more to falsefie their faith in all their
practices: they have been condemned both by the law of God and man, and
excommunicated by a counsel holden in Spain. And the Persians always reputed
loan to usury, to be deceat, lying and wickedness. Appian in his first book
of the civil wars wrote, that by an ancient law at Rome vsurye was
forbidden upon great pains: and we see in Titus Liuius, and in Tacitus, the
great searches and punishments that ensewed therefore. And in the time of
king Philip Augustus, of S, Lewys, of king John and Charles the sixth, the
Jews and Italiens which held banques, Jews and Italiens chased out of France.
and exercised vsurye thorough out France, were driven out and rifled: because
they marred the houses and families, that adjoined near unto them. The ancient
Cato held them as liars, murderers, theifes, Cato.
and a continual fire, which ever increased, thorough the loss and ruin of
such as fell there in. And so they which have to do with usurers, are by little
and little, consumed and gnawne a sunder. And as he which is stong with the
aspe dies sleeping, so sweetly does he consume him self which has borrowed
upon usury. And Michah writes that they devour the flesh of the people, flea
their skin and gnaw their bones. Micah. 3.
Moreover the word usury in the hebrew tongue is as much to say as biting. And
money is brought forth before it be begot. Usury the daughter of avarice and
ambition.
The which caused some to term, loan to usury the great chastiser of fools
for their incontinencie. And usury was ever accounted, the daughter of
covetousness and ambition, which leads to all evil. Wherefore according to
the lesson of the wise man, each one ought to beware that he fall not into so
great a mischief, but it is requisite rather to be content with a little,
Remedy against usury
to shun things superfluous, to use parsimony and sparing: thinking that if
one be not able to live with a little, he will lesseliue with nothing. And as
in sundry places debtors were priuiliged, among other in Dianas temple at
Ephesus: so was the temple of sparing and well ordered expense into which
usurers might not enter, open unto the wise and yields to them a joyful
rest. And for because such as intermeddle with selling again, do it without
any art or trauile, and with lying, they have been in like sort blamed as
well by Aristotle, as by Cicero.

CHAP. 43. Of the punishments that has be fallen unto such as have given ear
unto malicious surmises, rejecting the truth.
False accusations in the end discovered.
IF what we have before set down, touching forged accusations, do not so sone
discover it self, and if choler, false reports and opinions, do so far
insinuate them selves, as truth can take no place, nor iustifications be heard,
yet will God the protector of innocence set to his helping hand, and discover
the truth, as the holy scriptures affirm. And Theophrastus said, that surmises
would die by little and little, but truth was the daughter of time. Among an
infinite number of examples, I will content my self with a few the most
notable. Leo the emperor, condemned Michael to die, and the execution was
differred but until Christmas was ended, in which time he died soddainly: and
the same Michael was not onle delivered from prison, but chosen Emperor of
Constantinople. Mathias the son of that great captain Hunniades, was charged
of ill behauing him self, toward Ladislaus K. of Boheme, and Hungary: and as
he was ready to be condemned, his eldest brother having been before executed
through envy, and false information, the said Ladislaus mindinge to marrye
Margrite daughter to Charles the 7. died soddenly, and the said Mathias,
Castrutio.
attending but the hangman of Prag was chosen K. of Hungary. As also one
Castrutio retired from an obscure prison, was chosen governor of Lucques, by
the death of the tirant Vgutio. And one Iacques de lusignan, aques de Lusignam.
Theodoric.
prisoner at Genes was chosen K. of Cipres. Theodoric, K. of the Ghots, in his
rage through a forged accusation, executed Boethius, and Simmachus, two very
honorable personages, shortly after he was served at the table with a head of a
fish, which seemed unto him to be the head of the same Simmachus, loking a
squint upon him, and grinning with his teeth, and so with this fright and
conceit, fell he sick and died. Thrasibulus K. of the Jews conceived such a
grief in that he had slain his brother without hearing his excuse, that he
died. The like also befell to Aristobulus for murdering his brother Antigonus,
and for sorrow vomited up his own blood, which was cast in the place where his
brothers was spilt, and with a remorse of conscience died as Josephus writes.
And in thend of his history he tells of a governor, of Libia under the
Romans, who with false surmises, having made many be put to death to get their
wealth, was surprised with a sudden fright and astonishment: and often cried
out, that the shadows of such as he had caused to be murdered apeared unto
him, and cast him self upon his bed, as if he had bin in torments, and fire,
and in thend died his intrals gushing out of his body. They which by wrong
accusation caused Socrates to die not being able any longer to abide, Accusers
of Socrates Herod.
the public hate which was carried unto the^, hong, and strangled themselves.
The great Lord Soliman made his own son be strangled: K Herod did the like unto
his, and after that the truth was discovered they both too late sorrowed. There
is as much written of a K. of Spain, and of Cambises the K. of Persia, who put
his brother to death, whereof ensued great alteration of state. Mary of Aragon,
accused an Earl, Mary of Aragon.
before the Emperor Otho, her husband, faining that he would have defiled her,
and he was beheaded: but the truth being afterward discovered, she was
publikly burned. Nicephorus writes as much of the wife of Constantine the
great. Sedechias caused Jeremy to be imprisoned, who had told him the truth to
keep him from breaking his faith, was led away captive, Ier. 59.
after his eyes were thrust out, and his children beheaded. Conrad that writes
the chronicles of Magence, says of one Henry Archb. of the same Sea, Henry
archbishope of Magence accused by Arnold.
who to purge him self, of a certain charity which was lent unto him, sent
to Rome one Arnold whom he had highly advanced: but instead of excusing him he
aggreuated the matter, to the end that thorough presents he might attain
unto his masters seat, which he did compass with his masters own monye: and
there upon carried home with him as far as Vnormes two Cardinals from Rome,
where he caused the said Archbishop to be deposed from his sea, who appealed
unto God the most just judge. Anon after one of those Cardinals miserably burst
a two, the other as frantic, tore his hands in pieces with his teeth, and so
dyed. And the said Arnold who had compassed the Archbishopricke by so lewd
means, Ferdinand K. of Castile.
was murdered by them of the City. Ferdinand the fourth king of Castile,
caused two of his greatest Lords of Spain, which had been falsely accused
to have conspired against him, to leap down from the top of a high tower:
they appealed before God, before whom within thirty days they adiourned him to
appear, and at the end of thirty days the same king when men thought he was
a sleep was found dead. It is also written of the great M. of the Templers,
that when he was upon the point to be burned at Bourdeaux, The great master
of the Templers.
he adiourned Pope Clement the fifth, and king Philip the fair, to appear
before the throne of God to receive justice: shortly after they both dyed. So
has God always been accustomed to revenge periuries, and such as will shut
their ears to the truth, which ought to be consecrated only to hear what is
just good, true, and appertaining to his glory.

CHAP. 44. That we must avoid suites in law, because of the lyinge and cautell
of the practisers.
Pleas and suits to be avoided.
THe knowledge of the truth holds many back, and keeps them from embarking
them selves amid the floudes of suites, and seats of Petefoggers, which are
but the shoppes of falsehood, deceat, and counterfeit lying, thorough
disguising and formality perverting the vprightnes of a cause. For as
Demosthenes, and Anacharses said, wisdom and eloquence, without truth and
justice, are a Panurgie, that is to say a guyle or slight, such as we read
the slaves to use in Comedies, which still turns to their own damage and
confusion. And in truth, the fashion which they hold in many sovereign and
baser Courts, is but a kind of Sophistry, which casts smooke and duste into
the eyes of the judges, to the end to cover lying and pilferie. And we may say
with Ecclesiasticus, Eccles. 3.16.
I have seen the place of judgment where was wickedness, and the place of
justice where was iniquity. It were also very requisite, that Lawyers, besides
that God does especially command them, would observe the precepts of Plato
repeated in Thucidides, that in pleading they should not so much regard to
please men, as to speak the truth: The office of a good Lawyer.
to the end they should neither charge their own consciences nor their
clients, knowing that wealth gotten with lying will never profit. Solomon
said that the beginning of a controversy is, as when waters soking thorough a
bank, by little and little, make a great breach, or like Hidra who for every
head which was stroke off, brought out seven other. Tacit. l. 6.
Seneca found fault with the Lawyers of his time, as also Tacitus did, because
they sold their lies. The Emperor Licinius termed them the plagues of a common
wealth. Apuleus named them Cormorantes, because of their gredines. Other termed
them j Ravenous fowls, or heilish furies described by Vergil in his Eneidos.
Harpies. And Florus writes that when Varus was vanquished in Germany they put
out the eyes of all the Lawyers which they could find, Florus. lib. 4.
and from some pulled out their tongue. Frederic the third said, thy defiled
the place of justice, and equity, making it a bank of deceat and cosinage. S.
Augustine in one of his sermons writes, Augustine.
that there is nothing so impudent as arrogancy, and the babbling of a Lawyer.
Ambrose.
And Saint Ambrose says that they deceive the Judges, and gain them by
falsehood and that they ought to repaye whatsoever they take against the truth.
And S. Bernard said that they were the enemies of justice, Bernard.
overthrew the truth, and gnawed like ratts. And Origin called them swollen
froggs, which sell even their very scilence, and rather increase the charge,
more then the profit will avail, when they have gained their cause. And Ammian
thought that it was as impossible, to find out in all Asia a true Lawyer as a
white Crow. Tacitus writes that there is nothing so saleable. Cicero likewise
complained that thorough them good laws were corrupted. And it is too
notorious to see, how many of them give rash and uncertain counsel, very
lewdly acquit them selves of their charge, pleading only upon the
superscription of their bags, or not loking half way into them, whence much
injustice has proceeded. Pausanias writes that in the pleading place of
Atheues were two benches, The pleading place at Athens.
the one of contumely, the other of impudency. It was also uncovered, as that
at Rome was, Cato.
which Cato made be paued with sharp flintes, and wished that it might be
flowred with iron caltrops, to the end the Romans should have no delight to
plead. He forbad any to be called to the bar, who^ he knew eloquent in a bad
cause. And said as Plutarque recites, that it was meet for a prince or judge,
to give no ear to the persuasio^ of an Orator, or lawyer, making a motion for
any matter unjust. For as Cicero writes (which was also attributed to the
Emperor Valentinian) if he ought to be punished which corrupts a judge with
money or presents, how much more ought he which coseneth the^ with his faier
speech, Babbling of Lawyers more dangerous then presents.
and babbling: because a virtuous man will not suffer himself to be corrupted
with presents, but he may be deceived thorough their cunning tales and lies.
And Cicero in his Oration which he made for Murena, discourses at large, of
the vanity, and deceit of practisioners. We prove by the civil law, that in
sundry places, the number of lawyers has bin limited, and how K Ptolome
conferring with an ambassador, L. petitionem de aduocat. tit de i rescri. pr.
which the Siciones had sent unto him, inquired of him of the state and form
of their common wealth: he answered, that his Lords maintained no inuentors of
new things, nor received any physicians which alter health, and much less
lawiers, because they disguise the truth, Practisers in law driven out of
Rome.
and prolong suites. Pope Nicolas the 3, thrust al practisers in the laws out
of Rome, saying that they lived by the blood of the poor people. And it was a
use in most holy France, that no proctor should be appointed but by license
from the K. and all procurations ended together with the year, which was a
great cause of dispatch of suits. Domitian in like sort banished some, and
Galeace duke of Milan, caused one to be hanged for his delatory pleas, and
delaying of a suit, against a manifest and clear debt. And Pope Pius 2.
compared pleaders to birds, the place of pleading to the field, the judge to
the net, the proctors and advocates to fowlers, and birders. A man may say that
the cause why Caligula would have burned al law books, Caligula would have
had all law books to be burned.
although himself were very ill given, was to have suits sooner dispatched, and
to meet with the cautels and delays, which men toward the law study, by their
book and practice. And hereupon I will not let pass, a tale of Mathias
Coruinus K. of Pannonia, who having married the daughter of Ferdinand K. of
Naples, brought a long in his train out of Italy certain lawiers and
advocates of great practice, who as soon as they were arrived in his realm, by
little and little changed the course which they had found, in manner that an
infinite number of suits were bred thereby. And the K. perceiving how every day
the number increased, he was constrained to send the^ back again, that he
might establish the ancient custom, simplicity, and quiet. In like sort they
write that Ferdinand themperor, sending a viceroy into the Indies, which had
been newly discovered, forbad him by no means to carry over any lawier with
him, to the end he should not sow there, the seeds of suits. There are some
which attribute this infection, and contagio^ of petifoggers, brought into
France in the time of Philip the faier, to Pope Clement 5, when as he
transported his seat from Rome to Auignon, together with all his bullistes,
practisers, When petifoggers first set foot in France.
and petifoggers, by frequenting of who^ french men first learned this brave
piratical art, as it were never once dreamed of before. And sundry authors as
well french as Italians and Germans have written that since that french men
have suffered them selves to be governed by the Popes which were retired to
Auignon, and have intermingled their affair and practices together, they have
ever waxed worse and worse, and their delicatenes has even abastarded the good
warlike discipline, whereof there was forewarninges, The Druides and their
authority. comment. lib. 6
when as the said Pope Clement made his entry into Lions We read in the time
of Charlemagne and before him how the Druides in France took notice of all
differentes and process in law, and Caesar in his commentaries recites the
like. And if there were any which would not stand to their award, they
straightly forbad him their sacrifices, which of all other was the most
grievous punishment: because the^ they were held in the rank of men
abominable and accursed, every one abhorred their company, or to talk with
them, for fear least some misfortune might ensew, after such comunication:
which were to be wished, might now take place, for the dispatching and
abolishing of suites. And Paulus Emilius writes, that the french men in matter
of trial, French men simple in matters of trial.
and law, did so simply behave them selves, that they stuck to their first
judgment, and never appealed further. But since deceit was the cause of a
sovereign jurisdiction, which held once a year for a few days, and afterward
the said Philip the fair, caused the palace to be builded, which suffiseth not
for all that to satisfy the heat of pleading. Eschines in that famous Oration,
which he made against Cthesiphon, reprehending the manners and corruption of his
time, and calling to remembrance the ancient customs, and good laws says that
if they were well observed al things would go well, Many suits and pleas the
greatest mischeife can happen to a common wealth.
and there should be few suites or pleas at al, as if the co^mennes of the^,
were one of the greatest mischiefs could happen to a co^mo^wealth, as Plato
was of opinion in his discourses. And Socrates showing how good laws never
engendered suits, said the multitude of the^ to be a sign of corruption. Strabo
commended the Indians, The Indians no pleaders.
because they were no pleaders, and ever in their laws and barganes used great
simplicity, and kept their word, without using of any witness or seals. The
Poets in their verses, wish for seats and triales without pleaders, and
esteem that man happy which has no process in law. And the Germane proverb
shows it, that if a man have two kine, he were better give awayone, then not
to enjoy the other quietly, or go to judgment, in which place it seems that
many turmoiles and troubles meet, and a multitude of people throng them selves
together. For this cause the said Isocrates in an Oration which he made being
of the age of 80. years and two, Pleaders in small estimation or account.
said that he had al his life shunned process, and benches of pleading, and
that men accounted him an unworthy advocate to have any disciple, and he was
ill accounted of at Athenes, which haunted the said benches, and was often
seen there. And the principal doctors which have written upon our civil law
have always bin of opinion, Questions betvveene the Lawyer and Physician
that every good man ought to abhor suites, and that such as loved them ought
to be accounted cauillers, and exception to be taken to their witness. Upon the
contention and question which grew before Sforce Duke of Milan, who ought to
take place the lawyer or phisician, it was not ill gessed of him which said,
that when a theife is led to hanging, the theif goes before, and the hangman
comes after. It were very requisite, that as the emperor Probus promised he
would so order justice, that there should be no more need of companies at
arms, so that some good king would in such sort tame the malice of men, and
establishe such a discipline, that there might be no more proctors nor
advocates, but that where any doubt grew, the parties might appear at an
assigned day and hour, by bill carrying a clear demand, readily to receive
sentence, as almost it is thorough out the world. And in all the countries of
Zuizerland, and in the imperial cities, there is neither proctors nor lawyers,
and suits are ordinarily dispatched at the first assignation, and without cost
or trouble. And truly the natural sense assisted with an upright conscience,
joined with experience, sets a rule down for judgments: For France, it
has of long time had this Epitheton given unto it, that she is the mother
nurce of practisers: and a stranger which made a commentary upon Ptolome says,
that in France is more petifoggers, and wasters of paper to be found, the^ in all Germany, Italy, or Spain. And Claude of Sessel, Archb. of Marseilles, in
the 15. cha. of the monarchy of France says, that there are more there, then
in all the rest of Christe^dom. Statua of Martia.
Horace in his Satires makes mention of a statua of Martia, which none durst
behold, that undertook not a good cause. It is not my meaning for all this to
speak against a sufficient number, of proctors and lawiers which are honest,
and of great knowledge and discretion, which will not alter the truth, nor
charge either their own conscience or their clientes, with any goods gotten
unjustly or by cautel, nor make themselves the ministers of a wicked gain,
which in small time is taken again out of their hands or their heirs which
possess it, as the holy scripture and experience does teach us. For other I
think the proverb was meant by them, that with a white net they cousin other of
their wealth. For by their writings, pleas, Quintil. l. 12. c. 1. Gell^us l. 1.
c. 18.
formalities, and petifogging they pill the whole country, and as Iuuenal
writes, they sell the very sight of their hoods and long robes, plumming and
devouring up to their very snowt and feathers, their poor clients even to the
bones prolong their causes as much as may lie in the^, and fasten, and clean
unto the^, as the hop does unto the pole. And it seems that Jeremiah speaks
hereof when he says, Ierem. 5.27. and 6.13.
As a cage is full of birds, so is their houses full of deceit: yet they
prosper though they execute no judgment for the pore. For from the least of
them even to the greatest of the^ every one is given unto covetousness. And in
Hosea you have eaten the frut of lies. And Micah curses them that pluck of the
skins of the people and their flesh from their bones, and work wickedness in
their own imaginations. He says further, that the heads judge for rewards,
and are full of rapine and deceit. They shall eat and not be satisfied, every
man hunteth his brother with a net, the best of the^ is a briar. Isaiah. 9.6.
And in Isaiah you have eaten up the vineyard the spoil of the pore is in
their houses. And woe unto you which join house to house, and lay field to
field. And in truth the facility of arguing, sca^ning and pleading which is in
France, is the cause of so many proctors lawyers and judges, that they grow
like hornets and grasshoppers, which will live as Plato writes without doing
ought else then sting and bite. Lycurgus also which by his laws bannished al
superfluity out of Lacedemon, took away practisers and al kind of pleading. And
we may say with the ancient Poets, Astrea.
that Astrea which maintained good laws, and by the equity thereof gave great
quiet and contentment to every one, is flowne her ways up into heaven, Ate.
not being able to endure such iniquities, and Ate, which is the goddess of al
confusion damage, disorder, troubles and wickedness that may alter a state, has
succeeded in her place. The said de Sessel in his monarchy, Philip de Comines,
Gagnin, and late M. Bude upon the pandects, have greatly bewailed, the
corruption, confusion and disorder of such petifoggers as the very scumme of
Italy, and a most dangerous infection.

CHAP. 45. That it is a lying in Judges to receive presents, and what exercise
is to required to meet with avarice, bying of offices, and covetousness.
CAto the Censor was of opinion, that a man ought not to pray a Judge or
magistrate for any thing being just or unjust. He said also that judges,
captains, or governors, ought not to enrich themselves in their charges, but
with honor and good reputation. And Aristotle in the 5. of the politiques
writes, that nothing is more to be considered in a common wealth, then that
the laws should provide, that magistrates be not covetous not bitter for their
own commodity. Isaiah. 1. and 33.
And God by his Prophet Isaiah reprehendeth the princes and governors of his
people, terming the^ thieves, because they took presents, and praised the
faithful man, because he kept back his hand from any present, or unlawful
gain Polibus also writes that, Alexander seuerus. Buying of offices.
that the ancient Romans punished a Judge by death, which received any
presents. And the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, caused such to be deposed and
grievously punished, as bought their of sices, saying they sold dearer in
retaile the^ they bought in the gross. Which opinion Lewis th 12, the emperor
Antoninus and sundry other were of; and therefore bestowed they al offices by
consent of the Senate, Niger. Wages appointed to officers.
and after a very careful consideration had. And the Emperor Niger ordained
the^ wages, to the end they might not be a charge to any, saying that a judge
neither ought to take nor give. And Plutarque in his politiques teaches us,
that a magistrate ought not to go to the court or common wealth as to a faier to
buy and sell, as some wicked ones have said that they went to a golden harvest.
For this cause the Emperor Justinian in his 8 institution vipraesides, Laws
of Justinian.
and in the 24, and 25, especially forbids all such merchandise and
corruptions of judges, adding that they ought to carrye a fatherly affection
toward the people. The which likewise was the cause of those ancient laws
which ordained that all magistrates should be called to a reckning, and render
account of whatsoever they had don, and might be accused of every one if they
had taken ought. Among the oaths of judges repeated by Demosthenes, Oaths of
Judges.
one was that they should take no present. The sentence of Justinian the
emperor ought not to be forgotten auth. de iudicibus, that all judges ought to
contemn riches and to show their hands undefiled to God, their emperor, king
and law: which also is to be understood of all counselors, and governors, A
poetical fiction applied.
auth. de manda princ. And the Poets faining that Juno thorough her riches,
Mercury thorough his eloquence, Venus thorough her nicenes, Mars thorough his
threats, and the rest of the Gods having all conspired against Jupiter, and yet
were not able to pull him out of heaven, meant thereby that a man of virtue
could by no means be turned a side from justice. It has been said of many
that they which give presents to judges are most notably abused, for the
contrary party gives likewise, and makes the balance equal, They which
give presents to judges are notably cosened.
and often time the velvet disgraceth the satyn, and the horse takes away the
force of the hacney, and the chain of gold covers the ring. And yet by the
oath which judges have made to God and to their king, they are debtors of
justice, without respect of persons: so when they receive presents, they
deceive the pore suitors, and lie giving them hope, that their gifts shall
prevail with them. For this cause Diodorus great esteemed a picture which was
within a chamber of the Palais, A picture within the palace. Philip.
of thirtye Judges which were all without hands, and the President loking
only upon the image of truth which hog about this neck. K. Philip said to his
son Alexander, that he deceived himself, if he looked for fidelitye at their
hands who^ he had corrupted by money. And we must not marvel if the first day
they be received in they be perjured, selling again what they have bought, and
exercising as it were the art of robbing, through out the palace and presidial
seats. K. Agesilaus had once a custom, to send a beuse to every Senator of
Lacedemon, as soon as he was chosen, in sign of his virtue. The Ephores which
were as overseers of every one, condemned him in a fine, to the public use
adding that it was because through such favors he went practicing and gaining to
himself alone those which ought to be common to al. Justice a virgin
vndefloured.
For as Hesiodus said justice is a virgin vndeflowred always lodged with
honor, reverence temperance, and public vtility, and hating al presents. There
are certain old ordinances even in Bourgundy, which forbid al kind of presents
to governors and judges. K. S. Lewis, made a most rigorous law, which it were
well if it were revived. And in the Alcoran it is forbidden upon pain of
death, that judges receive no presents. Laws forbidding judges to receive
presents.
And if we receive what Plutarque teaches, instructing such as manage the
affairs of state, that he which enricheth himself by the handling of public
causes, and takes presents is a committer of sacrilege, an unfaithful
councelor, a perjured judge, a magistrate polluted and defiled with all the
wickedness which man can commit: and that which was said that he which first
gave money to the people, taught the true way to ruin and confusion of a
popular estate. The said Plutarque in the life of Pomp, shows what
mischief has ensued thorough presents. It was not without a mystery contained
therein, Judges drawn without hands.
that at Thebes, the Judges and counselors were drawn without hands, and the
President blindfold: to give to wit that justice ought not to be defiled,
favorable, nor corrupted thorough presents. And as the ears when they are
full of bussing, and noise, are not able comprehend what is said, Marius
as Marius excused him self that the sound of trompets made him that he could
not hear the laws. So if there be any present which sounds back, hardlye
shall truth and justice take place, but rather favor and injustice. The
lawyers in the treaties de officio praesidis, and de officio proconsulis, and
legati, expressly forbad all governors and Judges to receive any present. And
so does the law Cincia. Isaiah. 1.23. and 33.1.
Isaiah complained that the princes were rebellious and companions of theiues,
every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: and pronounces a woe to
them that spoil, for they shall be spoiled. In ancient time as soon as it was
known that a Judge had taken any thing, all the honor that in his whole life
he could gain, was now clean stained and lost. And if it were but known in
the Cantons of Surich or Berne, that one of the council had taken were it
never so little, Exodus 23.8. Micach. 3.11. Deuteronomy. 16.19. 1. Sam. 12.3.
the best bargain he could make were banishment. God in Exodus forbids to
take reward, for the reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the
words of the just. The which also is repeated in 16. of Deutronomy. And Samuel
rendering an account of his whole life, insisted principally, in that he never
received bribe to blind his eyes therewith, his children were blamed for
receiving and were the cause of the change of the state. Judas went and hong
him self. And Job said that fire shall devour the houses of bribes: and he
whose hands are pure shall increase his strength. Job. 15.34. and 17.9 Whence
gredines of bribes proceadeth.
And S. Ambrose upon S. Luke says, that even as they that are in a trance,
can not discern things in such sort as they indeed are, but only the
illusions and fancies of their passions: so the thought of a gredy judge,
wraped within the cords of covetousness, and fastened by the bonds of avarice,
neither sees or thinks of any thing but gold, Plato his Council.
silver, and riches, and all his study is but how to augment his wealth. And
Plato in his common wealth calls them drones which mar the honey, and Pikes
which devour the rest of the fish. The desire of these bribes proceed from a
greedines, which repugneth his fill, whereas all other yield thereunto: For it
exercises the appetite, and takes away the pleasure: and the children of such
corrupt judges do often times follow their trace. Plato gave counsel to
accustom young men in their infancy to think that it was not lawful to have or
wear any gold to be deck their body with, to the end that when they came to
the maniging of affairs, they should not seek to enrich them selves, nor
receive bribes, knowing that the inward gold which is virtue is proper unto
them. But now we may say that we are in the golden age, where no account is
made but of gold and silver. And as one finding fault with the corrupt manners
of the Athenians said, that at Athenes all was honest, so may one affirm now
that of vice is made virtue. The remedy to meet with covetousness and
greadines of bribes.
Our ancient fathers had great reason to think it fit, that there should be
an exercise to meet with covetousness, and the greediness of having and
receauinge bribes, which was to abstain from any lawful gain, to the end
men might be accustomed to estrange them selves from all injustice and
unlawful taking of monye, and from long continuance might tame and chasten
that greediness to gain, and get, which thorough enough of other habites and
actions is nourished and exercised always to be willinge to gain
impudentlye, and seeks after injustice, hardlye abstaining from autraging of
any, if any profit may thereby ensewe unto them, ready to take at all hands.
For as Ecclesiasticus writes, Eccles. 19.1.
He that contemns small things shall fall by little and little. And
according to the opinion of Isocrates, the couetouse man at all assaies
forsweareth and deceaueth him self: but this covetousness shall never assault
or surprise any, which shall not be even given over to receive gifts and
rewards, having his heart well settled and yielding to no motion that shall not
be honorable and good. And truly where bribes take place, there is law and
justice banished, and it can not be, that he should not inclyne to him, which
gives, because as we have before mentioned, bribes make men blind. And in
Ecclesiasticus they are termed a bridle for his mouth which receaueth them:
Eccles. 28.25 and 31.5.
and he that loves gold shall not be justified, but he that hates gifts shall
live. For after that entrance be once thereto admitted, all honesty and
integrity slideth away: and as it is said in a common proverb, gold makes
all things preignable. And bribes resemble hooks hid under a bayte, which
beasts can better avoid then men. I think that gifts between man and wife,
besides causes contained in the civil law, were forbidden to the end weomen
should take less of strangers, and their love be mutual without hier or
mercenary reward. It is also to be presumed that that which moved the Emperor
Adrian, and Alexander Seuerus to proportion the expenses of Judges, and there
to give them wages, was to the end they should take nothing of parties, as also
of some it was expressly forbidden. Spice money for suits.
And that which through out all France they take under color to buy spice, was
at the first a pound of comfites of less value then 12. pence, and that was
ever when their suit was ended. Romans very continent.
And in Titus Liuius we see how the ancient Romans abhorred presents, and
Cicero wrote of the Fabritii, Curiens, Scipioes, Pisces, and Catoes, that they
were not only honored for their prowes, but in that for all their poverty, they
could never be gotten to receive present. And Titus Liuius. Valerius.
highly commended Valerius who having been 4. times Consul, yet so poor he
died, that they were feign to bury him at the charge of the common stock He
tells the like of one Agrippa, Agrippa.
who apeased the seditions which were between the people and nobility. Those
two great captains Epamino^das, Epaminondas.
and Pericles, of which the one governed the Thebanes, the other the Athenians
many years, and obtained great victories, never augme^ted their patremony the
value of one bare denier, nor ever would accept present, as a thing unworthy of
a man of courage, and a valiant head. Scipio refused to join with a certain
Senator, after he knew that he took. And bribes were so highly detested of all
people, that it was not so much as lawful for ambassadors sent to princes to
receive any thing, whereon grew the complaint, Not lavvfull for ambassadors to
receive presents. Phocion.
which Dionisius K. of Sicile made, because them bassadors of Corinth refused
to take what he offered them, as if that law there were such as a tirant had a
better. The like was written of other ambassadors, sent unto Ptolome. Phocion
refused the presents of Alexander the great of Antipater and other, adding that
if they esteemed him an honest man, they should leave him so. It is written of
him that would not assist his son in law, which was accused for taking, saying
that he had made him his allie only for lawful and reasonable causes.
Xenocrates would not take anything either for him self or his friends of the
3000. crowns which Alexander sent unto him. Alcibiades and other could never
fasten upon Socrates to make him receive ought: for he said that his good
spirit abhorred al presents and sent word unto Archidamus which offered it
unto him, that a peck of wheat was sold at Athens for a duble, and watercost
nothing and that he co^te^ted him self with what he had. Menander also found
but two things necessary for the use of our life bread and water, for the
pleasure of life according to the opinion of Cicero, is rather in desire the^
satiety. Agesilaus
Agesilaus refused the K. of Persias present: Demetrius, Julius Caesar's: the
said Epaminondas sent back to the K. of Persias, his 3000. Daricques or
crowns, extremely chafing with Diomedes which presented the^, asking him if he
had undertaken so long a nauigatio^, to think to corrupt Epaminondas,
co^ma^ding him to make report unto his K. that as long as he wished and
procured the good of Thebans, he should have him his friend, and it should cost
him nothing, but if he should seek their endemnity, he would be unto him a mortal
enemy. Jason.
And Jason prince of Thesalia coming on a time to the city of Thebes with
which he was allied, sent unto the same Epaminondas 2000. crowns for a gift,
knowing him to be very poor, but by no means would he receive the^, and the
first time that he saw him after he told him, thou beginnest to outrage me. In
the mean time he borrowed of a Burges of the town a little some, with which he
entered into arms within Peloponese, now called la Mores, and put away his
esquier, having understood that he had received a present. Eliseus. 2. King.
5.16.
Eliseus refused the presents which Nahaman the constable of the K. of Siria
who^ he had healed of the leprosy would have bestowed on him: and Giezi became
a leaper for receiving them. Abraham refused the presents of the K. of Sodom
albe it he had well deserved the^. The advice of Philopemen general of the
Achaians, written of by Plutarque ought not to be omitted, who after he had
refused 612000, crowns of the Lacedaemonians told the^, Philopemen.
that it was not for the^ to go about to corrupt, and gain with their money,
honest me^ and their friends, in that they might at al assaies assure the^
selves to be served by the^, but that it was for the^ to be lewd fellows and
mutina^s, to the end that having their mouthsstopped by bribes, Cimon
they should less annoy the^. It is written of Cimon, that he demanded whether
they would have him a friend or hireling, and since he was a friend that they
would carry away their gold and silver. They write of many saints, which never
would receive any presents. The Romans refused 400000. crows sent from the K.
of Aegipt. Romans.
They did the likeby the crown of gold offered by the K. of Sicile. Titus Liuius
in the 2. book of the 3. decade, and 6. of the 4. shows how the Romans
refused the presents which the ambassadors of Naples and they of Peston had
offered unto the^, and so did they K. Philips and Ptolomes. Yea they would not
receive the very payment which was due unto them before their time; for fear
least that had bound them as a preventing, Menander.
and present made at that time. Menander the tirant of Samos, by reason of the
coming down of the Persians, Cleomenes.
retired him self into the city of Sparta with much gold and silver which he
showed to Cleomenes, praying him to take what liked him thereof. He refused to
take any thing, but fearing least he would have given to other of the city, he
went to the Ephores, and said that it was better for the weal of Sparta to put
out their Samien guest out of Peloponese, for fear he should entise any
Spartians to become naught. The said Ephores giving ear to this advise
bannished him the very self same day. And Demosthenes was bannished by the
Senate of Areopage, Demosthenes.
for having received a present from Arpalus. Curious and Fabritius, refused the
presents of the Samnites and Pirrhus. Fabritius.
As also did Daniell of king Baltazard: and the said Fabritius said that as
long as he could command his own members, he should never have need of much
money. Lysander would not receive the apparel and jewels which was sent unto
his daughter from Dionisius the tyrant saying that his presents more
dishonored then honored his daughters. Sophocles.
Sophocles before said the like. The which was the very cause that Alexander
Seuerus, Tulg. l 6. ca. 3
so grievously punished such of his officers, as he knew had taken bribes. And
according unto that most excellent saying of our savior Christ Jesus, recorded
by S. Paul, it is a blessed thing to give, rather then to take. Which also
king Ptolome Philadelphus was wont to repeat, and that it was better to enrich
an other then him self. Even the very Epicuriens held, that it was more
excellent and pleasant to do good to an other then to receive a benefit. And
Cicero in his Oration which he made for Plancius declares, that it is an
inhumane thing, and brutish, to suffer ones self to be overcome thorough
benefits. And as king Cyrus was wont to say, that he heaped up great
treasures when he enriched his friends and subjects. And Constance the
Emperor had often in his mouth, that it were better that public riches, and
appertayning to a king were possessed by private men, then kept in a coffer or
treasury. And for the ease of the Empire he used only earthen vessel, and
was content with little: for as Seneca writes, he is as great which uses
earthen vessel as silver, and silver as if they were earth. Remedy against
avarice
Cato, Cicero, and Titus Liuius, teaches us a means to meet with avarice, in
taking away all riotousnesse and superfluous expense, as sundry commonweals
and Empires have done. Pluto was called Dis, Pluto the god of riches.
that is to say the God of riches and hell, as if too great wealth made the way
more easy for us. And the Poets feign that the Furies were the daughters of
Pluto and Proserpina, allotted to great revenues: as if the abundance
thereof took away our understanding, except God inclined us to use it better.
And with great consideration did Lycurgus king of Sparta abolishe the use of
all gold and silver, Lycurgus.
as the very occasion and subject of the wickedness which man committed. And
Pliny wished that gold might be clean rooted out, Pliny.
as if it had been first found out for the ruin and destruction of man's life,
esteeming that age happy in which those things changed. Artaxerxes was wont to
say, that it was far more royal to add then to take away. And Isocrates
wrote to Nicocles, that he should be more esteemed of in giving, Isocrates
then taking, for these respects one ought not easily to receive a present,
and to charge himself hereby with a further recompense, except he wilbee
polluted with that vilanous vice of ingratitude heretofore described. VVhereon
the minds of men most runs.
If we consider the intents of the most part of men, we shall find they tend to
the heaping up of wealth, to ioyn stone and wood, one upon another, without
once thinking of the life of the soul, as though we had none at all. The which
causes me to remember an aphorism of Hipocrates. They, says he, Hipocrates
aphorism.
which in their sickness feel no pain at al, and toss, and tumble their
clothes, tear their hair, and pill straw, it is a very ill sign, and no
appearance at all that they shall live. For it is less decent to settle our
wits upon heaping up of riches, then to draw a piece of cloth of gold
through a sink. And such as are given thereto, are clean out of taste, as
they are which have the green sickness, who love to eat coals and ashes,
which is a strange cacochimie, and corruption of nature. And riches do not
consist but in opinion, Themistocles.
and estrange us from God: Themistocles said, that it was very requisite for
the chief of an army to know the enemies council, yea (answered Aristides)
but it is more decent, and praise worthy to have pure hands. As Pericles was
also wont to say. And if we should put in practice the judgments of K.
Cambises, Cambises
who caused a Judge to be fleade which was corrupted with brybes, and fastened
his skin to the seat which afterward he caused his son to hold, and that
of Darius, who for the like cause caused one to be hanged, Darius. Bishope of
Cologne.
and of a Bishop of Cologne, who caused the eyes of six of his counselors to
be put out, and left one to the seventh, which had taken least of any, to the
end he might guide the rest through the city, thereby showing how much
himself detested to be corrupted with bribes, there would be an infinite
number at this time, flead, hanged, and made blind. I could here discourse,
Avarice.
how great miseries avarice breeds, and how much it ought to be detested,
resembling the devil from whence it is sprung, which delivers up his
followers to the hangman, and breaks their neck after that he has a while
colled the^; but enough of others have entreated thereof. And the holy scripture
causes us often times to fly it as a plague, and root of al evil, and a
bottomless pit, making us sustain much evil, to attain unto evil, and to
turmoile and toil ones self, to pleasure his heir, who is often time
unknown. And the better hap a man has to attain thereunto the more is he
accursed, in being more tormented with the fevers of the mind, and unquietness.
Not without cause do they compare a covetous man, to one in a dropsy, or to
him which has bin stong by that dangerous serpent Dipsas, both which are never
satisfied with drink until they dye therewith. And it was wisely said, that
the poor man wants but a little, and the wise man al things: and that he
never does good until he dye, and the longer he lives the more he tormenteth
himself. S. Chrysostom often times preached that the more money a man heaped
together, the more he coueted: and that with great wealth poverty increased.
And Solomon writes: Pro. 15.27.
He that is greedy of gain troubles his own house, but he that hates gifts
shall live, and the covetous are excluded out of the kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.
Ephesians. ^. 2. Tim. 6. Seneca writes that if covetousness do once surprise youth,
she will strangle it before she will leave it. It is a strange matter to see, how
many are withdrawn from the fear of God through riches and wealth, Riches
withdravve from the fear and love of god.
which notwithstanding proceed but from his liberality, and therefore ought
rather to make the possessors of the^ more devout, and affectionate unto his
service. And how we pull up the briars and weeds which hinder the good seeds
from growing in our gardens; Luke. 7.
and yet few have regard to this covetousness, which keeps the word of God
(the only incorruptible seed) from being able to take root, Crates.
and choketh it when it would grow. Crates finding that the wealth of this
world did hinder him from the study of Philosophy, cast his goods into the
sea, saying, that he had rather drown them, then be drowned by them. We have
before made mention of sundry other, which have left their goods and
possessions, the better to intend their study: the which poor Pagans will
condemn such as are slaves to their own substance. And would to God men would
learn that lesson of S. Paul: Tim. ^.6.
Godliness is great gain if a man be contented with that he has. For we
brought nothing into the world, Celestial gods.
and it is certain that we can carry nothing out: therefore when we have food
and raiment, let us therewith be content. And shows of how many mischiefs
covetousness has bin the cause. And he writes in the 3. to the Philippians
that after that he knew Jesus Christ, and the great riches which he brought to
them which received and possessed them through faith, 3. Col. 7.31.
he then began to account al those things which the flesh was accustomed to
glory in, but as loss and dong. And al such as through reading and preaching,
have known and well tasted of those goods which God the father, by the means
and favor of his son, would bestow of us, esteem not of this worldly riches
and muck, but enjoy the^ as though they enjoyed the^ not, and do not set their
hearts upon so frivolous and uncertain things, as we have infinite examples in
the scripture to declare: for as we have above noted, the knowledge of
spiritual goods makes vile the price of earthly. The desire and love whereof
begins to vanish as soon as we have but tasted of the other, which are
sound, permane^t, and breed true contentme^t. Is^^h. 9.6. Romans 5.^. Worldly
goods.
Our savior Christ is called in Isaiah, the Prince of peace; and that faith
which we have in him is such as thereby we have peace toward God, and rest
in our spirit: And contrariwise covetousness and desires trouble the same; for
they are insatiable, and infinite, and they which are possessed with them are
accursed like the serpent: for that like unto him they live with earth, and
therein settle their paradise like Moles. For where their treasor is, there is
their heart their God and paradise. Let us consider, that very little will
content a mind, which is but desirous of what is necessary for to entertain it
here; and if we seek his kingdom and the righteousness thereof, al temporal
things as he has promised shall be given unto us without needing for our further
enriching, to fashion our selves or do ought against our duty or honor, or
rendering our selves too much addicted unto them. It is here where we ought to
use violence, not only, if our eye cause us to offend, to pluck it out: if our
hand or foot cause us to stumble, to cut them off, and cast them from us, as
our savior councelleth us in the 18. of S. Matthew. but to cut off these
accursed desires which in such sort presses down our hearts, and keeps the^
from not being able to lift up them selves on high, to search out heavenly
things, Col. 3.1.
as al good Christians ought to do. The which I have the rather amplified,
besides that which is before contained in the 25 discourse, to the end we
might endeavor to diminish these accursed desires, which are the cause of so
great mischiefs, annoyes, and miseries throughout the world. And to make us to
have less occasions to take, we may not be too curious in our raime^ts,
banquets and buildings; for as Cicero writes, Remedy against covetousness.
if one will exe^pt himself from covetousness, he must take away riotousnes which
is the mother, and it shall be very requisite that they by no offices, Buying of
offices.
which the Emperor Justinian thought to be the very beginning of naughtines And
the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian, ordained that al Judges and governors
of provinces should at their entrance into their office, swear, that they
neither gave nor promised any thing, nor had any will to give, or cause ought to
be given, and also that they should take nothing but their wages. And if it
were found that they had received any thing, in which it was lawful for every
one to be an informer, then paid they quadruple, besides the infamy they
sustained of perjury. And the like pain was ordained to him which gave the
brybe. I would commend it much more for the weal both of the King and realm,
if the youth might rather give themselves to learning, discipline, and
Philosophy, or to the Mathematiques, divinity, physic, or some honest trade
of merchandise, to husband well their revenues left unto them by their
ancestors, then both dearly and foolishly to buy offices, to gain by them, and
pil the poor people. That would be a cause both of fewer officers, fewer
suits, and more learned men. And for the most part the money which comes of
such a sail, turns into smoke, through a just judgment of God: and often
time such purchasers leave behind them no heirs. Now the Presidents,
counselors, and Judges, being chosen according as the ordinances carry, would
be much more honored and France in more quiet. Li. 5.
Sabellic recyteth that in the grave Senate of Areopage, none was received,
except he had made some notable proofs of his virtue, knowledge, and
dexterity. And if any one suffered himself to be corrupted and impaired, he
was so ashamed among so many virtuous men, that voluntarily he quited his
estates, and absented himself. And every one was above forty years of age. The
holy Scripture attributed the change of the Iewisse common wealth, to that they
demanded a King, 3. Sam. 7.3
founded upon that the sons of Samuel turned aside after lucre and took
rewards. And David said, that man was happy which took not. And our Savior
bad his disciples give for nothing, Liberality of princes.
what they received for nothing. Yet will I not herby restrain the liberality
of Princes, as we have sundry examples in the scripture, and it is praise
worthy to relieve such as have need thereof, and to entertain amity, and
reconcile themselves, and especially the holy scripture commands us to give
of our substance to the poor, as if it were to God, even to attain to
eternal life. Tiberius the second made a notable answer to his wife, that a
man should never want wealth, while he gave great alms. And that good Bishop
Nilus exhorted us to intertaine the poor, because they rendered our Judge more
favorable unto us. Guiciardin in his second book greatly commended the
Venetians, Liberalitye of the Venetians.
because they did not only increase the pay to such as had valiantly behaved
them selves at the day of Tournauue, but also yielded pensions and sundry
recompenses to many of their children which dyed in that battle, and
assigned dower to their daughters, which was also done by sundry other Princes.

Let us follow the lesson of Ecclesiasticus: Let not thy hand be stretched out
to receive, and shut when thou should give. But Demosthenes and Plutarque
have set down, that by how much their particular which bear public office
is increased, that common profit is diminished, as we have before set down by
the example which Theodosius made of the spleen, which puts all the parts
of the body in hazard, it being too much increased.

CHAP. XLVI. That it is a lie, to be intemperate, drunk, excessife,
whoremonger, player, and idle, and to say that one would be in health, of
music and Physic, as well for the body as the soul.
THey cannot be well exempted from lying, The intemperate in vain seek health.
as Democrites said, which so much commend health, and seek all means
possible to preserve it, and yet run into so great excess, of eating,
drinking, sleeping, and other pleasures, never applying them selves to honest
exercises, suffering their members and senses, to be mortified with ydlenes:
and esteem more of a slavish body, then of the mind, which ought to
command, of the raiment more then of the body, of the box or bag more then
of the precious stones contained therein: they fear wandering, as they go by
the way, and yet in their life and conversation, they still go contrary to the
way which they ought to hold: they have ears and hear not, eyes and see not,
they are blockish in whatsoever they do, and (as Horace says) made drunk
with their sweet fortune: and which is worse, they will never examine their
life according to the true rule, nor amend in themselves, what they reprehend
in an other, and asking health at Gods hands, they mar it through their
disordinate life. Zonarus and Sigebert make mention of one Alexander Emperor of
the East, Alexander an emperor of the east.
given to great ydlenes and gluttony, who on a time demanded of his wise men
if he had long to live: they answered him, yea, if he could take away the
teeth, and privy parts of a brazen bore that stood in the market place,
meaning thereby that he would shorten his days except he became more
temperate and continent. The which happened shortly after, as it has done to
sundry Emperors and Kings, which have died thorough intemperancie. And a
Senator of Rome which was saluted by another riding in his chariot, answered,
I will not say unto you, God save you, since in going thus at your ease, you
show you have no desire to live long. And a certain K. said unto one of his
counselors, which pampered up himself very much without doing any thing.
Cease to buyld thee so grievous a prison of thy body. And Epaminondas
discharged all his souldiars which grew fat thinking, Epaminondas allowed not
of soldiars.
that as a woman too fat does not easily conceive, so does fat hinder a man
from doing of his charge, as arms do, which are too heavy. And when he was
chosen Captain of Greece, immediately he made al his people to exercise, and al
superfluities to be taken away. Scipio.
As also Scipio did, who being arrived at his camp, banished al soldiers
slaves, and Pages, and all unprofitable people, and made each one carry his
own armor. Fat. Li. 2. c. 1 A girdell of the Gaulois and Iberiens.
Likewise the word fat, as well in the Latin tongue, as in ours, is taken for
grosenesse, and without spirit. Alexander tells how among the Gaulois and
Iberiens. the magistrate had a strait gyrdle, with which they gyrt men and
weomen which were not with child, and such as by reason of their fatness were
not able to enter therein, were esteemed as dishonored. And in Lacedemon they
condemned them in a fine. Elian tells how that to this end there were
certain deputes appointed to control youth, Controllers of youth.
and to correct their ydlenes and excess. And in Aegipt, before they did eat,
all youth was of necessity to exercise themselves until they sweat, each one
according to his quality. The like was done in Persia. Exercises against
Idleness.
And Lucullus who was ever wont most sumptuously to entertain his frinds, had
still one of his servant to stand behind him, to put him in mind of sobriety.
And Aulus Gellius tells how if a knight of Rome grew to fat, Lib. 22.
the Censors would ever take away his horse. The Lacedaemonians very sober.
In Lacedemon exercise was very much used and their diet was very slender, to
the end that of long continuance they should accustom themselves never to be
full, that they might be the apter for war, if the learned, to take pains,
live soberly, and last long with small expense, and they called their public
feasts Phedetia; because they learned to live soberly, of the word Phido,
Fatenesse.
which signifies sparing: and every man sent thither in the beginning of every
month, a few victuals, as Plutarque and Aristotle wrote: for fulness has
always bin the fountain, from whence sundry griuous and long diseases do
proceed, replenish the body with humors, wind, inflammations, distillations,
and opilations, which happens unto such as through a disordinate appetite,
and gluttony, feed of every kind of meat which is served unto them, and being
full, seek to please their appetites. And if any present unto them any
exquisite or strange meat at the end of all the rest, they will for all that
they be already full, feed thereof through very doltishnes. And for the most
part this change and disguising of meats, Change of meats.
makes our health to decay, although we confess that the mingling of sundry
meats engender sundry accidents; because it is that which draws pleasure
out of the bounds of sufficiency, pleasure, in all things which pleases:
whereas in simple and uniform kinds, delight never exceeds the appetite, and
natural necessity, Eccles. 21.23. Lisimachus.
it is written in Eccl. Pain in watching and cholerike diseases, and pangs of
the belly are with an insatiable man. K. Lysimachus, having yielded himself by
reason of his extreme thirst, after he had drunk some water said: O god how
great felicity have I lost for one so short a pleasure. A man may well say so of
such as are inte^perat, which lose their health thereby, and often times their
life. It was wisely said of old men in time past, that the well conditioned
belly, and lasting, brought great liberty and health And Isocrates gave
council to bridle it, and not too much to pamper it, because it was very
unthankful. Seneca.
And Seneca called sickness the chastisement of intemperance. Calisthenes
answered him which would needs urge him to drink, as other did, at Alexander
his fests, I will not for to drink to Alexander have need of an Esculapius,
meaning a Physician. The said Alexander after he was well tipled, was banqueted
by one of his captains, where he fell again to tippling more then before,
whereof he dyed. He was also compared by Daniel foretelling of the Monarchies,
to a Leopard, which cannot be so well taken as through wine: for being drunk
he falls into the toils as some write. The wise man says very well to
purpose, reprehending the drunkards: To whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? to whom
is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? and to
whom is the rednes of eyes? Even to them that tarry long at wine, to them
that go and seek mixed wine. And S Paul exhorts us, to walk honestly, Romans
12.10.
as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in chambering and
wantonness, nor in strife and envying: because there is ever great dissolutenes,
riotousnes, and losenes in all such excess. The glutto^ and the drunkard shall
be poor says Solomon, and especially forbids it to Princes as both Eccl.
and Isaiah do. And it was not amiss said, that wine has drowned more then
the sea. Plutarque in the life of Cleomenes writes that Ptolome Philopater,
Ptolome philopater.
so named in mockery says Zonarus because he put to death both his father
and mother, was destroyed through Wine and Weomen, and dyed like a beast.
Another Ptolome was termed the belly man because of his gluttony.
Callicratidas being sent to Cyrus, after that he had remained certain days,
Necessary points to preserve health.
and not had any audience, by reason the King was retired and occupied in
continual banquets and feastings, it was thought meet he should return
without doing any thing, saying that as there was great reason they should
have consideration of their weal so ought they to commit nothing unworthy of
Sparta. Caesar writes in his commentaries, that the Almanes would not suffer
any wine to be brought. Men in old time set down three most necessary
points to continue health, to eat without being full, to labor without sparing
ones self, and to preserve his seed. There has been also certain Priests,
which would never use salt with their meat, Salt.
because it sharpened appetit, and provoked to eat and drink more, fearing to
be fat, and least that divine part which was in them, should be pressed down
and kept under by the mortal. And thereunto that the extremity in good point
according to the opinion of Physicians is very dangerous, and the excellency
of too much welfare enclineth toward the opposite. Josephus describing the
manner of living of three sorts of Philosophers or sects in Judea, especially
of the Esseniens, highly commended them because they loved truth, and never
did eat or drink ought, whereby nature might be offended: and by reason of
their great sobriety they lived long in health, some unto a hundred years.
And truly it is a great mean to live happily, when a man's body is well
disposed, and in good temper not drowned with wine, nor grieved with meats,
ready to be employed in any actio^ he desires. Plato
The which also moved Plato to call intemperancie a root proper to every
disease. And Gorgias being demanded how he attained to so great years, of a
hundred and eight, answered, in never having eaten or done any thing through
pleasure. The old proverb says: much meat, much malady. And very wisely was
Socrates wont to say, that such as were accustomed to frugalitie, and
continency, enjoy great pleasure and delight, as well for the quiet of their
conscience, as good disposition of their body. And for as much as in ancient
time, fish was accounted a more deintie, Fat and hungry soyles.
and exquisite kind of meat then flesh, they which often fed thereon were called
by an infamous name, Opsophagi, gluttons, and wantons. This is the reason why
in Titus Liuius barrenness is preferred before frutefulnes; because that men
in a fat soil are often times cowards and lubberly fellows, and in a hungry,
they are more industrious, sober, and painful as experience teaches us. And
whenever we have a mind to eat, let us consider that we have to banquit
both the soul, and body together, following the advice of Epictetus. After
that Alexander had vanquished Darius, he caused a goodly pillar to be hewn
down, and burst in pieces, wherein was engraven the order, and quantity, of
such meats, as were every day set before the Kings of Persia, saying that it
was not fit for kings to learn to suppe so prodigally and sumptuously. And
Diodorus the Sicilian writes that there were laws set down to the kings of
Egypt, not only to show what they ought unto their subjects, but also to
serve as a rule and diet of their own particular. And Zonarus after Xenophon
in his Pedia writes, The bringing up of the persian youth
that all the youth of Persia, at schools and places where they learned and
exercised, were never nourished but with bread and water, and some time for
better cheer says Cordamus they added a few Cresses. And they never eat
until they had done their ordinary task. The which in his second book he
writes was also enjoined to souldiars, and in that country it was a very
great dishonor for one to show himself subject to natural eiections; which
they never knew to do, but with abstinence, moderatenesse, and good diet:
thorough which together with their exercise, they consumed and diuerted such
superfluities and humors, Socrates his council.
as proceeded from too great nourishment. Socrates in Xenophon wishes such as
would live in health, to beware of meats which entised them to eat when they
had no appetite, and of drinks which provoked them to drink when they had no
thirst, teaching us only to use that which we have need of, in joining
pleasure together with necessity. Julius Caesar, Augustus, Titus, Vespatian,
Traian, Tacitus, Alexander Seuerus, Princes very sober.
and Charlemagne, grew most famous for that they used so great sparing, and
their table talk was more accounted of then great fare. And they made
ordinances upon expenses, for the preservation of health and sparing of the
gifts of God. It is written of Vespasian that once a month he would fast one
whole day. Vespasian. Cato,
And of Cato that for the most part he never eat but of bread and beef, and
never drank but water, with which sometime he mingled a little vinegar. The
like is said of Scipio. Fabritius was found by the Samnite Ambassadors
feeding of Turnups which he roasted between the cenders. Massinissa King of the
Numides never did eat but of rauell bread, and very simple meat, without
sauce, and that but once a day according to the ancient order. Hannibal never
used other ordinary then the worst of his soldiers. And Cicero alleges the
saying of Plato, that it was very strange to see one feed twice on one day.
And he which says that the life of a sober man, and one that is content with
little, resembles him which makes a voyage in the spring time, by little
iourneys, through a pleasant and fertile country, co^pareth it very fitly, and
ought to withdraw us Frenchmen, from so great wantonness, for which the very
Turks have found fault with us, as Paulus Iouius writes. At Rome in old time
wine was forbid unto women, the which the inhabitants of Marseilles long time
observed. Wine forbidden to Romain weomen.
We see likewise that vessels when they are more frayght, then they are able to
carry do sink: even so fares it with such as eat and drink too much. As it
is written in Eccl. Excess of meats brings sickness, Eccles. 37.29.
and gluttony comes into choleric diseases, By surfeit many perishes, but
he that dieteth himself prolongeth his life. And Socrates was wont to say that
there is no difference between a choleric man and a beast. Xenophon.
As also Xenophon declares in his Pedia, commending k. Cyrus for his sobriety,
and for that he exercised, until he sweat. And in the 2. Socrates.
book of the deeds and sayings of Socrates, he advised a man never to contract
amity, with any that is too much addicted to their belly, to drinking, eating,
sleeping drowsines, and covetousness. Who will have pity on the charmer that
is stinged with the serpent? As Eccl. writes: Eccles. 12.15
less pity then, ought there to be had of him which suffers himself to be
thrown down hedlong through pleasure, which is said to rese^ble the thieves of
Egypt, called Philistes, which ever made much of the people, and embrased such
as they had a mind to strangle. Pleasure.
And Isocrates called her a traitor, deceiuer, hangma^, cruel beast, and
tyrant. Amos 6.4.
God by his prophet Amos greatly threatened those that love to live delicately,
as also did our savior by the example of the wicked rich man. And S. August.
upon the 41. Psalm, alleges the old saying, that the incontinent man calls
upon death. As also the proverb carries, of a short pleasure comes a long
displeasure. And there lies poison ever hidden, and the hook is covered with
a bait. And we must behold the^ behind, and not before as Aristotle
cou^selleth us. For plesures seem very beautiful before, as do the Sirenes,
and sundry other monsters: but behind they train a long and ugly serpents
tail. Whordome is also forbidden by god, and the immoderate use of the act of
venery ought to be shunned, Of Whoredom.
as altering, drying, and marring the body, weakening all the joints and
members, making the face blobbed, and yellow, shortning life, diminishing
memory, understanding, and the very heart, 1. These. 4.3
as Hosea says. S. Paul in the first to the Thessalonians writes, that the
will of God is our sanctification, and that we should abstain from
fornication, that every one should know how to possess his vessel in
holiness, and honor: and not in the lust of concupiscence. In the first to
the Corinthians he exhorts us to fly it, 1. Cor. 9.18.
because he that commits fornication sins against his own body, that is
to say, he does injury it, profaning and defiles the poverty, and holiness
thereof, he says further that of the members of Christ we make them the
members of an harlot, and profane the temple of the holy Ghost, and that being
bought with great price, we are not our own but Gods, and therefore should
glorify him in our body and spirit. Public honesty lies there violate,
and as Cupid was made blind, so do they which are bewitched with this foolish
love, stayne, and abandone, their own honor, Pro. 7.22.
wealth, liberty, and health. For this cause Solomon compared the whoremonger,
to an ox that goes to the slaughter, and to a fool to the stocks for
correction, and to a bird that hasteneth to the snare, not knowing that he is
in danger. We read what happened to Dina, the Beniamites, and David. And
histories are full of examples of mischiefs which have ensued thereon. And he
which commits that sin, wrappeth and sets an other as far in, and
sins not alone. By Gods law adultery was punished by death. Genesis 20. Leu.
22. and according to the civil law. Instit. de pub. iud. Sicut lib. Iulia. de
adult. lib. in ius. C. But to cast off so dangerous a vipor, Remedy against
whoredom.
we must crave at Gods hand, that he will bestow of us a pure and chaste heart,
that we may live soberly, avoid idleness, and all foul and filthy
communication, be it by mouth, writing, or picture. Ezechiel attributes the
sin of Sodom, to fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness. Ezec. 16 49.
David prayed to God to turn his eyes from vanity. Psalm. 119. and Job said,
I made a covenant with my eyes, why then should I think on a maid? And in
Genesis 6. the children were blamed that kept not their eyes, Job. 13.1.
but looked on fair women as also did Sichem. Genesis 34. and Putifer his wife
Genesis 39. and Ammon 2. Sam. 13. Notwithstanding as Isocrates said, that a less
labor and grief is made not to be left through a greater, so do those
pleasures, which proceed from virtuous and honorable actions, as from
temperance continency, and other virtues, clean mortify, with their joy and
greatness, such as come only from the body, which engender nothing but gowtes,
sciaticas, cholicques, palsies, greefes of the stomach, tremblinges,
leprosies, panges, vomits, inflammations, and other dangerous accidents. And
when we feel heaviness, and wearisomnesse in our members, head aches, or
stitches in our side, which for the most part proceed from crudities, and lack
of digestion, we must not perswad our selves to do as before, and as they say
to cach hear from a beast, but rest quietly and observe good diet, and long
before to foresee the storm that is at hand. And when we go to visit such
as are sick, and understand the cause of their diseases, we ought to look
into our selves according to Plato his council, and see whether we commit not
the like excess, to the end we may take heed by an other bodies harm, and
to stand upon our gardes, and consider how precious a thing health is. And
let us thankefully receive at Gods hand, such instructions, as by chastising
of us, he sends by reason of our intemperancie, to the end we may learn to
prevent such as may happen unto us. Antigonus.
And as king Antigonus said, that sickness had warned him not to wax proud,
so ought we to learn to humble our selves, and to live better, for that God
sends that as a means, as well to us as other, to awake us, and keep us
within the bounds of our dewetie. For vices are as the very proper inheritance
of man, which we must seek to correct, taking away from goods a vehement
covetousness, Correction of vices.
and unbridled greediness, and from evils, fear and sorrow, which come but
from conceit, the very cause of unquietness, and perturbation, which puts
me in mind often times of the saying of an ancient father, that as the body
in health easily endures both cold, and heat, and makes his profit of all
kind of meats, so does the Christian, which has his soul well compounded,
moderate anger, joy, and all other affections, Hipocrates advise to physicians.
which offend both body and soul. Hippocrates above all things recommendeth
to a Physician, that he should well advise himself, if in plagues, and
ordinary diseases, he found nothing which was divine, that is to say,
whether the hand of God were not the proper causes of the sickness, of the
party diseased. For truly, Siknes, and aflictions are sent from god for our
good and profit.
he often times sends sickness for remedies, and means to withdraw those
whom he loves from eternal ruin. And to punish such excess, he armeth
grasshoppers, noisome flies, worms, frostes, winds, plagues, war, dewes and
vapors of the earth. As before we declared those things which they call evils,
are as great helps to the good to do well, and to profit in the exercise of
virtue: Poverty, to moderate their desires, baseness to humble themselves,
sickness to live patiently, and more soberly, and al kinds of griefs to make
us run unto God, Good and evil.
and reconcile our selves unto him, and to succor our neighbor in like
distress when God shall have drawn us out. For I esteem none good but such
as follow true riches which are godliness and virtue: and contrariwise the
wicked are fastened to true evils, that is vice and impiety. That was the
reason why in the council of Latran it was enjoined, that the sick man should
call for his spiritual Physician. Diognes was angrye with such as sacrificed to
health, and in the mean time lived in all pleasures and idleness: and said
that as in a house where much provision and victual is, are many rats and
cats: so the body that is replenished with meats draw sundry diseases unto
it. Frugalitie.
And he called frugalitie the mother of health, for which without great need a
man need not use laxatiue medicines, because they are offensive to the
stomach, and often times breed more superfluities and excrements, then they
draw out of the body. Plato also in the 8. of his commonwealth, councelleth us
not to provoke sickness with physic, except the disease be most dangerous
and vehement. Physic Aurelius
It is written of the Emperor Aurelian and sundry other, that they never
called for physicians or used physic: as at this day most part of the Almanes
and Zuzers use, but they healed themselves throught good and spare diet, and
some of them with a quart of strong wine and spyce. And as Herodotus wrote,
Babilonians.
the Babilonians never used physic but all sick persons were brought into
the market place, In the temple of Esculapius, were all receipts registered.
to whom al such as had been cured of the like disease, taught their remedies.
And there was found in the temple of Esculapius, enregistred, all such
receites as had been experimented, for to serve in like case. Plin. lib. 29.
For otherwise physic consisted in the knowledge of sundry herbs, and they
were almost all instructed in anatomies, and simples, as Galen writes. And we
see even very many beasts and birds, to find out herbs and remedies fit for
themselves which they have taught unto men, with the use of letting of blood
and glisters. Yet they have always thought, that they are often deceived, when
there is nothing but experience without judgment and contemplation, to apply
remedies in time and place, with other consideration of the age, strength or
debilitie of person, condition, manner of living, the season of the year, the
cause, beginning, increase, Asclepiades.
growing, and declyning of the disease. Asclepiades set all physic at naught,
and counseled only sobriety, to rub over the whole body every morning and
to exercise. And some have compared such as take physic, to those which drive
out the burgess out of the city, to place strangers there. Cato.
M. Cato feared least the Grecians would send physicians to Rome, and
therefore made some to be banished and driven thence; and expressly forbad his
son in any wise to use or deal with the^, as appears in a letter he wrote
unto him. They in like sort of the same profession which since have crept into
Rome, were mere strangers, Rome lo^ng time without physicians
the Romans themselves having been above 600. years together without
Physicians, and since they have even abhorred the^, saying their irresolutio^
and hazardous advise: which was the very cause that they termed the^ hangmen
and thieves, and so the most part of the citizens endeavored only to be skilful
in simples, using no other drogues then what proceeded from nature, and of
their own growing. Indeed they had certain deputies which sent them panniers
full of simples out of the isles which appertained unto the^ as sundry have
written. And were it not that I fear being too tedious, I could allege a
great number of Kings and Princes, which have bin very curious in knowing, and
seeking out the property of herbs and plants, and some have written thereof to
the great profit of their posterity, and an immortal glory is remained unto
the^. Gale^ himself writes, that sundry emperors have gratly studied to
attain unto the knowledge of simples, and to adorn that art amidst their
business and in sundry places entertained arborysts, and in their triumphs
caused rare plants to be carried. The temple of Esculapius without the city.
The temple of Esculapius was in old time builded, without the city, teaching
us thereby how we ought to esloyne our selves from Physicians and physic, which
kind of people Plato could never like of, except they were surgions, and
marvelous well experienced, thinking it to be a great sign of inte^perancy where
he found any of the other sort. And in his dialogue Philosophus he esteems
physic to consist only in opinions and uncertain conjectures. Nicocles called
Physicians happy men, because the Sun made manifest what good success soever
happened in their cures, and the earth buried what fault soever they committed.
And some say they are very angry men when they see their neighbors in health,
and not to need them. The said Plato and Cato were likewise wont to say, that
men in doing nothing learned to do ill. And Eccl. cou^selleth us to exercise,
because Idleness breeds much evil, and slothfulnes poverty, which te^teth us
to do ill as Isocrates wrote. And Xenophon exhorted Hierom to spend his time in
honest exercises, to make both his body and mind better disposed. And the
Athenians ordined a great punishment for idleness. For this cause Scipio was
wont to say, that he was never less in rest, then when he rested himself,
understanding thereby that when he was not busied in public affairs, his own
particular and his study sufficiently held him occupied and that in solitarines
he co^sulted with himself. The wise me^ of the Indies called Gymnosophistes so
greatly detested idleness, that they caused every man to render a particular
account of what he had learned or did every day. We read in S. Ambrose in the
82. Epistle of his 10. book, and in S. Ierom in sundry treaties, and other
ecclesiastical aucthors that monasteries were first ordained for academies and
schools of travail and exercise as well of the body, as of the mind, of
learning, virtue, abstinence, fasting, patience, and all good example. And the
word of the Emperor Seuerus was, Trauaillons. And the Emperors Adrian,
Antonius, Cyrus, Sertorius and sundry other captains, have still kept their men
of arms, and soldiers, yea their very horses in continual exercise,
travail, and sobriety. And we read in the Commentaries of Caesar, that his
soldiers had no other provision, then corn, and a little vinegar to mingle
with their water, and that some would never suffer any to bring the^ wine,
imagining that that made men more nyce and effeminate, and less able to endure
pain and travail: and shows as also did Titus Liuius, how they sought to
cut off all occasions, and means of delicateness: and how the soldiers were
all the day long kept to travail in works, and constrained to carry about them
sufficient corn for one whole month, and seven piles to serve for a rampire.
Veget. L. 1 c. 19
And Vegetius ordained that young apprentises and nouices should carry burdens
to threescore pound weight. And Marius so charged his soldiers and employed
them in the diches near unto the Rhyne, Marius his Moyles.
that they were after termed the moyles of Marius, yea they were often times
employed in amending the high ways called military, and there they made
diches to make them the dryer, and the waters to soake away. The said Marius
said likewise in Salust, that his father and sundry other personages had
taught him, that daintiness, De bello Iug.
and niceness were fit for weomen, but travail for men, and that all good
men ought rather to esteem a good reputation, then riches: and that weapons
beautified a house, and not fair mooueables. The said Salust recyteth before,
Metellus kept the discipline of war.
how that when Metellus was arrived in Africa, he took away whatsoever might
seem to nourish slothfulness, and caused proclimation to be made throughout
the camp, that none should be so hardy as to presume to sell either bread, or
any other meat dressed, that the cariers of water should not follow the camp;
that the simple soldiers should never have page, nor beast of carriage: that
each one should keep his rank, cast his trench, and carry his victual together
with his furniture. And Xenophon in the second of the Pedia of Cyrus writes,
that the soldiers and men at arms, did never dyne and sup, until they
travailed and sweat. The which ought to make our men ashamed, that have so
many boys, and drabs to carry their furniture; such ought rather to be held in
the rank of thieves, robbers, cowardes, and boys, then of valiant men for
co^bat. The said Caesar writes also of a fashion which the Gaulois had, The
ancient fashion of the Galois at an entrance into war.
the which Titus Liuius and Tacitus do likewise affirm, that when by public
ordinance proclamation of war was made, all young men above the age of 15.
years were summoned to appear armed, and furnished as they ought, and he
which arrived last, was put to death. The which Pliny also does recite of
storkes, how they detest slothfulnes. And in certain Islandes namely the
Baleares now called Maiorque and Minorque, the children can not break their
fast nor eat, Baleares.
until with their slinges they strike down, their meat which is set upon the
top of a high beam or pole. Other used to give their children nothing but
what they could get by hunting. And they of Crete, caused them continually to
exercise, to make themselves the more nimble. Yea Amasis K. of Egypt, forbad
to all his subjects upon a great penalty, that none should eat before he
had long iourneyed or trauayled in his occupation, Alexander
and thereof should render account. Alexander the great called travail a
royal thing, and idleness servile. And in the proverbs idleness is
forbidden, and he writes, that A slothful hand makes poor: and he that
sleeps in harvest is the son of confusion. And in Ecclesiastes The sleep
of him which trauaileth is sweet. And the said King Amasis condemned to
death all idle persons except they had wherewithal to live: and in all sorts
greatly blamed idleness, and would that once a year each one should render
account, by what science or occupation he gained his living. The Aegiptians and
Athenians rendered account how they lived.
The which the Atheniens and sundry other well ordered commonwealth diligently
observed. And Cicero entreating of the laws writes, that none went in the
streates but he carried the badge and mark whereby he lived. Which is yet
observed in sundry cities of Germany, and Cantons of Zuizerlande. Of others
they write that sometimes men so employed themselves at Rome that there was not
to be found so much as one idle man. And a Philosopher said that as a woman
can not engender any thing to purpose without a man, no more does hope without
travail: and there is nothing which continual labor will not attain unto,
and thorough care and watchfulness, a man overcomes things more then hard,
as Seneca said. And Hesiodus counceled the laborer, to make his prays to the
Gods before he went to his work or saying, marry he must lay his hand on the
plough tail. And Plato has most holily written, that as through great, and
continual labors, concupiscences, and ryotousnesse were quenched, so were
they set a fire again by idleness. Money lost lent to an idle person.
Stobeus writes that in sundry countries, if a man lent money to one that were
idle or given to his pleasure, he should loose it for ever. And if at Rome one
had negligently husbanded his inheritance, Ezec. 16 49.
he was straightwayes censured. And God in Ezechiel among the causes of the
destruction of Sodom sets down idleness for a principal. And Themistocles
was wont to say, that slothfulnes buried men while they were living in their
grave. And S. Ambrose called idleness the pillow of Satan. And it is written in
Ecclesiasticus, what ever thou do, take exercise, and cruel sickness shall
not meet with thee, and that idleness breeds much evil. For she is the
spring of injustice, of poverty, and evil disposition. And Seneca wrote that
travail nourished gentle spirits. And the holy scripture teaches us that as
the bird is borne to fly, so is man to travail, and to employ himself to
many fair and good offices: for vice which watches hard, comes and runs
over, as soon as ever it perceives that one is given over to idleness, and
makes the^ give way, because that nature being always in a perpetual motion,
desires to be driven to the better part, Man's nature.
or else she suffers her self to be weighed down as a balance to the worser.
Which was the cause that Plato was wont to say to his children when they went
out of his school, Go to masters, 1. These. 2.9
study to employ your leisure to some honest pastime. S. Paul in the first
Epistle to the Thessalonians declares how he had eat his bread trauayling
both day and night, to the end he would not be chargeable unto any, and that he
which refused to work ought not to eat, adding that some walked
disordinately, doing nothing, and living wantonly: wherefore he commanded
those which were such and be sought them thorough Christ Jesus, to eat their
bread laboring peaceably. Xenophon recites among the sayings of Socrates,
Pithagoriens
that it is idleness if one do no good. The Pithagoriens commanded none to
help their friends to ease them of their burden, but to charge them well, as
not approving idleness. And K. Cyrus boasted, Cirus.
that he never did eat, before he had first done some exercise, Alexander.
as a sauce to breed him a good appetite. The which Alexander was often times
wont to say, and that he had no need of any other cooks for his dinner then to
rise early, nor for his supper then to eat little at dinner, and refused the
cooks which the Queen of Carry sent unto him. The like is written of Julian
the Emperor. Agesilaus.
To which purpose we read that the Thessalonians sent unto Agesilaus certain
refreshinges of corn, foul, comfits, baked meats and other exquisite fare,
and most dainty wine: He took the corn only and commanded such as brought it
to carry away the rest, as a thing which he had no need of: but in the end,
thorough the great instancie, which they made unto him, he took them, and
willed them to make division thereof among the slaves, telling them that it was
not meet, for such as made profession of valor and prowess, to receive such
nice daynties: and that which is proper and serves to a servile nature, ought
not to agree with such as are of a frank and free courage. A Lacedemonian.
A Lacedemonian answered one, that wondered how he could live so sparingly,
considering he was of such wealth; that it was an honest matter when one having
great store of riches, could notwithstanding live according unto reason and not
appetite. And Archidamus told one that had promised to give him excellent
wine, Archidamus.
that that would serve but to make one drink more, and become less man, of
Sleaping.
Too much sleeping also fatteth and diminishes the spirits of life, and of
time. And not without cause said a Philosopher, that it annoyed the body, the
mind, and all business, except it were moderated to suffice nature, egalling
our felicity with an other misery: and that like unto a tole gatherer it
took away the half part of our life. And if as Plutarke, Varro and Pliny
wrote, to live is to watch, then they which sleep do not properly live, as
they write of Epaminondas, who after that he had killed one of his soldiers,
Epaminondas
that was set to watch, because he found him sleepinge, answered that he left
him in the same estate he found him in. From whence I imagine the custom
first grew, of which I spoke before, to awake the Kings of Persia and
Macedonia early, K. of Persia and Macedonia.
to put them in mind to take care of that which God had committed unto their
charge. Virtue.
Hesiodus describes virtue unto us to be environed, with sweat, watching and
great travail. And we see that sluggishnesse makes both mind and body to
languish. And if the air in which we live, and the waters were not tossed with
winds there would be naught else but corruption. Quintus Cursius writes of
Alexander and of the Lacedaemonians, and Titus Liuius of Hannibal and the
Carthaginians, that they which were not able to be overcome and vanquished by
their enemies and infinite harms which they endured were notwithstanding
clean destroyed through delights and pleasures. And the Poets wrote of
Perseus, that through the aid of Minerua he cut off Gorgons head, which turned
men into stones, understanding thereby that Princes through wisdom, have
surmounted pleasures, which make men as blockish as images. And we see by
experience that the poor has this advantage over the rich, that they are
exempt from pleasure. The which Curious and Corancanus well knowing, when it was
told the^ that some referred all to pleasure said, Soldiors employed in trifles
to avoid Idleness.
would to god that the Samnites and Pirrhus had bin as well persuaded herein, to
the end that giving themselves to pleasure, they might more easily have bin
vanquished. And many have said that all pleasure was followed by enemies, and
it is to be coniectured that it was not thorough folly, that sundry emperors
have made all the spider cobwebs through out the city of Rome, to be gathered
and heaped together and created a Senate of weomen, led their armies to the
sea shore to gather cockles, as though there were want of enemies, to stand
catching of flies, but it was to avoid idleness, and rather to occupy their
soldiers in such trifles, and toys, then quarrels, to sell smoke rather the^ to
do worse, which likewise as Pliny wrote, moved the^ which builded those so
wonderful Pyramides where about one of the^ 300. and threescore thousand men
wrought the space of 20. years; and yet he writes that their remembrance was
clean lost, which spent so much treasure and time in such vanities. And it had
bin much more commendable, to have bestowed that time and expense, By what
means health is preserved.
in matters profitable to the common wealth. Gelon after that he had vanquished
the Carthaginians, led the Siracusians often times into the field to labor and
plant as well as to war, to the end to enrich their land, and that they
should not wax worse in doing nothing. The ancient proverb carries, that the
Gods sell riches unto men for their travail. So following Galens counsel, who
so would be in health ought to live soberly, and to take pains, except he will
cosen him self, as we see that all things alter, except they be put in use. A
great Lord told King Alphonsus that he toyled too much, to whom he
answered: think thou that God and nature have given hands unto Kings in
vain? And if they desire to live in health, why should they seek the
contrary thorough idleness and delights? As Solomon teaches in his
Proverbs, Ease slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroys
them. Our forefathers counseled us to exercise our body and mind equally
together, as a couple of horses, set in a coach together. And Zenon was
wont to say, that the life of schoolers, that is to say, of such as are
given to idle study, dyffereth not from the voluptuous and Epicurians. For
knowledge and study ought as well to profitte other as ones own self. Of
gaming.
And for as much as idleness draws to unprofitable and dishonest games,
here were a very good place to show the mischiefs, noysomnesse, blasphemies
and cosonage, that they carry with them: and to praise Chilon the Lacedemonian,
who returned from Corinth without delivering what he had in charge, because he
found the governors playing at dice. And it were very requisite that the good
ordinances, which are made therefore were well observed. Alphonsus.
The which Alphonsus forbad to those in his court, and to all his subjects,
not permitting them to play under a great forfaiture. Turkey.
And in Turkey he was noted of great infamy, which played for money, and
grievous pains are appointed, if he return to it again. Sundry have written
that King Cyrus to punish them of Sardes, Cirus.
commanded them to pass away their time in plays and banquets, thereby to
render them less men and keep the^ from rebellion. It were very requisite
that all playing at chance and hazard were banished out of France, as well in
deed, as they are by the edictes, Young gentlemen wndone by play.
by the law Martia, and sundry other. Every man may see how many young
gentlemen have been clean undone by playing at cards and dice, by gluttony,
drunkenness, whordome, expenses, Honest pastime allowed.
and excess, which proceed thereof. I will not for all that mislike honest
pastime, and yet we ought to be sorry with Apelles, if we escape a day without
drawing a line, or with Cato the Censor, if through negligence we have neither
done nor learned any thing that is good, and at night call all our actions to
account, and see what loss we have made of the time, which is so precious, and
not able to be again recovered. And in a good beginning we ought to persevere
without loosing courage. And forasmuch as mere leisure is the cause of
disorders, and little honest thoughts we ought not to spend one bare hour in
vain. Many have counseled youth to exercise themselves in Music, Music.
to employ their time in those harmonies, which stir up to commendable
operations and moral virtues, tempering desires, greediness, and sorrows, for
so much as rimes and melodies consist in certain proportions and concords of
the voice. And so long as this pleasure without wantonness allureth them, they
loose the occasion of devising any less honest sport, according to Plato his
opinion, the second of his laws and eight of his commonwealth, and Aristotle
in his Politiques lib. 8.3. 5. and 7. This moved Architas to invent a certain
musical instrument, Architas. Men giving over, public charge to live privately
to stay the running wit of children. I could here extol Curious, Diocletian,
Lucullus, and sundry other, who retired themselves into a little small farm to
the ploughe. And Cicinnatus, who after he had given over his Dictatorshippe,
returned to his plough, as did Attilius Calatinus, Attilius Regulus, and
sundry other, who contented themselves with the labor of the field, despising
all honors. The which in my opinion moved Plynie to write that the ground
took pleasure in being ploughed by Emperors. Wantonness, and daintiness
breeds vexation of mind, strange fashions, and choler: whereas facility of
manners, makes one content with what he has in hand, Manner of the Egiptians.
and to seek nothing too exquisite or superfluous. I am of opinion that the
manner which the Egyptians held, and long time observed, in carrying up and
down the hall at feasts, a dried anatomy of a dead man's body, and showing
it unto the company, thereby admonishing men to remember that in short time
they should be a like, was to make men more sober and temperate. And sundry
before time have written that the diseases of the body be not to be feared so
as the soul be sound, the health whereof consists in the good temperature
of powers courageous or wrathful, coveting and reasonable, Temperature of the
soul.
she being the reasonable mistress, and bridling the two other, as two furious
and unbroken coltes. For as we are curious to preserve the health of our
body, through the receites which are given and prescribed unto us by
Physicians or experience, and so abstain from meats and excess, which may
offend or alter the same, it is more required at our hands to remain in the
truth, and to have a greater desire and care to preserve the health of our
souls, diligently observing all the rules which God the sovereign Physician of
all prescribes unto us: and taking great heed on the other side that we
shun and avoid whatsoever he has forbidden. And if we be careful to seek
out, The health of the soul.
those remedies which nature, art, and experience present unto us to preserve
the health of our body, much more ought we to draw, and suck out of the
holy scriptures and histories, that which forms, dresseth, teaches,
advises, reformeth and heals the most noble and excellent part of us, which
prepares and strengthens us at all assayes, to receive and carry with great
contentment and hope, (God assisting) whatsoever may befall unto us in this
life.

CHAP. XLVII. What we ought to judge of certain examples of lying.
WE have before recited the maxim which Ulysses in Sophocles would teach the
son of Achilles, as a matter very necessary, never to be ashamed to lie
when a man may reap profit thereby: as also we put in ure what Plato permitted
to Magistrates and Physicians to lie, so some other benefit might be reaped:
for the scriptures, and Doctors of the Church, forbid all kind of lying as
well to great as to small. And none ought to save his corporal life, to loose
his spiritual. All manner of lying forbidden of god.

Lying joyful or offici, ous.


And such help as we ought to minister unto our neighbor, ought to be without
offense to God, and by just, upright and honest means. A man must not in like
sort do evil in hope of good. And as touching that kind of lying which is
called joyful or offycious, it discovers it self easily, and does no great
harm. Now to satisfy what may be objected of the ly which the midwiues of the
Hebrews made, and of Rahab which hid the spies of the children of Israel, The
Lie which the midvviues of the hebrews made.
of Jacob which said he was Esau, and of other places which seem to derogate
from the truth, S. Augustine says, that as touching the midwiues we ought not
so much to respect the lie, as the faith which they had in God, and the
affection and mercy which they showed unto the children of Israel. In the
rest we are to consider the will of God, and that they have been moved
thorough the holy Ghost, to foretell like Prophets, what God had ordained for
his glory. And when he wills a thing, then is sin clean excluded: and what
may seem unto men most unjust, is in respect of our sovereign Lord most just.
Constance the father of Constantine the great, made proclamaton that all
Christians should give over their offices, and living, which the good did and
went from the court, but such as were but in name, gave over their religion.
The said Emperor shortly after, caused all those to be called home again
which were departed, and drove away the rest, saying that if they were not
faithful to God, they would not be to his service. 2. King 10.25
The like was done by Iehu, who after he had summoned all the Priests of Baal,
as though he would reestablish their idolatry, put them all to the edge of the
sword, and made a iakes of their temple. Yet ceased he not to worship the
golden calfes. We ought then to admire the sayings and deeds of great
personages and not to imitate them in what is not conformable to the rule which
God has prescribed, or wherein they shall fail like men, and to follow the
counsel given unto us by S. Paul to try all things and hold that which is
good. 1. These. 5.21.


CHAP. XLVIII. Of the means how to render a nation true and happy, and of the
bringing up of youth.
ALbeit that sundry of those means, may be perceived by that which we have
before touched, yet by reason of their importance and to be meet with sundry
inconveniences which happen, I thought good to set forth more at large, how
the very fountain of all truth, Bringing up of youth of what importance.
godliness, bounty, justice, policy, and virtue, proceeds from a natural
good, and that thorough the carelesnes of heads and Magistrates, guiding their
affairs by hazard without any foresight, and according to the humor of me^
which in all time have halted in their duty, youth never having received good
bringing up, corruption has in every place mightily increased. For as
Isocrates wrote in his Areopagiticke; it is not great revenues nor riches, nor
laws and ordinances which make a city quiet and happy, but the good nourture
of youth; which being ill brought up makes no account of laws; Good laws
straighly to be observed. L. 5. c. 6
and contrariwise becomes very obedient unto Magistrates, and gives it self
to all kind of virtue, if betime it receive a good impression. It were also
very requisite to cause laws to be straightly observed; but in vain do me^
make laws as Aristotle in his Politics said, if youth be not brought up in
good manners, and nourished therein. And Plato in the 4. of his commonwealth
was of opinion, that it had no great need of laws, by reason of the good
discipline in which his citizens had been nourished, as such as without laws
were able to govern themselves as they ought. And in his Politiques and books
of laws, he attributes all the disorder of a country or city, to the
multitude of laws and so often change of them, Nourture and bringing up of
children.
and all delights to lewd bringing up, and shows that the principal scope
of a good establisher or reformer of a commonwealth, ought to be in causing
youth to be well brought up and instructed: and to the end it might be more
capable of good discipline, it is required that the fathers and mothers should
be sober, moderate, and quietly minded: that when children are borne, they
should suck their own mothers breasts, to be sure that they should not be
nourished in delights nor idleness, and in playing might fashion themselves
to virtue. He would also that whatsoever might breed happiness, were engraven
through good nourture in the manners and hearts of men to remain there all
their life as a good impression: because that while they are young, they have
more need to be well looked unto and diligently taken heed of, then any other
kind of beasts. And it is more meet that care shall be taken hereof, then of
getting or preserving of wealth, or enclosing our parks, or gardens, with
walls, or hedges. And there is no doubt, as S. Ierom and other ancient doctors
have written, that the cause which moved the most part of such, as heretofore
founded Churches, The foundation of churches prebends and colleges
Prebends, and Colleges was chiefly for to bring up youth in learning, and to
render the^ more capable to serve God and the co^monwelth, and the better to
imprint in the^ the fear of God which is the beginning of all wisdom, and
which forms the mind to the true mould of truth and virtue, and carries it
far off from vice, foolish fashions, and lewd companies, whence there is
always carried away, some botch and stayne of the infection of their wickedness.
Good bringing up of children makes them moderate and temperate.
And by the ordinance of the three estates in all Cathedral and collegiall
Churches of this Realm, the reuenew of one prebend, is still allotted to a
scholemaster. For that according unto the saying of Plato, when youth in the
beginning has bin well taught, then is the navigations and voyage of this world
happy; and all the life after is accompanied with contentment, felicity, and
good hope, and such as have bin well nourished and brought up, become for the
most part very moderate and temperate and the old proverb auerreth that
nourture passes nature. The which Licurgus showed by the nourishing of 2.
dogs, the one to the field, the other to the kitchen: and if one sow good
corn in harvest he shall reap the like. Themistocles was wont to say, that
colts and fierce beasts became tame through discipline. And it is manifest that
the Almanes and sundry other nations which were marvelous barbarous, as we
read in Caesar and Tacitus, became more meek and industrious by better
education. And some have written that at Rome in ancient time, it was ordained
that children for the first fault should be told of it, Punishments of
childrens faults at Rome.
for the second punished, for the third hanged, and the father banished. And
Plato was always of opinion, that enourmious vices proceeded more from a
generous nature corrupted, then from vilitie, or low estate. And the first
thing which ought to be beaten into youth, is to love honor, to fear God and
to obey his will, to make no account of the brickle goods of fortune, but of
the eternal and spiritual and of virtue; to set before their eyes the
examples and praises of virtuous personages, and the blames and miseries of the
lewd and wicked, to the end they may become wise by others harms, and detest
all vice and evil company, receiving correction at the hands of every one,
without presuminge ought of themselves, shunning wantonness and delights,
neither speaking nor believing too lightly, not being to obstinate, hard,
stubborn, choleric, impatient, nor vnconuersable. Saint Jerome writing to
Nepotian, thought that all poor scholars, Poor scollers nourished with
tenthes. Dan. 1.5.
and such as had will to serve the common wealth or the church, were to be
nourished with the tenthes. We see in Daniel, the care which was had to the
bringing up of youth. And Strabo in his Geographie, showed sundry examples of
the Indians and Persians, for the eschewing of that vice of ignorance, whereof
we have before entreated, Deuteronomy. 25. L. 2. c. 6 L. 2. de stud. litera.

The principal care which parents ought to have over their children


as Moses complained, and Josephus. And the ordinance of the Emperors is set
down in the eleventh of the Code. It falls out oftentimes, that the wicked
abhor the remembrance of their fathers and mothers, when thorough their
damnable liberty, wanton pleasures, lasciviousness, fond collinges, and evil
examples they have been lead away; whereas contrariwise the well nourished,
give thanks unto them which have been the occasion of their so great good. And
Solomon affirms, that A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son
is a heaviness unto his mother. The wife Crates was wont to say, that if it
were possible for him he would climme up to the top of the city, and cry
alowde: O men, whither do you carry your selves thus headlonge, that take
what care you can to heap up wealth, and yet make small account of those to
whom you are to leave it, as caring more for the doublet or show, then the
body or foot. The same Solomon in his proverbs says, that wisdom cries
thoroughout. To this purpose, the contents of an Epistle written by Xenophon
to Crito, seems worthy of marking. Know ye that Socrates has often told
us, that such as leave great riches to their children, without seeing them
brought up well and honestly, are like unto such as give much prouender unto
young horses, but never break them at all: for so they wax fat, but
unprofitable. The praise of an horse consists not in the fashion of his
body, but in his service and dexterity. They also are in as great an error,
which buy heritages for their children which set little by them; because they
will esteem of the wealth, but despise them, whereas there is a great deal
more reason that the gardien should be better liked then the possession. He
then which makes his son worthy to be had in estimation, has don much for
him although he leave him but little wealth. For it is the understanding which
makes every thing seem great or small, because that whatsoever the well
brought up possesses, Knowledge and virtue a more sure inheritance then
riches.
is moderate and sufficient, but unto the evil nurtured it is very little.
Leave no more then unto thy children, then very necessity requires: for they
shall very much esteem that which is sufficient, if thou have well brought them
up: Phocion.
and if they be ignorant, then will they have less care, fear, and occasion to
do evil. The which Phocion practiced, refusing the presents of Alexander as
Plutarque writes. Let us then consider that knowledge is not laid open to
fortune as are richesse, the which are very often possessed by the wicked: nor
mutable as glory: nor comes by descent, as nobility: nor of small lasting as
beauty: nor changeable as health: nor decays and diminishes as strength:
but increases with time, Stilpon.
and is not vanquished by war, as Stilpon told K. Demetrius. And the
Laconien scholemaster, answered very well, that he would make the noble
gentleman which was his pupil, to sport himself in things honest, just and
true: and to be offended at dishonest, unjust, and lies. For manners being
through discipline well composed within, are the very fountain, whence al
contentment proceeds.

And children are by custom trained into the way of virtue. And the
Pithagoriens lesson seems unto me to be very wise, Choose the best way,
custom shall make it agreeable, and pleasant unto thee. The Komanes had a good
custom, to place their children with those whom they would have them to
imitate, And in France, there is great account made of one which has bin
brought up as a page to some valiant and wise gentleman. Good example to be
shevved to children.
Cirus in the end of the 7. book of Xenophon, desires every man to give a
good example to children, because if they see no vncomlines, they shall be
enforced to follow goodness, and virtue, and be fit for all things. A King of
Sparta answered him wisely, which asked what children ought to learn; That
said he, which they ought to do when they are men: he told another, that they
were to learn to know how to obey and to command. Lessons to youth.
We must then more study to fill the understanding then the memory, not only
to have a care to besprincle the soul with knowledge, but to make it grow
perfect, and learn by study, not of the tongues, but of wisdom, courage,
and resolution, to avoid the baytes of pleasure, and to throw down with an
invincible courage the threats of Fortune and death to be sound and short in
discourse, to render themselves, and quite their force to truth, as soon as
they shall perceive it, without being too stubborn, that their conscience,
sincerity, and virtue, be manifested in their words and deeds, that in
company they cast their eyes round about, and in themselves control the
manners of each one, to follow the good and contemn the wicked. And they
ought not to let one word or sentence fall to ground, without putting it in
their tables, to make their profit thereof, as Bees draw honye out of sundry
flowers, so learning the discourse of Phylosophie, they shall clear the
tempests of Fortune. They must also take away strangenes and partiality,
enemies to society, and apply the supple bodies to all kind of fashions,
customs and companies, to be able to do all things, but loving to do but
what is good. And if they go to the war, Youth going to vvarres.
to fear nothing but God, and an evil renown. To learn to combat with the
enemy, and above all things to obey their head, Com. 6.
as Caesar in his commentaries desired the French to do. To accustom
themselves to endure pain, cold and heat, to lie hard, to assault well, and
to keep a forte. The chief care which Kings and governors ought to take, is
of the honor of God, and maintenance of his Church, and next of policy
and justice, followinge the lesson of our Savior, in seekinge the kingdom of
God, and then whatsoever is necessary for them shall be given unto them. Now
the kingdom of God is the Church of the faithful, the seed whereof is youth,
which is consecrated to God thorough baptism, under the Church. Then this
seed ought to be well husbanded, and kept from weeds, which might choke it,
that the ears may be gathered full of grain.

It is an old saying, that he which has begun well, The beginning is
chiefly and principally to be considered.
has half ended. The beginning is in the first youth, whence the good
Bourgesses, Magistrates and governors do spring. And there is great
advancement and hope to be looked for in that place, where youth is well
brought up in godliness, and honesty. For this cause Aristotle in the end
of the seventh of his Politiques, would have them turn their eyes and ears,
from all injuries, foul and indecent actions, and communication. And the more
that we see all things to impair, good manners subverted, wickedness,
covetousness, ignorance, and injustice, not by stealth, but publickely, and
without shame to run their course, of which our predecessors greatly
complained, and we complain of at this day, and it is very likely, that
they which come after us shall rewe it: the more regard ought we to have, that
the nurcerie of our posterity, which is the youth, may be taught to live
soberly, and justly, and not so much to speak well as to live well: to the
end that what the vessel being new has once been seasoned with, it may
long keep the sent thereof, as Horace writes. And there is no doubt, but that
man being desirous to know, Adolescencie is from 12. to 21. years.
and incline to virtue from his birth, if by a good guide he be until the
last year of his adolescencie kept and defended from the snares, which the
delights of senses and pleasures draw with them, his understanding being
once fortified thorough good instructions, shall after of himself be so well
rooted in the love of knowledge, virtue, and the fear of God, that it shall be
very hard ever after to withdraw him. The which was the cause that the
Lacedaemonians answered Antipater, that they would rather dye then give him
their children which he demanded for hostages, so great account made they of
their education. This felicity and happiness, as Aristotle shows in the
end of his Ethickes, depends principallye of the grace of God, of a good
reformation, of the liberality, magn^^cence, bounty, and courtesy of
Princes, which hereby provoke, and prick forward the advancement of Arts,
and of good wits; as contrariwise they languish, and clean decay, thorough
the ignorance, envy, covetousness, tyranny, and stubbernesse of such as
govern, and thorough great disorder, and corruption. I have before touched the
inconveniences and mischiefs which happen in France, K. Francis 1
by reason that the nobility is not trained up in learning: And not without
cause the great King Francis said, that it greatly grieved him that the
gentlemen of his Realm, gave themselves no more to study, and learning, to
the end he might have provided for them the chief offices of the long robe;
thinking that thereby he should have been better served, both in his
gouernmentes and wars. Bayart.
And that great Captain Bayart, answered him that asked him the difference
between a learned man and an ignorant: as much as between a Physician and a
patient, a live man, Aristippus.
and one dead. Aristippus answered likewise, send them into a far country,
and then you shall know, and there is nothing but knowledge which causes a
man to be esteemed.

And the oracle given unto the Greeks, of the doubling of the house, was
interpreted by the wise men, that it was meant thereby, that they should leave
arms, and converse with the Muses and learning, which would mollify their
passions and drive away ignorance, and procure courage and good council:
Agesilaus.
as Agesilaus maintained, that the laws of Lycurgus bread a contempt of
pleasures. To accustom youth in like sort to follow virtue, to bridle
passions and choler, to shun vice, and lying, to enter into consideration how
good and virtuous personages have in all times behaved themselves, to remember
the harms happened to the wicked, and the blessings and honors which have
accompanied the good, bredeth a great quiet all the life long, because such a
custom has a maruailous efficacy, in aduauncing of a man: And betimes is the
judgment that proceeds from an evil custom to be corrected, the which in a
vile nature does often by process of time throw down and abase our minds,
and render us contemptible. The which may be helped and amended through
virtuous exercises. For if that resistance which reason makes to the appetite
of eating, and drinking, forces very often hunger, and thirst: much more
easy shall it be for one to cut off covetousness, ambition, pride, envy,
choler, curiosity, lying, and other vices, by refraining and abstaining from
those things which he coueteth, so as in the end they shall al remain clean
discomfited. To abstain also from pleasures which are permitted, is a good
exercise to meet with such as are forbidden. I leave here to declare how much
France was dishonored when as the Polakes made their entry into Paris
accompanied with the French gentlemen, An embassage from Pologne to K. Henry 3
who for the most part were dome not able to speak or understand Latin, and
were rather brought up to wear a rapiar be their side, ride a horse, danse, and
play at fense, then to have skill in languages, and arts, with which the
very Barbarians in old time were adorned, honored, and became more valiant in
the wars. Alexander.
As Alexander and sundry other great Captains and Princes have confessed. Yea,
him self grew extreme angry that Aristotle had published his Metaphisicks,
because, (he said) he had rather a desire to pass all others in learning and
knowledge, then in arms and force. And we before have noted, that he
attributed all his victories, to what he had learned of Philosophy. The
Emperor Antonin the Philosopher, went himself to seek out learned men in
their own houses, saying, that it very well became a man, yea, though he were
old, to learn what he was ignorant of. The which Cato and other of our
lawyers have affirmed. And Paulus Iouius writes of Charles the fifth, Charles
5.
that his schoolmaster Adrian, who since was Pope, did with very great cause
often times foretell him, that he would greatly repent that in his youth he
had not learned the Latin tongue. For it is very requisite that youth be
brought up in that part of learning which is called humanity; because that
without the discipline thereof, the world should live but brutishly. And that
it be accustomed to make account of laws and superiors, and to keep a
straight discipline in the manner of life, which it chooses, Youth shows by
his blossoms what fruit it will bear in age.
be it in war, and defense of their country. And a man follows all his
life long his first addressinge in his youth. As if a tree blossom not in the
spring, it will hardly bear fruit in the Autumn. The which ought to stir
parents to chastise their children, and to make them to be diligently taught,
and not to pamper them. Apes.
As Pliny writes of Apes which choke their little ones in imbrasing them too
hard. And we ought greatly to weigh the saying of Origin, that the sins
which the evil nurtured, and vnchastised children commit, shall be laid to the
fathers charge, 1. Sam. 4.18.
as it is said in Samuel of Ely. And if it be written of Xenocrates,
Xenocrates.
that his auditors of dissolute became temperate and modest, what fruit are
we to think that youth will bear, through the sweetness, and benignity of
the Muses? That is through the knowledge of learning, which as Plutarque
writes in the life of Sertorius, causes them to tame and sweeten their nature
which before was wild and savage, holdinge the mean by the compass of
reason, and reiectinge the extreme.

Licurgus
And Lycurgus the lawgiuer said, that he never used to set down his laws in
writing, because such as had been well nourished, would approve, and
follow whatsoever were most expedient for the time. Which was the cause of
the laws so much commended by Diodorus, that children should be brought up
in learning, at the public expense.

The effects of good education.
To be short, good bringing up of youth, makes it to be true, constant and
joyful. For having a good conscience, true comfort, and resolution, which
sweeteneth all the bitterness of this life, and knowinge the causes why God
has always been accustomed to punish his, makes them carry all things
cheerfully, not doubtinge, but that he loves, and has a fatherly care over
them. So do they repose themselves upon the assurance of this good will, and
endeavor to obey him, and dye with a good hope, acquitinge them selves of their
duty. Sundry have greatly commended the laws of the Lydes, Laws of the
Lydes.
because they deprived such children as were not virtuous from their
enheritaunce; which caused them to correct their naughty inclinations, and to
shun vice: as also they had certain officers in sundry provinces, which
took care of youth, and punished the parents which did not well bring up
their children. And for as much as it is a great happiness unto a country,
when the Prince has been well instructed: Plato in his Alcibiades, The
children of the kings of Persia.
and Xenophon do write, that out of the whole realm of Persia, were four
most sufficient men chosen to bring up the Kings children: the one in
learning: the second, to teach them all their life to be true: the third,
to instruct them to command their passions, and not to addicte themselves to
pleasures; the fourth, to make them hardy, and courageous. We ought to make
our profit of the lamentation, which the Prophet Baruche made, in that the
young sought after wisdom upon the earth, Baruc. 2.23.
and became expounders of fables, and knew not the way of wisdom, which was
the cause of their destruction. Psalm. 119.9.


David also found no means for a young man to redress his way, but in
taking heed thereto, according to Gods word. The Apostle admonished
Timothy, to fly from the lusts of youth: 1. Cor. 9.24.
and to humble the flesh to the spirit, to the end no advantage be given
unto the enemy, which will be an evil token for the rest of the course which
is to be run all our life long. And Saint Peter commands young men to
be wise, modest and humble. Saint Paul joins shamefastness and gravity, of
which he desires Titus to be the patron. Eccles. 2^.23
And Ecclesiasti, cus wills them to give no ear unto the enchauntrise for
feare-of being surprised. And as we have before mentioned, offices and riches
which are left unto children, are sometime the very cause of their
destruction, except the knowledge and fear of God be imprinted within them.
For this cause Ecclesiastes writes: Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, whiles the evil days come not. And Jeremiah in his Lamentations
says: Ier. 3.2^.
It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth, because young men
become unruly, except they be held short.

God also said of Abraham: I know that he will command his sons, and his
household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness,
Deuteronomy. 4.10.
and judgment. And in Deuteromie: I will cause them hear my words, that they
may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and
that they may teach their children. And every Christian is commanded to
follow al things that are honest toward al men, and to avoid all apparances
of evil, referring all to the glory of God, and betimes to accustom himself
thereunto, to the end that more easily he may broke the storms of this life,
and without any trouble wade out of all business. And to this end is every
man to beseech at Gods hands, that he will lighten him through his word,
Great happiness depends of ^od education.
and bend his heart therein to obey him. From this good education, proceeds
great happiness, obedience to God, their King, and superiors, choice of virtuous
men, without money, rewards, or offices, and every man perfourmeth his duty
the better in that vocation to which he is called, and follows other lessons
and reformations, noted at large before.

CHAP. XLIX. Of certain points which might be added to this discourse.
THis matter which we have undertaken to discourse of, An argument ample and
fertile.
is so fruitful and ample, that I were able to heap sundry Chapters one upon
another, containing summarily what the office of Kings, Prelates, Clergy,
Captains, soldiars, merchants, and artificers, masters, servants, fathers,
children, Judges, counselors, and practisers at the law is, therein to
discover the abuse and perjury, which is used in this time. There were also
very great means to dilate at large, of the inconvenience which sophistry
brings, the which the lawiers term cauilling, Sophistry.
when from truth, through some alteration, the disputation is brought to that
which is most evidently false. In old time it was terribly detested; for it
corrupted all arts and disciplines, and bread sundry heresies, and false
opinions. I were able likewise to set down, how many cousin themselves, which
in marriage respect more the wealth and beauty, Marriage.
then modesty, and good education of a maid: and are not so much husbands
unto their wives, as slaves unto their wealth, for which they abandon that
commandment and authority, which God and all laws have aforded unto them
over their wives, over whom they ought to rule, not as the lord over his
servant, but as our Lord and savior Jesus Christ does over his Church, and
the soul over the body, through a mutual love, and reciprocrate affection
wherewith he is tied unto it. And Solomon calls the contract of marriage, the
contract of God, as more excellent than any other. Lycurgus, Solon, and the
twelve laws ordained, that maidens should be married without dower, for the
causes before specified. And some have written of the Aegiptians, Alexa^. l. 2.
c. 2
that if any received money with his wife, he remained as a slave unto her. And
in Plautus he which was cast in the teeth, that he had nothing with his wife,
answered, that if every one would do like him, there would be better
agreement and amity among the citizens, and their wives would honor them
much more, and be less chargeable unto them. Strabo l. 4:
Strabo commended the laws of the Massiliens, which forbad him which was
richest, to give with his daughter above one hundred crowns, and ten for her
apparel and jewels. And it were very requisite that the good laws in France
made to this end might be better observed. And likewise as a matter depending
hereunto, there were ministered very great occasion of reprehending and
detesting such as they term tyers of points, which oppose themselves against
that holy contract, and ordinance of God, and his commandment, and are the
cause of divorces, enmities, whoredoms, Tiers of points.
and other evils, combating with the Majesty of God, and damning themselves
through a secret alliance which they make with Satan. It were not also much
out of the way, to show what a pernicious lie they incur, which from the
birth of their daughter bring her up so delicate, that she is less fit to
perform the part of a good houswife, and is always more sickely, serving
rather as a picture or dead image, then fit to hold that place which she
ought. And to declare withal the great injury which weomen offer unto their
children, in denying that milk unto them with which they were nourished within
their womb, with great pain and grief, drying up that holy fountain of
their breasts, given of God, to that end, bannishing their children into the
hands of a strange nource, often times a whore, drunk, pockie, and evil
conditioned, of which the said children savor, all their life long, as we
see by experience too much. Lampidius writes that Titus was subject to sundry
diseases, by reason of his Nurce. And Dion, that Caligula was the more cruel,
by the nature of his Nurce, and that she rubbed the end of her teat with
blood. And that Tiberius and sundry other were given to wine, Tiberius.
having bin weaned, with sops steped in wine. The which we see in lambs
nourished by goats, and in seeds and fruits which hold of the earth. I leave al
other reasons recited by Aulus Gellius. And for as much as an Ambassador sent
from a Prince, Ambassadors
is as his eye, his ear, and his tongue, and binds him by what he promises,
it had not bin impertinent, to have discoursed, how in choice to be made of
him, his honesty, age, experience, integrity, learning, dexterity, and
gravity ought to be considered: because by his carryage of himself, and
train, strangers do often time judge of the whole nation, as if he had bin
chosen out of the most excellent. And it were very convenient to send with
him some number of young ge^tleme^ well brought up, to make them capable of the
like charges, and to learn the passages, fashions, alliances and manners of the
country, and to fyle and pollish their own brain, with strangers. I could
also describe the inconveniences which arise by Masks, which disguise both
the body and mind, Masks.
and causes great impudency, the very cause of so manylyes, and uncomely
speeches, and of the execution of so great wickedness. S. Ciprian entreating of
the apparel of virgins, alleges to this purpose the example of Judges, who
when he saw Thamar, judged her a whore, for she had covered her face. And God
in Zephaniah threateneth, Genesis 38.15
that he will visit the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are
clothed with strange apparel. And it was forbidden to men to wear weomens
garments, and to weomen to wear men's. And an account must be rendered of every
idle word. And as S. Paul alleged of Menander: evil words corrupt good
manners. The which moved sundry well governed common wealths to forbid masks
upon great pains, and in England, of death. It had bin no ways impertinent to
have showed how much Princes have abused themselves, rather in taking care, and
giving themselves to conquer cities and countries, A greater matter to preserve
what is gotten the^ to get.
and make great buildings, then to preserve and well govern what they have
already gotten, and to maintain those houses, which have been left unto them
very commodious. As Augustus the Emperor greatly wondered, to see that
Alexander did not esteem it so great a matter and honor to govern well an
Empire, already conquered and left, as to conquer a great country, and
prefer necessary and profitable expenses before voluptuous. According to the
disposition of the law likewise, the legacy, or gift that is appointed for to
be employed about a new buylding, ought to be converted to the repairing and
amending of the old, in the latter law D. de operibus publ. l. decuriones de
administr. re. ad ciu. pert. I might also speak, how Idolatry and the gods
of the Pagan, first began, and how they were left, according unto the prophecy
of Jeremy, that The gods which have not made the heavens and the earth shall
perish. I could also blame the condition of hucksters, and sellers by retayl,
in that as Cicero writes, they gain nothing except they lie, which was before
confirmed by Ecclesiasticus. Eccles. 3.16. Misseres.
I might also amplify, how deeply they lie, which live wickedly, dishonor
and periure themselves, that they may leave their heirs rich, which often
times are such as love them not. The dissoluteness which is too much spread
throughout France, would have required a discourse upon the law, which was
made to forbid Tauernes, Tauerns and play.
and playing at dyce and cards, considering the inconveniences which daily
happen thereby, and that in Turkey all play is punished by infamy, and great
penalties, as Cuspinien writes. One might also show how much they deceive
themselves, which covet to come to extreme old age, because that the long life
is not the better, but the more virtuous. And as it is written in the book of
wisdom: the honorable age is not that which is of long time, neither that which
is measured by the number of years, but wisdom is the gray hair, and an
undefiled life is the old age. And many have esteemed them most happy which
have changed this miserable life, with an immortal, ^esire of old age
before such time as the disco^modities and wearisomnes of old age has crept
upon them. And besides the assured testimony which we have out of the holy
scriptures Aristotle wrote that when Silenus was taken he said, Silenus
the condition of dead men was better then of the living. And Pliny after that
he had in the beginning of his seventh book, pliny
showed at large the miseries of me^, concluded that nature gave nothing better
then a short life. Notwithstanding, to the faithful, no estate of living
comes amiss, since they wholly refer themselves to the will of God, and takes
every thing in good part, as a blessing proceedinge from his hand. We might
also show how pernitiously, they lie, which clippe, wash and delay coin, as
the Poet Dante called Philip the fair, a falsefier of coin, because by reason
of his affairs he was constrained to delay his silver. And very wisely did
the Emperor Tacitus forbid the mingling of mettalles in his coin, where there
ought to be a correspondance and proportion between the gold and silver or
other metal: in which now a days sundry pernicious faults are committed.
Consequently, I could describe the vanity of alquemie, which has empouerished
those which have used it, and turned the gold which they have put thereto into
smoke, whereof we daily see but too many examples: the which gave occasion to
Domitian, to cause all the books to be burned, which he was able to find out.
I could also set forth the fault which they commit, Dreams.
who put too much trust in dreams, according as Ecclesiasticus has written,
that Dreams have deceived many, and they have failed which have put their
trust therein. And Lucian in the city of sleep which he describes, in which
dreams do dwell, says that they are all cosenners and liars. It were also a
very large matter to write of, To demand council.
to show how, albeit that blind men choose some one to lead them, yet an
infinite number of persons, which have their judgment and wit blinded, and go
groping at all their business, and wandering, without knowing the way which
they ought to hold, do not for all that seek either council or guide, and
are meruelously polluted with the same fault which they find in an other, and
in their own ignorance become Censors over other men's manners. Superstition.
It were not likewise unprofitable to declare how dangerous a matter
superstition is, the which is so fruitful that of one error or lie, it
engenders a great number, and thorough a kind of slight, simplicity, or
false appearance, it clean chooketh the truth, and is for this cause termed in
the holy scripture, whoredom, Saints.
and adultery, violating the promise which we have before made unto God. We
might likewise extol the saints in all ages, which have taken pains to
maintain the truth against lying, and to make a register of all virtues and
abuses which are committed. I could likewise enlarge sundry Chapters, in
showing how daungerously they do lie, who after so many examples, and
experiences, ruynes, defacinges, desolations and mischiefs happened in
France, desire for all that, that men would yet the fifth time cast
themselves hedlong into a civil war, covering their passion with a cloak of
religion, Civil vvarres.
which is settled in the understanding the which can not be gained, but thorough
a persuasion founded upon the holy and canonical scriptures, and not by
violence or constraynt, as Saint Augustine in sundry places, and other
ancient fathers have maintained. And the war which is not necessarily
undertaken, is an enemy to religion, justice, order, reformation, and good
manners: and as the Emperor Justinian writes, it carries great grief to
every good man, it is brutish, dissolute, and without all ho, especial, the
civil, which is miserable, and most pernicious, as well in regard of the
victorers, as of the vanquished, as Cicero affirms in sundry places: and in
his Philippiques he adiudgeth him which desires it to be a most detestable
citizen. It were not also a matter much different from that which we now
discourse of, if I should set down the opinion of Pliny, which affirms that
there are no lies more dearly sold, L. 29. Physicians.
nor more dangerous then those of the Phisicians, who learn to the peril of
the patient and murder without being punished: and that there was never any
vocation found, in which there was more danger or cosininge: albeit that
their ignorance and error, whatsoever he said, Pliny said, Pliny his error.
ought by the very law to be punished. lib. 7. c. seq. ad legem aquil. l.
illicitas. sicuti de offic. praep. l. si quis, Celsus locasti l. quod nerua
depositi. Sundry have justly complained, that the greatest part of Physicians
have no skill at all in such simples, and mineral matters as they have need
of, but trust unto Apothecaries as unskillful as them selves, which give a qui
for quo, Simples. Apothecaries
and engender diseases, the which ought to give occasion to have them
rigorously and exactly looked unto, and to have their drugues and spices, to be
often over looked, by such as are skillful therein. And if the said Physicians
and Apothecaries, were well practiced (as it is very requisite) in the
knowledge of such simples, as God has abundantly bestowed thorough out this
realm, and which are proper to our nature, we should have no need to fetch
drougues from the infidels and Barbarians, in a contrary climate to our own.
We might also take occasion here with great profit to declare, how far they
swerve from the truth, The assembly of a council or estats.
which mislike the assemblinge of a general or national council, or of the
general estates of a realm, the only means invented by our ancestors, to
meet with the corruptions and disorders, which crept as well into the Church
as into place of justice, and al other vocations, and to hear the complaints
of every one, to apply remedy thereto, and make necessary provision for the
same, to the end the evil which grew might be cut off, and good ordinances
revived and kept, and corrupt doctrine and manners reformed, which is a
sovereign medicine for kings and all other sort of people. I could also
declare how pernicious a matter despair is, Despair.
and how contrary to the truth, and handle the means which keeps us from it:
and also how much the lying of such as are too suspicious is to be detested,
which often times engendereth curiositye, backbitinge, Suspicion.
unquietness, factions, ielousies, and other mischiefs. And further how
uncertain a proof that is which is drawn out by torture, Torture.
because that as Publius Mimus said, smart will constrain even the very
innocents to lie. And Viues writes upon Saint Augustine his book, of the
City of God, that if a man be able to endure torture he will not tell truth,
if he can not he will surely lie. The examples are in Marcellin lib. 4. and 29.
and in Valerius lib. 3. c. 3. and lib. 8. c. 4. The which sundry Doctors upon
the law have followed, and very many Judges have had experience of. It had not
also been very unprofitable, to have discoursed which opinion of the two were
more true, The government of vveomen.

Bartolus his opinion not to be follovved.


either theirs which allow weomens government in respect of their wisdom,
and quickness of spirit, and of the laws which confirm the same in sundry
provinces, (wherein I will by no means allow the opinion of Bartolus, and other
Doctors, which deny that they are any ways able to make laws, under the
color for sooth that a law is defined to be a counsel of wise men, having
many examples in Plutarque lib. 6. of the virtue of weomen, and else where to
the contrary) or theirs which exclude them clean thereof, and of all other
civil affairs, for their infirmity of counsel and weakness of judgment,
leaving them wholly in the perpetual power of their husbands, parents, and
curators, as Cicero wrote of the Romans. I could also have added a long
chapter fit for this time, to confute the impiety of the Atheistes, Atheists.
and to show even by the very ancient philosophers writings, that there is
but one God, who thorough his bountye and wisdom is the Creator and guider of
the world, and of whatsoever is contained therein, that in the world he has
created man the image of the Creator, according to his own understanding,
and the image of his creatures according to his life, sense, and moving,
mortal in what he holds of the likeness of the creature, immortal in as
much as he carries the image of his Creator in his soul: and that God will
crown and recompense good works to the good and chastise the vicious and
infidels with pains eternal. The which almost all contemners of religion and
Epicures have been constrained to confess, and in their own conscience have
stood convicted thereof before their death. It had not been much out of the
way, nor very unapt for this time, Alliance of the Zuizers.
wherein there has been a fresh renewinge of the alliance, with the Zuizers,
to set down what were the most expedient, for as much as they are more
nearelye bound, by the latter then by the precedent alliances. And by the
histories of the later wars, men has sufficiently known, the valor,
succor, and military discipline which they have observed: and contrariwise,
seen the excessive expense, difficulties, and pensions that has been
bestowed as well on public, as particular, to bring about the said alliance:
that by the treaty of perpetual peace they are bound to succor the king in
his need, and never ought to serve his enemies: that now the discipline is not
such as in time past it has been, that thorough the great pensions,
presents, gold, and silver of France, delicacie, and riches, they are much
changed, and there is no doubt, but without making any alliance, a man may
now have as many as he list to serve his turn, so as the crown be in the
hand, and the treasory well furnished. And not without cause did king Lewis 12.
as well as other, find it strange to support the insolency of such people, and
to become as it were tributaries unto them: albeit that then he had much more
occasion to seek them, then now, and they were far better then they are,
having now more need of the help amity, and support of the king of France,
then he has of them. And the more favor, and gifts a man bestows of them,
the more do they covet, and less thank do they cun him. And oftentimes those
which receive the greatest pensions are they which most stubbornly oppose them
selves, to what the kings ambassadors shall demand, and their covetousness
can be no more filled, Wherein man's felicity consists.
then one that has the dropsy can be kept from drink. I could also amplify
a long chapter, how many men lie and are abused, as touching the felicity of
man: and show that it cannot be found in riches, which vanishe away, and are
easily lost with sorrow, and as Solomon says are gotten with travail, and
possessed with fear and care. And that in glory there is nothing but vanitye,
and it easily vanishes away, Riches
as we have before declared. As touching pleasure Solomon says it ends in
heaviness. Glry o^ Pleasure
And an ancient writer compared it to a live body on a beire. God is the true
and only felicity.
It is not found likewise in any part of this brittle and wretched life: but
in the trust, mercy, puissance, and bounty of God, and remission of our sins,
as David sets it 32. Psalm: and Saint Paul to the Romans, in the fear
and love of God and of his word, and to put our whole confidence in him: and
in that which our Savior recites in the 6. of Saint Matthew. It had not
likewise been unfruitful, to have showed, how hurtful impatience, and
murmuring are, and how necessary to be eschewed, followinge the instruction of
Solomon, Proverb. Murmuringe.
14. and 19. and of Saint Paul 1. Corrinth. 10. and 2. Phil. the example of
Achitophel is in the 2. of Samuel cap. 17. I refer other greater reasons of
the above said articles until an other season. I could also have discoursed
at large of sundry other opinions which are in controversy, were it not for
fear of being too long, and over tedious.

The Conclusion.
CHAP. L.
TO the end then that we may rest beloved of God, and of good men, and have a
good conscience, a peaceable life, a guide in all affairs with hope of
eternal life, Admonishment to follow the truth and shun lying
and heap of bliss, we must walk wisely, and be found true in all our
thoughts, words, and actions: and so to accustom our selves thereto, that we
give no place to any lie, though it be the lightest which may be made. Now for
fear least we should fall hereunto, to our great grief, let us be time think
of what we would do or say, before we put it in execution, beseeching God with
David, that he will address us in his truth, and that it may always remain
in our heart and mouth, that he will make us to understand, how short and
uncertain the course of this our life is, to the end that we may retire our
hearts from the vanities and false apparances of this world, and spend that
little time which we have to live, in learning of his wisdom, that is to
say, to believe and assure our selves upon his promises, to obey whatsoever it
pleases him to command us, and carefully to eschew, whatsoever he has
forbidden. And as this contagion of lying, has well gained place in many,
thorough custom, and is grown by little and little, so let us exercise our
selves to follow truth though in tryfles, and every day before we sleep,
examine, and try what we have gotten by being true and virtuous: and according
to Seneca his counsel, in all our actions how secret soever they be, let us
imagine that God, his saints, and Angels, be present, or some man of great
authority and gravity: to the end our countenances, words, and actions may
be the better governed. Deuteronomy. 3. Blessings promised to such as follow the
truth and curses to such as follovvelying.
And of such as shall live in this truth shunning lying, we may say as Moses
prophesied and pronounced to the children of Israel, to whom al christians have
succeeded, that they shall be blessed in the city, and blessed also in the
field, blessed shall be the fruit of their body, and the fruit of their
ground, and the fruit of their cattle: God shall make an alliance with them,
he shall make them increase and multiply in abundance, of whatsoever is
necessary: But if contrariwise they follow lying and live disorderly, fear
and trembling feauers, burning agewes and all sorts of curses there set down
shall fall upon them. There is no question to be made which way is to be
followed, that we may attain to all felicity, and the inheritance promised
to such as are sanctified of God, and to those are things which neither eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor came into man's heart which God has
prepared for them which love him. Saint Paul wrote to the Romans, that the
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, which withholde the truth in unrighteousness. And to
them which by continuance in well doing seek glory, honor, and immortality,
to give everlasting life, but to them that are contentious and disobey the
truth, and obey unrighteousness shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish shall be upon the soul of every man, that does evil, but to every
man that does good shall be glory, and honor, and peace. And seeing the
chastisements, miseries, and afflictions, and so many tragical events sent
from God to so many people, Christians but in name, which are set before our
eyes for an example, to reconcile us to God, we have great occasion humbly to
beseech by fervent prayers and groans, that he will bend our hearts to his
obedience, and so make other men's plagues and visitations to profit us, that we
may not draw through our unthankfulness more grievous pains upon us and
ours, most humbly thanking him, for that amidst so great darkness, error and
ignorance as covers the world, it pleases him to cast some beams of his
grace, and truth upon us, beseeching him that he will warm, quicken, and
illuminate us more and more attending the day of our delivery out of this
world already vanquished by him.

To theo doxa.
Telo

