THE WELL OF WISDOM, CONTAINING CHIEF AND CHOSEN sayings which may lead
all men to perfect and true wisdom, as well to Godvvard as to the world:
GATHERED OVT OF THE FIVE books of the old Testament, especially belonging to
Wisdom, that is to say, the Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Canticum,
Sapientia and Ecclesiasticus, and bestowed in usual common places in order of
A. B. C. By T. C.

PROVERBES 2. It is the Lord that gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes
knowledge and understanding. printer's device of Thomas Vautrollier, featuring
an anchor surrounded by laurels (McKerrow 164) ANCHORA SPEI


Imprinted at London by Thomas Vau troullier for William Norton. 1577.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL M. NEVVELL SOTHERTON, CLERK OF THEXTRETES OF the Queens
Majesty's Court of Exchequer: grace, mercy and peace from God the Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ.
AMong all the gifts that ever God bestovved on mankind, wisdoms excels:
which is not only by King Solomon and his writings sincerely witnessed, but
also by good government and orders of diverse Princes, rulers, counselors, and
states of common vvelths, from time to time in every age confirmed. And
although the books of the old Testament named Sapientiall, set forth directly
neither law, prophecy nor history, yet do they plainly express matters of
wisdoms, and arguments incident thereunto. And when as for my own
instruction I had of late collected the chiefest sayings to the order of common
places, I did consider that they published might somevvhat profit others, being
applied to proper intents and purposes. And thereupon understanding of your
special zeal to good learning, and singular imitation of the fruits
contained in the said books, have thought good to present these my labors
unto you as a patron convenient for such a work. For mine own part I
acknovvledge that by reading the books aforesaid, I have obtained more
understanding even in vvorldly affairs, then my young years by experience have
taught me, or my travels at Oxford in the study of profane authors directed me.
And no marvel, for who in wisdoms either is or has been at any time like
unto Solomon, is it not written in the third of Kings and third chapter, that
upon prayer made by Solomon for an understanding heart, God said unto him,
because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked long life, neither
riches, nor the lives of thine enemies: See I have done according to thy
petition, and behold I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so
that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise
like unto thee. And again in the tenth chapter of the same book: that the
Queen of Saba came to Jerusalem from the uttermost coasts of the land to
hear and see the wisdoms of Solomon, and in sum that king Salomo^ exceded
all the Kings of the earth in riches and wisdom, that all the world
resorted to Solomon to hear his wisdom which God had put in his heart.
This being true of whom then may we better learn wisdoms then of the
vvisest? Whose sayings because they be also of the holy scripture, ought
with more heed to be marked, and will doubtless in every good man's heart be
the deeper imprinted. For the sayings of the wise and unwise are not with
wise men of like authority, neither are the sayings of the sacred scriptures
and of other vvriters likewise to be valued. But other men's sayings so far
allowed as by scripture they may be confirmed. Then although Thales, Solon,
Chilo, Pitachus, Bias, Cleobulus, Periander, which were named the seven wise
men of Grecia: If Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus and many
more, both wise and learned Philosophers have uttered sundry sayings and
sentences inducing to virtue and wisdoms. Yet are not their sayings likewise
to be regarded as the sayings of Solomon or Jesus Syrach, nay in respect of
Solomon they were all but fools: neither was their wisdoms true and perfect
wisdoms, because they vvanted the fear and right knowledge of God.
Wherefore such learned men as have translated their sayings into English, and
set them forth together with the sayings of Solomon, and other out of the holy
scripture, as they are to be praised for their diligence, vvilling to profit
others that can not understand the Latin tongue, so are they not to be
praised for mingling Sacra prophanis, whether it be touching doctrine, or
conversation. Notvvithstanding I grant many of their sayings to be good, and
to lead a man to wisdoms, neither does the one take away the other, but
ought as they be in deed so to be esteemed. Therefore to conclude, although it
well appear that all these sayings are and have been known to you long
since, for that you have traueled for trial of doctrine, and quieting of your
conscience thorough out the holy Bible sufficiently, yet may these common
places, (which is the commodity of abridgme^ts) bring you in mind of many
things red before. But they are not gathered for your better instruction or
others, which be wise and learned, and able of them selves to gather much
better and in better order, but for the rude and ignorant, who though they can
read, yet have not judgment to discern and to disseuer sentences. And as
touching the name given to the book, it is taken out of the eighteen chapter
of the Proverbs, where I read it used in like sense, videlicet, the words
of the wise man's mouth are like a full stream. And again in the first of
Ecclesiasticus, Gods word in the height is the well of wisdoms. God grant
therefore that out of this well we may dravv plentifully both true wisdom
to guide us in doing, and true doctrine to direct us in believing, that in the
end we may fully taste of him which gives all true wisdom, which is the
very fountain of life Christ Jesus, and here most heartily I desire you to
accept this dedication in good part as a perfect signification of benevolence
in him that wishes you increase of felicity, and all virtuous actions
thorough the benefit and rule of wisdoms. From Oriall college in Oxford, the
xx. of August. anno 1573.

Yours to command, THOMAS COGAN.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
I might seem (gentle reader) to have attempted a needeles work in setting
forth sentences of Scripture, which (God be thanked) through daily reading and
preaching are now rife in every man's mouth: but the causes moving me thereto,
are before alleged in mine epistle. And in deed I have set forth nothing but
Scripture: gathering the places as the chapters and books are placed in the
Bible: and in the same translation which is commonly used and by authority
approved. Which places being well considered, may give us to understand, that
God of his goodness, has laid before us through his divine wisdom, not only
our duty toward him, and right belief in him: but also in some part or other
of the scripture, how we ought to deal in worldely affairs, yea more then
that, what diet we ought to keep in eating and drinking, yea what manners we
ought to use both at the table and else where. So that the Bible may seem to
contain all things necessary to be known of us any manner of way. But may we
not learn wisdom otherwhere then in the scripture? yes truly, yet so as S.
August. writes de doct. Christ. cap. vlt. Quicquid homo extra didicerit, si
noxium est, hic damnatur: si vtile est, hic inuenitur: and quum ibi quisque
inuenerit omnia, quae vtiliter alibi didicit, multo abundantius ibi inueniet
ea, quae nusquam aliter inuenire potuit. And certes, in the reading of Solomon
and Jesus Syrach, I found diverse sayings, which be also red in profane
writers, as in the Prou. 22. Prou. 22.
Teach a child in his youth what way he should go, etc. The like is in the
Poet Horace. Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem testa diu. In Eccle.
What manner of man the ruler of the Eccle. 10.
city is, such are they that dwell therein also. The same is alleged by Cicero
out of Plato. Quales in republica principes, tales reliqui solent esse ciues.
And in Eccle. 12. In heaviness and trouble a man shall know his friend. The
same is used of Cicero in Lelio. Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. Likewise
may be said of a great number more. Whereby are understand that the same God
which gave wisdom abundantly unto Solomon, has likewise powered some sparks
of wisdom into heathen men's hearts, whereunto if they had joined true knowledge
of God, then had they been wise men in deed. Yet are not they so greatly to be
blamed as those Christians, at least wise by name, (though in deed much worse
then heathen or Infidels) which reading and hearing the true wisdom of God,
do utter in doing most deuilish policy. Nay many english Anglus Italiatus.
men being Italianate, do prove the proverb true to be devils incarnate,
having more delight in the prince of darkness, set forth by Machiauell,
Machiauel.
or his discourse leading headlong to hell, then in Gods word, which is the
well of wisdom, or the everlasting commandments, which are the entrance
unto it. So that a man may see great difference in wisdom, which also is
noted in Ecclesiasticus 19. after Ecclesiasticus 19.
this manner: The fear of God is all wisdom, and he that is a rightwise man
keeps the law. As for the doctrine of wickedness, it is no wisdom: and the
prudence of sinners is no good understanding: it is but wickedness, and
abomination, and blaspheming of wisdom, which also is written of the heathen
Philosopher Plato: Scientia quae est remota a iusticia, calliditas potius quam
sapientia est appellanda. Yet now a days, vice bears the name of virtue.
Subtlety I say, has the countenance of wisdom, yea among those which (as men
say) be no small fools. But God in the end, as S. Paul witnesses, Corin. 1.
will destroy Corin. 1.
the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding of the prudent.
For the foolishnes of God is wiser then men: and the weakness of God is
stronger then men. God grant that the wise of the world, may in the end be as
the foolish whom God has chosen. Yea as Socrates and Plato with some other of
the best and wisest Philosophers, whom notwithstanding their mis belief, God
of his infinite mercy has received to grace, as Iustine the Martyr, S.
Augustine and other have judged.

JAMES 1. IF any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God which gives to all
men indifferently, and casts no man in the teeth: and it shall be given him.

WIS. 9. The prayer of Solomon to obtain wisdom.

O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercies, thou that have made all things with
thy word, and ordained man thorough thy wisdom, that he should have dominion
over the creatures which thou have made: that he should order the world
according to equity and righteousness, and execute judgment with a true heart:
give me wisdom which is ever about thy seat, and put me not out from among
thy children: for I thy servant and son of thy handmaiden, am a feeble
person, of a short time, and too young to the understanding of judgment and the
laws. And though a man be never so perfect among the children of men, yet if
thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing regarded. O send her out of
thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy Majesty, that she may be with me
and labor with me: that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight, for she
knows and understands all things: and she shall lead me soberly in my
works, and preserve me in her power, so shall my works be acceptable.

AMEN.
ADVERSITY AND prosperity.
Ecclesiastes 7. 16.
Use well the time of prosperity, and remember the time of misfortune: for God
makes the one by the other, so that a man can find nothing else.

Ecclesiasticus 2. 4. 5.
Whatsoever happens unto thee, receive it: suffer in heaviness and be patient in
thy trouble. for like as gold and silver are tried in the fire, even so are
acceptable men in the furnace of adversity. Believe in God, and he shall help
thee: order thy way aright and put thy trust in him: hold fast his fear and
grow therein.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 11.
Laugh no man to scorn in the heaviness of his soul: for god (which sees all
things) is he that can bring down, and set up again.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 14.
Prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come all of
the Lord.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 25.
When thou art in welfare, forget not adversity: and when it goes not well
with thee, have a good hope that it shall be better.

Ecclesiasticus 12. 8. 9.
In prosperity a friend shall not be known: and in adversity an enemy shall
not be hidd, for when a man is in wealth it greeueth his enemies: but in
heaviness and trouble a man shall know his friend.

Aduoutrie.
Ecclesiasticus. 23. 18. 19.
A Man that breaks wedlock and regards not his soul, but says: Tush,
who sees me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me; no body
sees me: whom need I to fear? The highest will not remember my sins: He
understands not that his eyes see all things, for all such fear of men
drives away the fear of God from him, for he fears only the eyes of men,
and considers not that the eyes of the Lord are clearer then the Sun,
beholding all the ways of men, and the ground of the deep, and loking even to
men's hearts in secret places.

Prou. 2. 16. 17. 18. 19.
An aduouterous woman gives sweet words, forsakes the husband of her youth
and forgets the countenance of her god, for her house is inclined unto
death, and her paths unto hell, all they that go in unto her come not again,
neither take they hold of the way of life.

Prou. 5. 3. 4 5.
Apply not thou thy self to the deceitfulnes of a woman, for the lips of an
harlot are a dropping honey comb, and her throat is more glistering then oil,
but at the last she is as bitter as wormewod, and her tongue as sharp as a two
edged sword, her feet go down unto death, and her stepps perse thorough
unto hell.

Prou. 6. 32. 33.
Whosoever commits aduoutry with a woman he is a fool: and brings his life to
destruction: he gets him self also shame and dishonor, such as shall never
be put out.

Prou. 22. 14.
The mouth of an harlot is a deep pit. wherein he falls that the Lord is
angry withal.

Prou. 23. 27. 28.
An whore is a deep grave, and an harlot is a narrow pit: she lurketh like a
thief and brings unto her such men as be full of vice.

Ecclesiasticus 9. 4. 5. 6
Look not upon a woman that is desirous of many men, lest thou fall into her
snares, cast not thy mind upon harlots in any manner of thing, lest thou
destroy both thy self and thine heritage.

Ecclesiasticus 9. 11.
Sit not with an other man's wife by any means, lie not with her upon the
bed: make no words with her at the wine, lest thine heart consent unto her,
and thou with thy blood fall into destruction.

Ecclesiasticus 9. 9.
An aduouterous woman shall be trodden under foot as mire, of every one that
goes by the way.

Ecclesiasticus 26. 9.
The whoredom of a woman may be known in the pride of her eyes and eye lidds.

Age.
Pro. 16. 31.
AGe is a crown of worship if it be found in the way of righteousness.

Pro. 20. 29.
The strength of young men is their worship, and a gray head is an honor unto
the aged.

Ecclesiastes 11. 9.
Be glad (O thou yo^g man) in thy youth, and let thy heart be merry in thy
young days: follow the ways of thine own heart and the lust of thine eyes,
but be thou sure that God shall bring thee into judgment for all these things.

Wis. 4. 8. 9
Age is an honorable thing: nevertheless it stands not in the length of time,
nor in the multitude of years: but a man's wisdom is the gray hear, and an
undefiled life is the old age.

Ecclesiasticus. 8. 6.
Think scorn of no man in his old age, for we wax old also.

Ecclesiasticus 8. 9.
Go not from the doctrine of thine elders: for they have learned it of their
fathers, for of them thou shall learn understanding, so that thou may make
answer in the time of need.

Ecclesiasticus 25. 3. 4. 5. 6.
If thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, what will thou find then in
thine age.

O how pleasant a thing is it when gray headed men are discreet, and when the
elders can give good counsel. O how comely a thing is wisdom unto aged men:
yea understanding and counsel is a glorious thing. The crown of old men is
to have much experience: and the fear of God is their worship.

Alms.
Prou. 3. 27. 28.
Give unto ye poor, so shall thy barnes Prou. 3. 10.
be filled with plenteousnes, and thy presses shall flow over with sweet wine.
Withdraw no good thing from them that have need so long as thine hand is able
to do it. Say not unto thy neighbor, go thy way and come again, to morrow will I
give thee, whereas thou have now to give him.

Prou. 14. 31
He that does a pooreman wrong blasphemeth his maker: but whosoever has pity on
the poor does honor unto God.

Prou. 17. 5.
Whosoever laugheth the poor to scorn blasphemeth his maker: and he that is glad
of an other man's hurt shall not be unpunished.

Ecclesiasticus 4. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
My son, defraude not the poor of his alms, and turn not away thine eyes
from him that has need. Despise not an hungry soul, and defy not the poor
in his necessity, grieve not the heart of him that is helpelesse: and withdraw
not thy gift from the needful. Refuse not the prayer of one that is in
trouble: turn not away thy face from the needy: cast not thine eyes aside from
the poor for any evil will, that thou give him none occasion to speak evil of
thee: for if he complain of thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer
shall be heard, even he that made him shall hear him.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 10.
Be not faint hearted when thou make thy prayer, neither slack in giving of
alms. Reach thine hand unto the poor that God may bless thee with
plenteousnes.

Ecclesiasticus 29. 12. 13. 14.
Lay up thine alms in the hand of the poor, and it shall keep thee from all
evil.

A man's alms is a purse with him and shall keep a man's favor as the apple of
an eye, and afterward shall it arise, and pay every man his reward upon his
head, It shall fight for thee against thy enemies better then the sheelde of a
giant or spear of the mighty.

Ambition.
Ecclesiasticus 7. 4.
Labor not unto man for any Lordeship, neither unto the king for the seat of
honor.

6.
Make no labor to be made a Judge, except it were so, that thou could
mightily put down wickedness, for if thou should stand in awe of the
presence of the mighty, thou should fail in giving sentence.

Ecclesiasticus 32. 1. 2. 3. 4.
If thou be made a ruler, pride not thy self therein, but be thou as one of the
people. Take diligent care for them and look well thereto: and when thou have
done all thy duty, set thee down that thou may be merry with them, and
receive a crown of honor, talk wisely and honestly, for wisdom becomes
thee full well. Speak not where there is no audience, and power not forth
wisdom out of time.

Battle.
Prou. 24. 5. 6.
A Wise man is ever strong: yea a man of understanding increases of strength
for with discretion must wars be taken in hand, and where as many are that
can give good counsel, there is ye victory.

Ecclesiasti. 26. 29.
There be two things that grieve my heart, and the third is a displeasure come
upon me. When an expert man of war suffers scarsenesse and poverty, when
men of understanding and wisdom are not set by, and when one departs from
righteousness unto sin.

Bevvtie.
Pro. 31. 30.
AS for favor it is deceitful, and beauty is a vain thing.

Ecclesiasticus 9. 5. 8.
Behold not a maiden that thou be not hurt in her beauty.

Turn away thy face from a bewtifull woman, and look not upon the fairness
of other: many a man has perished thorough the beauty of women, for thorough
it the desire is kindled as it were a fire.

10.
Many a man wondering at the beauty of a straung woman, has been cast out: for
her words kindle as a fire.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 2.
Commend not thou a man in his bewty, neither despise a man in his utter
appearaunce.

Ecclesiasticus 42. 12. 13.
Behold not every bodies beauty, and have not to much dwelling among women. For
like as the worm and moth comes out of the clothing, so does wickedness
come of women.

Boasting and presumption.
Pro. 27. 1.
MAke not thy boast of to morrow, for thou know not what may happen to day.

Ecclesiasticus 5. 2. 3.
Follow not the lust of thine own heart in thy strength, and say not: tush,
how have I had strength, or who will bring me under because of my works, for
doubtless God shall aduenge it.

Ecclesiasticus 5. 5. 6. 7
Because thy sin is forgeuen thee be not therefore without fear, neither
heap one sin upon an other, and say not: tush the mercy of the Lord is
great, he shall forgive me my sins be they never so many, for like as he is
merciful, so goes wrath from him also, and his indignation comes down upon
sinners. Make no tarying to turn unto the lord, and put not of from day to
day: for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall
destroy thee.

City.
Pro. 11. 10.
WHen the just are in wealth the city prospers: but when the ungodly have the
rule it decays.

Prou. 29. 8.
Wicked people bring a city in decay: but wise men set it up again.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 1.
When they that be in authority are men of understanding, there the city
prospers.

Company.
Prou. 1. 10. 11. 15. 16.
MY son consent not unto sinners if they entise thee, and say come with us:
we will lay wait for blood and lurk privily for the innocent without a cause.
My son walk not with them, refrain thy foot from their way: for their
feet run to evil: and are hasty to shed blood.

Prou. 13. 20
He that goes in the company of wise men shall be wise: but whosoever is a
companion of fools shall be hurt.

Prou. 23. 20. 21.
Keep not company with wine bibbers and riotous eaters of flesh: for such as
be drunkards and riotous shall come to poverty, and he that is given to much
sleep shall go with a ragged coat.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 35. 36. 37.
Stand with the multitude of such elders as have understanding, and consent
unto their wisdom with thine heart, that thou may hear all godly sermons,
and that the worthy sentences escape thee not. And if thou see a man of
discreet understanding, get thee soon unto him, and let thy foot tread upon
the stepps of his doors.

Ecclesiasticus 8. 8.
Despise not the sermons of such elders as have understanding, but acquaint thy
self with the wise sentences of them: for of them thou shall learn wisdom,
and the doctine of understanding, and how to serve great men without complaint.

Ecclesiasticus 13. 1.
Whosoever touches pitch shall be filed withal: and he that is familiar with the
proud shall cloth him self with pride.

2.
He takes a burden upon him that accompanies a more honorable man then him
self. Therefore keep no familiarity with one that is richer then thy self.

Communication or talk.
Prou. 13. 3.
HE that keeps his mouth, keeps his life: but whosoever opens his lips to
evil destroys him self.

Prou. 15. 1. 2.
A soft answer puts down displeasure: but froward words provoke unto
anger. The tongue of such as be wise uses knowledge aright, as for a foolish
mouth it bableth out nothing but foolishnes.

Prou. 16. 26
A wise heart orders his mouth wisely, and amendeth the doctrine in his
lips.

Prou. 16. 28
A froward body causes strife: and he that is a blabbe of his tongue makes
division among Princes.

Pro. 17. 27.
A wise man uses a few words, and he is a man of understanding that makes
much of his spirit: Yea a very fool when he holds his tongue is counted
wise: and to have understanding when he shuts his lips.

Prou. 18. 4.
The words of a wise man's mouth are like deep waters, and the well of wisdom
is like a full stream.

Prou. 21. 23
Whosoever keeps his mouth and his tongue, the same keeps his soul from
troubles.

Pro. 29. 20.
If thou see a man that is hasty to speak unadvised, thou may trust a fool
more then him.

Ecclesiastes 5. 2. Ecclesiasticus 4. 24.
Where many words are, there men may hear fools. In the tongue is wisdom
known, so is understanding knowledge and learning in the talking of the wise,
and steadfast, and in the works of righteousness.

Ecclesiasticus 5. 12. Ecclesiasticus 5. 14.
Be swift to hear, but slow and patient in giving answer.

Honor and worship is in a man's wise talking, but the tongue of the
indiscreet is his own destruction.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 5.
A sweet word multiplieth friends, and pacifieth them that be at variance,
and a tha^kful tongue will be plenteous in a good man.

Ecclesiasticus 20. 7.
A wise man will hold his tongue till he see opportunity, but a wanton and
indiscreet body shall regard no time.

Ecclesiasticus 21. 16.
The talk of a fool is like an heavy burden by the way: but to hear a wise
man speak it is a pleasure.

Ecclesiasticus 27. 12.
If thou be among the indiscreet, keep thy words until a convenient time,
but among such as be wise speak on hardly.

Constancy.
Ecclesiasticus 5. 9. 10.
BE not carried about with every wind, and go not into every way, for so does
the sinner that has a double tongue. Stand fast in the way of the Lord, be
steadfast in thy understanding, abide by the word and follow the word of peace
and righteousness.

Correction.
Prou. 3. 11. 12.
MY son despise not the chastening of the lord: neither faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth, and yet deliteth
in him even as a father in his own son.

Prou. 10. 17
To take heed unto the chastening of nurtour is the way of life: but he that
refuses to be reformed deceives him self.

Pro. 12. 1.
Whosoever loves wisdom will be content to be reformed: but he that hates to be
reproved is a fool.

Prou. 13. 18
He that thinks scorn to be reformed comes to poverty and shame: but
whosoever regards correction shall come to honor.

Prou. 13. 24
He that spares ye rod hareth his son: but whosoever loves him chasteneth him
betimes.

Prou. 15. 5.
A fool despises his fathers correction, but he that takes heed when he is
reproved shall have the more understanding.

Prou. 15. 31
The ear that harkeneth to the reformation of life, shall dwell among the wise.

Prou. 15. 32
He that refuses to be reformed, despises his own soul: but he that
submits him self to correction is wise.

Pro. 17. 10.
One reprofe only does more good to him that has understanding then a hundred
stripes unto a fool.

Pro. 19. 29.
Punishments are ordained for the scornful, and stripes for fools backs.

Prou. 23. 13. 14.
Withhold not correction from the child, for if thou beatest him with the
rod, he shall not dye thereof. If thou smite him with the rod thou shall
deliver his soul from hell.

Pro. 29. 15.
The rod and correction minister wisdom, but if a child be not looked
unto, he brings his mother to shame.

Pro. 29. 17
Nurtour thy son with correction, and thou shall be at rest: yea he shall do
thee good at thine heart.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 26.
He that is wise and well nurtoured will not grudge when he is reformed, and
an ignorant body shall not come to honor.

Countenance.
Ecclesiasticus 13. 26. 27.
THe heart of a man changes his countenance, whether it be in good or evil.
A cheerful countenance is a token of a good heart, for else it is an hard
thing to know the thought.

Ecclesiasticus 19. 27. 28.
One that has understanding may be perceived by the look of his countenance.

A man's garment, laughter, and going, declares what he is.

Counsel and counselors.
Prou. 11. 14
WHere no good counsel is, there the people decay: but where as many are that
can give good counsel, there is wealth.

Pro. 12. 15.
Look what a fool takes in hand, he thinks it well done: but he that is
wise will be counsayled.

Pro. 15. 22.
Unadvised thoughts shall come to naught but where as men are that can give good
counsel, there is stedfastnes.

Pro. 15. 23.
A joyful thing is it to a man when his counsel is followed, and very
pleasant is a word spoken in due season.

Prou. 16. 21
Whosoever has a wise understanding shall be called to counsel.

Pro. 20. 18.
Wise counsel in the heart of man is like a water in the deep of the earth,
and a man that has understanding brings it forth.

Prou. 20. 18
Thorough counsel the things that men devise go forward, and with
discretion ought wars to be taken in hand.

Prou. 21. 5.
The devises of one that is diligent bring plenteousnesse: but he that is
unadvised comes unto poverty.

Pro. 21. 30.
There is no wisdom, there is no understanding, there is no counsel against ye
lord.

Prou. 28. 2.
Because of sin the land does often change her prince: but thorough men of
understanding and wisdom a realm endures long.

Ecclesiasticus 8. 17. 18
Take no counsel at fools, for they love nothing but the things that please
them selves. Make no counsel before a stranger, for thou can not tell what
will come of it.

Ecclesiasticus 37. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
Seek no counsel at thy kinsman, and hide thy counsel from such as bore thee
no good will. Every counseler brings forth his counsel, nevertheless there is
some that counseleth but for his own profit. Beware of the counseler and be
advised before where to thou will use him, for he will counsel for him self,
lest he cast the lot upon thee and say unto thee: thy way and purpose is good:
and afterward he stand against thee and look what shall become of thee. Ask
no counsel at him that suspecteth thee for an enemy, and hide thy counsel from
such as hate thee. Ask no counsel at a woman concerning the things that she
longs for: nor at a fearful and fainthearted body, in matters of war: nor
at a merchant how dear he will cheap thy wares toward his: or at a bier of
selling: or at an envious man of thanks giving: or at the unmerciful of
loving kindness: or at an dishonest man of honesty: or at the slouthful of
working: or at an hireling which has no house or profit of wealth. Take no such
folks to counsel: but be diligent to seek counsel at a virtuous man that
fears god: such one as thou know to be a keeper of the commandments,
which has a mind after thine own mind, and is sorry for thee when thou
stumblest. And hold thy counsel fast in thine heart, for there is no man more
faithful to keep it then thou thy self.

Ecclesiasticus 19. 8. 9.
Show thy secrets neither to friend nor foe, and if thou have offended tell it
not, for he shall harken unto thee, and when he finds opportunity, he shall
hate thee, and so shall he be always about thee.

Ecclesiasticus 37. 16.
Before all thy works ask counsel first: and or ever thou do any thing
be well advised.

Covetousness, look liberality.
Ecclesiasticus 10. 9.
THere is nothing worse then a covetous man. There is not a more wicked thing
then to love money, and why? such one has his soul to sell, yet is he but
filthy dounge while he lives.

Ecclesiasticus 14. 9.
A covetous man's eye has never enough in the portion of wickedness, until
the time that he wither away, and has lost his own soul.

Ecclesiasticus 14. 3.
It becomes not a covetous man and a nyggard to be rich: and what should a
nyggard do with gold.

Ecclesiasticus 14. 4.
He that with all his carefulnes heapeth together unrighteously, gathers for
other folks, and an other man shall make good cheer with his goods.

10.
A nigard has a wicked eye, he turns away his face, and despises his own
soul.

Curiosity.
Pro. 25. 27.
LIke as it is not good to eat to much honey, even so he that will search out
hie things it shall be to heavy for him.

Ecclesiasticus 3. 22. 23. 24. 25.
Seek not out the things that are above thy capacity, and search not the
ground of such things as are to mighty for thee, but look what God has
commanded thee, think upon that always, and be not curious in many of his
works: for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things
that are secret. Make not thou to much search in superfluous things, and be not
curious in many of his works: for many things are showed unto the already,
which be above the capacity of men, the meddling with such has begiled many a
man, and tangled their wits in vanity.

Daughter.
Ecclesiasticus 22. 4. 5.
A Wise daughter is an heritage unto her husband: but she that comes to
dishonestie, brings her father in heaviness. A daughter that is past shame
dishonors both her father and her husband, the ungodly shall regard her, but
they both shall despise her.

Ecclesiasticus 26. 10. 11. 12.
If thy daughter be not shamefast, hold her straightly, lest she abuse her self
through over much liberty, beware of all the dishonestie of her eyes: and
marvel not if she do against thee: like as one that goes by the way and is
thirsty, so shall she open her mouth and drink of every next water that she
may get. By every hedge shall she sit down, and open her quiver against
every arrow.

Ecclesiasticus 42. 9. 10
The daughter makes the father to watch secretly: and the carefulnes that he
has for her, takes away his sleep: yea in the youth, lest she should
ouergrow him, and when she has an husband, lest she should be hated: lest she
should be defiled in her virginity, or gotten with child in her fathers
house, or (when she comes to the man) lest she behave her self not right, or
continue unfruitful.

Ecclesiasticus 42. 11.
If thy daughter be wanton, keep her straightly, lest she cause thine enemies to
laugh thee to scorn, and the whole city to give thee an evil report, and so
thou be feign to hear thy shame of every man, and be confounded before all the
people.

Death.
Ecclesiastes 7. 1.
I Judged those that are dead to be more Ecclesiastes 4. 2. 3.
happy then those that be alive: yea him that is yet unborn to be better at
ease then they both, because he sees not the miserable works that are done
under ye sun.

The day of death is better then the day of bir^h.

Wis. 2. 23.
God created man to be undestroyed: yea after the image of his own likeness
made he him. Nevertheless thorough envy of the Devil came death into the
world, and they that hold of his side do as he does.

Wis. 3. 1.
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and the pain of death
shall not touch them.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 11. 12.
Though the Physician show his help never so long, yet in conclusion it goes
after this manner, to day a king to morrow dead. For when a man dies he is the
heir of serpents, beasts and worms.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 28.
Praise no man before his death, for a man shall be known in his children.

Ecclesiasticus 14. 14.
Work thou righteousness before thy death, for in the hell there is no meat to
find.

Ecclesiasticus 14. 17.
All flesh shall fade away like grass, and like a flourishing lease in a
green tree. Some grow, some are cast down, even so is the generation of all
flesh and blood: one comes to an end an other is borne.

Ecclesiasticus 22. 11.
Make but little weping because of the dead: for he is come to rest, but the
life of the fool is worse then the death.

Ecclesiasticus 36. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.
My son bring forth thy tears over the dead and begin to mourn, as if
thou had suffered great harm thy self, and then cover his body after a
convenient manner, and despise not his burial. Enforce thy self to weep, and
provoke thy self to mourn and make lamentation expediently, and that a day or
two, lest thou be evil spoken of, and then comfort thy heaviness, for of
heaviness comes death, the heaviness of the heart breaks strength, take no
heaviness to heart, drive it away and remember the last things, forget it not,
for there is no turning again. Thou shall do him no good but hurt thy self.

Ecclesiasticus 41. 1. 2.
O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that seeks rest and
comfort in his substance and riches. Unto the man that has nothing to vex
him, and that has prosperity in all things, yea unto him that yet is able to
receive meat. O death, how acceptable and good is thy judgment unto the
needful, and unto him whose strength fails, and that is now in the last
age, and that all things is full of care and fearfulness, unto him also that
is in despair, and has no hope nor patience.

Ecclesiasticus 41. 3. 4.
Be not thou afraid of death: remember them that have been before thee and that
come after thee: this is the judgment of the Lord over all flesh. And why
would thou be against the pleasure of the highest? whether it be ten hundred
or a thousand years, death asks not how long one has lived.

Delicate living.
Prou. 21. 17
HE that has pleasure in bankettes shall be a poor man: whosoever deliteth in wine
and delicates shall not be rich.

Pro. 29. 21.
He that delicately brings up his servant from a child shall make him his
master at length.

Ecclesiastes 7. 2.
It is better to go into an house of mourning, then into a banketting house.

Diet.
Ecclesiasticus 31. 19. 20.
O How well content is a wise man with a little wine? so that in sleep thou
shall not be sick thereof, nor feel my pain. A sweet holsom sleep shall
such a one have and feel no inward grief. He rises up betimes in the
morning, and is well at ease in him self. But an insatiable eater sleeps
unquietly and has ache and pain of the body.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 21.
If thou feel that thou have eaten to much, arise, go thy way, cast it out
of thy stomach, and take thy rest, and it shall ease thee, so that thou shall
bring no sickness unto thy body.

Ecclesiasticus 37. 28. 29. 30.
Be not greedy in every eating, and be not to hasty upon all meats, for
excess of meats brings sickness, and gluttony comes at the last to an
unmeasurable heat. Thorough surfeit have many a one perished: but he that
dieteth him self temperatly prolongeth his life.

Dissembling.
Pro. 10. 32.
DIssembling lips keep hatred secretly

Prou. 11. 3.
The innocent dealing of the just shall lead them: but the wickedness of such as
dissemble shall be their own destruction.

Pro. 11. 9.
Thorough the mouth of the dissembler is his neighbor destroyed.

Pro. 11. 13.
A dissembling person will discover privy things: but he that is of a faithful
heart will keep counsel.

Pro. 11. 20.
The Lord abhors them that be of a feigned heart, but he has pleasure in
them that be of an undefiled conversation.

Prou. 12. 17
A true mouth is ever constant: but a dissembling tongue is soon changed.

Pro. 26. 28.
A dissembling tongue hates one that rebukes him: and a flattering mouth
works mischief.

Ecclesiasticus 19. 25.
A wicked man can behave him self humbly, and can ducke with his head, and yet
is but a deceauer within.

Doings of men, look good men.
Prou. 16. 7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his very enemies to be his
friends.

Prou. 16. 1.
A man deuiseth a way in his heart, but it is the Lord that orders his
goings.

Pro. 16. 17.
The path of the righteous is to eschew evil, and whosoever looks well to his
ways keeps his own soul.

Pro. 16. 33.
The lottes are cast into the lap, but the ordering thereof stands all in
the Lord.

Pro. 19. 22.
It is a man's worship to do good, and better it is to be a poor man then a
dissembler.

Prou 20. 6.
Many there be that would be called good doers: but where shall one find a true
faithful man.

Pro. 20. 7.
Whosoever leads a godly and an innocent life is righteous: and happy shall his
children be whom he leaves behind him.

Prou. 20. 9.
Who can say, my heart is clean, I am innocent from sin.

Pro. 20. 24.
The Lord orders every man's going: how may a man then understand his own way.

Prou. 21. 2.
Every man thinks his own way to be right: but the Lord judges the hearts.

Prou. 21. 3.
To do righteousness and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then
sacrifice.

Pro. 21. 5.
The just deliteth in doing the thing that is right: but over the workers of
wickedness hangs destruction.

Pro. 24. 16.
A just man falls seven times and rises up again: but the ungodly fall
into wickedness.

Prou. 25. 21
If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink: for so shall
thou heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee.

Pro. 28. 13.
He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but whosoever knowledgeth them and
forsakes them shall have mercy.

Prou. 28. 14
Well is him that stands in awe, as for him that hardens his heart he shall
fall into mischief.

Pro. 28. 18.
Whosoever leads a godly and an innocent life shall be saved: but he that goes
froward ways shall once have a fall.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 7.
Justify not thy self before God, for he knows thy heart, and desire not to
be reputed wise in the presence of the King.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 36.
Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end and thou shall never do
amiss.

Dreams.
Ecclesiasticus 34. 1.
Unwise people begyle them selves with vain and deceitful hope, and fools
trust dreams.

2.
Whosoever regards dreams is like him that will take hold of a shadow and follow
after the wind: 3.
even so is it with the appearings of dreams.

Ecclesiasticus 34. 5. 6.
Southsaying, witchcraft, sorcerie and dreaming is but vanity: like as when a
woman trauaileth with child, and has many fantasies in her heart. Where as
such visions come not of God, set not thine heart upon them.

Drunkenness, look more in wine.
Ecclesiasticus 19. 1.
A Laboring man that is given unto drunkenness shall not be rich, and he that
makes not much of small things, shall fall by little and little.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 25. 26.
Be not thou a wine bibber, for wine has destroyed many a man. The fire
proves the hard iron, even so does wine prove the hearts of the proud when
they be drunken.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 30.
Drunkenness fills the mind of the foolish with shame and ruin, minisheth
the strength and makes wounds.

Enemy, look more in love and evil will.
Ecclesiasticus 12. 10. 11. 12. 13.
TRust never thine enemy: For like as iron rusteth, so does his wickedness, and
though he make much crowching and kneeling, yet keep well thy mind, and
beware of him. Set him not by thee, neither let him sit at thy right hand,
lest he turn him, get thee into thy place, take thy room, and seek thy seat,
and so thou at the last shall remember my words, and be pricked at my sayings.

18.
An enemy is sweet in his lips, he Ecclesiasticus 12. 17.
can make many good words, and speak many good things, yea he can weep with
his eyes, but in his heart he imagines how to throw thee into the pit: and
if he may find opportunity, he will not be satisfied with blood. If
adversity come upon thee thou shall find him there first, and though he
pretend to do thee help, yet shall he undermine thee. He shall shake his
head and clappe his hands over thee for very gladness, and while he makes
many words he shall disguise his countenance.

Father and mother.
Pro. 17. 21.
HE that begets a fool, begets his sorrow: and the father of a fool can
have no joy.

Prou. 19. 18
Chasten thy son while there is hope: but let not thy soul be moved to slaye
him.

Prou. 22. 6.
Teach a child in his youth what way he should go: for he shall not leave it
when he is old.

Pro. 23. 24.
A righteous father is marvelous glad of a wise son: and he that begets a
wise child, shall have great pleasure of him.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 23.
If thou have sons, bring them up in nourtour and learning, and hold them in
awe from their youth up.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 24. 25.
If thou have daughters, keep their body and show not thy face cherefull
toward them. Mary thy daughter, and so shall thou perform a weighty matter,
but give her to a man of understanding.

Ecclesiasticus 16. 1. 2. 3.
Delight not thou in the multitude of ungodly children: and have no pleasure in
them if they fear not God. Trust not thou to their life and regard not their
labors. For one son that fears God, is better then a thousand ungodly. And
better is it for a man to die without children, then to leave behind him such
children as are ungodly.

Ecclesiasticus 30. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Whosoever loves his child holds him still under correction, that he may have joy
of him afterward, and that he grope not after his neighbors doors. He that
teaches his son shall have joy in him, and need not to be ashamed of him
among his acquaintance. Whosoever enformeth and teaches his son, greeueth the
enemy, and before his friends he may joy of him, though the father dye, yet is
he as though he were not dead, for he has left one behind him that is like
him in his life, he saw him and had joy in him, and was not sorry in his death,
neither was he ashamed before his enemies, for he left behind him an auenger
against his enemies, and a good doer unto the friends.

7.
He that chasteneth his child binds the wounds together, that his heart may
fear every word.

8.
An untamed horse will be hard, and awanton child will be wilful.

Ecclesiasticus 30. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
If thou bring up thy son delicately, he shall make thee afraid: and if thou
play with him he shall bring thee to heaviness. Laugh not with him lest thou
weep with him also, and lest thy teeth be set on edge at the last. Give him no
liberty in his youth, and excuse not his folly, bow down his neck while he
is young, hit him upon the sides, while he is yet but a child, lest he wax
stubburne and give no more force of thee, and so shall thou have heaviness of
soul. Teach thy child and be diligent therein, lest it be to thy shame.

Fear of the Lord.
Ecclesiasticus 1. 15. 16. 17.
THe fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

The fear of the lord is the right service of God that preserves and
justifies the heart and gives mirth and gladness.

18.
Whosoever fears the Lord shall be happy, and when he has need of comfort he
shall be blessed.

20.
The fear of the Lord is wisdom that makes rich and brings all good with
her.

22.
The fear of the Lord is the crown of wisdom, and gives plenteous peace
and health.

24.
The fear of the Lord is the root of wisdom, and her branches are long
life.

26.
The fear of the Lord drives out sin: for he that is without fear can not
be made righteous, and his wilful boldness is his own destruction.

Ecclesiasticus 2. 9.
O ye that fear the Lord take sure hold of his mercy, shrink not away from
him, that ye fall not.

10.
O ye that fear the Lord believe him and your reward shall not be empty.

O ye that fear the Lord put your trust in him: and mercy shall come unto you
for pleasure.

O ye that fear the Lord set your love upon him, and your hearts shall be
lightened.

11.
Consider the old generations of men, o ye children and mark them well: was
there ever any confounded that put his trust in the Lord? Who ever continued in
his fear 12.
and was forsaken? Or whom did he ever despise that called faith fully upon
him? for God is gracious and merciful, he forgets sins in ye time of
trouble, and is a defender of all them that seek him in the truth.

16.
They that fear the Lord will not mistrust his word, and they that love him
will keep his commandments.

17.
They that fear the Lord will seek out the things that are pleasant unto
him, and they that love him will fulfill his law.

18.
They that fear the Lord will prepare their hearts and humble their souls in
his sight.

19.
They that fear the lord keep his commandments and will be pacient till
they see him self, saying: better it is for us to fall into the hands of the
Lord, then into the hands of men: 21.
for his mercy is as great as him self.

Folly.
Prou. 1. 32.
THe prosperity of fools shall be their own destruction.

Prou 2. 21.
The wise shall have honor in possession, but shame is the promotion yt fools
shall have.

Pro. 10. 23.
A fool does wickedly and makes but a sport of it: but wisdom rules the
man that has understanding.

Pro. 12. 16.
He that has understanding does hyde wisdom, but an indiscreet fool tells
out his foolishnes.

Prou. 14. 7.
See that thou meddle not with a fool in whom thou perceauest to be no
knowledge.

Prou. 14. 8.
The wisdom of him that has understanding, is to take heed unto his ways,
but the foolishnes of the unwise deceives.

Prou. 14 9.
Fools make but a sport of sin, but there is a favorable love among the
righteous.

Prou. 18. 7.
A fools mouth is his own destruction, and his lips are the snare of his
own soul.

Prou. 26. 3.
Unto the horse belongs a whip, to the ass a bridle, and a rod to the
fools back.

Prou. 26. 12
If thou see a man that is wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a
fool then in him.

Pro. 26. 17.
Whosoever goes by and medleth with other men's strife, he is like one that takes
a dog by the ears.

Pro. 28. 26.
He that trusts in his own heart is a fool: but he that deals wisely
shall be safe.

Ecclesiastes 10. 11.
The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious: but the lips of a fool will
destroy him self.

The beginning of his talking is foolishness, and last word of his mouth is
stark madness.

Ecclesiasticus 21. 14.
The heart of a fool is like a broken vessel, he can keep no wisdom.

Ecclesiasticus 22. 13.
Talk not much with a fool, and go not with him that has no understanding.

Ecclesiasticus 27. 13.
The talking of fools is abomination, and their sport is voluptuousness and
misnurtour.

Fortune commonly called in deed nothing else but the providence of God.
Ecclesiastes 4. 14.
SOme one comes out of prison and is made a King: and an other which is borne
in the kingdom comes unto poverty.

Ecclesiastes 9. 10.
In running it helps not to be swift, in battle it helps not to be
strong: to feeding it helps not to be wise: to richesse it helps not to be
subtle: to be had in favor it helps not to be cunning, but that all lies in
time and fortune.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 5.
Many tyrauntes have been feign to sit down upon the earth, and the unlikely
have worn the crown.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 6.
Many mighty men have been brought low: and the honorable have been delivered
into other men's hands.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 11. 12.
There is some man that labors, and the more he werieth him self, the less
he has. Again some man is slothful, has need of help, wants strength and
has great poverty, and Gods eye looks upon him to good, sets him from his
low estate, and lifts up his head: so that many men marvel at him and give
honor unto God.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 21.
Continue not in the works of sinners, but put thy trust in God, and bide in
thine estate: for it is but an easy thing in the sight of God to make a poor
man rich, and that suddenly.

Ecclesiasticus 20. 9.
Some man gets a fall for being to proud, and some comes to worship from
low estate.

Ecclesiasticus 37. 18. 19. 20. 21.
Some man is apt and well enstructed in many things, and yet very unprofitable
unto him self. Some man there is that can give wise and prudent counsel, and
yet is he hated, and continues a beggar: for the grace is not given him of God
to be accepted. An other is robbed of all wisdom, yet is he wise unto him
self, and the fruit of understanding is commendable in his mouth.

Friendship.
Prou. 17. 17
HE is a friend that always loves, and in adversity a man shall know who is
his brother.

Prou. 18. 19
A brother though he be grieved with offense, yet is he more worth then a very
strong castle: and they that hold together are like the bar of a palace.

Pro. 18. 24.
A man that loves his friends will be companable with them: and some friend
sticks faster to a man then his brother.

Prou. 27. 6.
Faithful are the wounds of a lover, but the kisses of an enemy are cruel.

Prou. 27. 9.
Balm and sweet incense make the heart merry: so is the sweet counsel of a
man's friend that agrees to his purpose.

Pro. 27. 10.
Thine own friend and thy fathers friend see thou forsake not: but go not into
thy brothers house in time of trouble, for better is a friend at hand then a
brother a far of.

Ecclesiastes 4. 9. 10. 11. 12.
Two are better then one, for they may well enjoy the profit of their labor.
For if one of them fall, his companion helps him up again: But woe is him
that is alone: for if he fall he has not an other to help him up. Again,
when two sleep together they are warm, but how can a body be warm alone?
one may be overcome, but two may make resistance. A threefold gable is not
lightly broken.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 6.
Hold friendship with many, nevertheless have but one counselor of a
thousand.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 7 8. 9. 10. 11. 12
If thou gettest a friend prove him first, and be not hasty to give him
credence, for some man is a friend but for a time, and will not abide in the
day of trouble. And there is some friend that turns to enmity, and takes
part against thee, and if he know any hurt by thee he tells it out. Again
some friend is but a companion at the table, and in the day of need he
continues not. But a sure friend will be unto thee even as thine own self,
and deal faithfully with thy household folk. If thou suffer trouble and
adversity he is with thee.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 13.
Depart from thine enemies, yea and beware of thy friends.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 14. 15. 16. 17.
A faithful friend is a strong defense, whosoever finds such one finds a
treasure. A faithful friend has no pear, the weight of gold and silver is
not to be compared to the goodness of his faith. A faithful friend is a
medicine of life, and they that fear the Lord shall find him. Whosoever fears
the Lord shall prosper with friends, and as he is him self so shall his
friend be also.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 18.
Give not over thy friend for any good, nor thy faithful brother for the best
gold.

Ecclesiasticus 9. 12.
Forsake not an old friend, for the new shall not be like him. A new friend
is new wine: let him be old and thou shall drink him with pleasure.

Ecclesiasticus 19. 15.
Tell thy friend his fault lest he be ignorant, and say: I have not done it,
or if he have spoken that he do it no more.

Ecclesiasticus 27. 17. 18.
Love thy friend and bind thy self in faithfulness with him, but if thou
bewrayest his secrets thou shall not get him again: For like as the man is
that destroys his enemy, so is he also that deals falsely in the
friendship of his neighbor.

Ecclesiasticus 37. 4.
There is some companion which in prosperity rejoices with his friend: but in
the time of trouble he takes part against him.

Gifts or rewards.
Prou. 17. 8.
A Reward is a precious stone unto him that has, (...) but unto whomsoever it
turns, it makes him unwise.

Pro. 17. 13.
Whosoever rewards evil for good, the plague shall not depart from his house.

Pro. 17. 23.
The ungodly takes gifts out of the bosom to wrest the ways of judgment.

Prou. 19. 6.
The multitude hangs upon great men: and every man favors him that gives
rewards.

Prou. 21. 14
A privy reward pacifieth displeasure, and a gift in the bosom stilleth
furiousness.

Pro. 25. 13.
Whosoever makes great boastes and gives nothing, is like clouds and wind
without rain.

God.
Prou. 3. 5. 6 7.
PUt thy trust in God with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own
wit: in all thy ways have respect unto him, and he shall order thy goinges.
Be not wise in thine own conceit, but fear the Lord and depart from evil.

Prou. 5. 21.
Every man's ways are open in the sight of the Lord, and he pondereth all
their goings.

Prou. 15. 3.
The eyes of the Lord look on every place beholding both the good and badde.

Pro. 15. 11.
The hell with her pain is known unto ye lord: how much more then ye hearts
of me^?

Prou. 16. 1. 2. 3.
A man may well purpose a thing in his heart, but the answer of the tongue
comes of the Lord.

A man thinks all his ways to be clean, but it is the Lord that judges
the mind. Commit thy works unto the Lord and look what thou deuisest it shall
prosper.

Pro. 20. 22.
Say not thou I will recompense evil: but put thy trust in the Lord and he
shall defend thee.

Pro. 29. 25.
He that fears men shall have a fall: but whosoever puts his trust in the Lord
is without danger.

Ecclesiastes 8. 12.
Though an evil person offend an hundred times, and God defer, giving him long
life: yet am I sure that it shall go well with them that fear God, because
they have him before their eyes.

Ecclesiastes 12. 13.
Fear God and keep his commandments, for that touches all men, for God
shall judge all works, and secret things whether they be good or evil.

Ecclesiasticus 13. 8. Ecclesiasticus 13. 13. Ecclesiasticus 15. 11. 12. 13.
Submit thy self unto God and wait upon his hand.

Love God all thy life long, and call upon him in thy need.

Say not thou, it is the Lords fault that I am gone by, for thou shall not do
the thing that God hates. Say not thou, he has caused me to do wrong, for
he has no need of the ungodly. God hates all abomination of error, and they
that fear God will love none such.

Ecclesiasticus 16. 11. 12.
Mercy and wrath is with him: he is both mighty to forgive, and to pour out
displeasure: like as his mercy is great, even so is his punishment also, he
judges a man according to his works.

Ecclesiasticus 32. 23. 24.
In all thy works put thy trust in God from thy whole heart, for that is the
keeping of the commandments: whosoever believes Gods word takes heed to the
commandments, and he that puts his trust in the Lord shall want nothing.

Ecclesiasticus 33. 1.
There shall no evil happen unto him that fears God: but when he is in
tentation, the Lord shall deliver him and keep him from evil.

Ecclesiasticus 33. 12.
Like as the clay is in the potters hand, and all the ordering thereof at his
pleasure: so are men also in the hands of him that made them, so that he may
give them as likes him best.

Good men and evil.
Prou. 2. 21. 22.
THe just shall dwell in the land, and they that be perfect shall remain in
it: but the ungodly shall be rooted out of the land and the wicked doers shall
be rooted out of it.

Prou. 3. 33.
The curse of the Lord is in the house of the ungodly: but he blesses the
dwellings of the righteous.

Prou. 3. 31. 32.
Follow not a wicked man and choose none of his ways: for the Lord abhors
the froward, but his counsel is among the righteous.

Prou. 4. 14. 15. 16.
Come not in the path of the ungodly, and walk not in the way of the wicked,
abhor it and go not therein, depart aside and pass over by it: for they can
not sleep except they have first done some mischief: neither take they any rest
except they have first done some harm.

Prou. 4. 18. 19.
The path of the rightwise shines as the light, that is ever brighter and
brighter unto the perfect day: but the way of the ungodly is as the darkness,
they know not where they fall.

Prou. 10. 16
The righteous labors to do good: but the ungodly uses his increase unto
sin.

Pro. 10. 25.
The ungodly passes when the tempest comes: but the righteous remains sure
for ever.

Pro. 10. 30.
The righteous shall never be overthrown: but the ungodly shall not remain in
the land.

Prou. 11. 6.
The righteousness of the just shall deliver them: but the wicked shall be
taken in their own ungodliness.

Pro. 11. 18.
The labor of the ungodly prospers not: but he that sows righteousness
shall receive a sure reward.

Pro. 11. 19.
Like as righteousness brings life, even so to cleave unto evil brings
death.

Prou. 12. 7.
God ouerturneth the estate of the wicked and they stand not: but the house of
the righteous shall stand steadfast.

Pro. 12. 21.
There shall no misfortune happen unto the just, but the ungodly shall be
filled with misery.

Prou. 13. 21
Mischief follows upon sinners, but the righteous shall have a good reward.

Pro. 14. 11.
The house of the ungodly shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle of the
righteous shall flourish.

Prou. 15. 9.
The way of the ungodly is an abomination unto the Lord: but whosoever follows
righteousness, him he loves.

Pro. 15. 29.
The Lord is far from the ungodly, but he hears the prayer of the righteous.

Wis. 5. 16. 17.
The righteous shall live for evermore, their reward also is with the Lord,
and their remembrance with the highest. Therefore shall they receive a glorious
kingedom, and a bewtifull crown at the Lords hand: for with his right hand
shall he cover them, and with his own holy arm shall he defend them.

Ecclesiasticus 40. 9. 10
Death, bloudsheding, strife, and sword, oppression, hunger, destruction, and
punishment, these things are created against the ungodly, and for their sakes
came the flood also.

Health and sickness.
Pro. 18. 14.
A Good stomach drives away a man's disease, but when the spirit is vexed who
may abide it?

Ecclesiasticus 30. 14. 15. 16.
Better is the pore being whole and strong, then a man to be rich and not to
have his health. Health and welfare is above all gold, and a whole body above
all treasure. There is no riches above a sound body, and no joy above the joy
of the heart. Death is better then a wretched life, and eternal rest better
then continual sickness.

House and husbandry.
Pro. 24. 27.
FIrst make up thy work that is without, and look well unto that which thou
have in the field, and then build thine house.

Pro. 24. 3. 4
Thorough wisdom is an house builded, and with understanding is it set up.
Thorough discretion shall the chambers be filled with all costly and pleasant
riches.

Pro. 27. 23.
See that thou know the number of thy cattle thy self, and look well to thy
flocks: for riches abide not always, and the crown endures not for ever.

Pro. 27. 25.
The hay grows, the grass comes up, and herbs are gathered in the
mountains.

Pro. 27. 26.
The lambs shall cloth thee, and for thy goats thou shall have money to thy
husbandry: thou shall have goats milk enough to feed thee, to uphold thy
household and to sustain thy maidens.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 15.
Let no laborious work be tedious unto thee, neither the husbandry which the
Almighty has created.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 22.
If thou have cattle look well to them, and if they be for thy profit, keep
them.

Ecclesiastes 48.
The increase of the earth vpholdeth all thing: yea the King him self is
maintained by husbandry.

Housevvife.
Pro. 31. 10. ad finem.
Whosoever finds an honest faithful woman, she is much more worth then pearls.
The heart of her husband may safely trust in her, so that he shall fall in no
poverty. She will do him good, and not evil all the days of her life. She
occupies woll and flax, and labors gladly with her hands. She is like a
marchaunts ship that brings her vittails from far. She is up in the night
season to provide meat for her household, and food for her maidens. She
considers land and byeth it, and with the fruit of her hands she planteth a
vineyarde. She girdeth her loins with strength, and courageth her arms. And
if she perceive that her housewifery does good, her candell goes not out by
night. She lays her fingers to the spindle, and her hand takes hold of the
distaffe. She opens her hand to the poor, yea she stretches forth her
hands to such as have need. She fears not that the cold of winter shall
hurt her house, for all her household folk are clothed with scarlet. She makes
her self fine ornaments, her clothing is white silk and purple. Her husband
is much set by in the gates. When he sits among the rulers of the land. She
makes cloth of silk and sells it, and delivers girdles unto the
merchant. Strength and honor is her clothing, and in the latter day she
shall rejoice. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the
law of grace. She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not
her bread with idleness. Her children shall arise and call her blessed, and
her husband shall make much of her. Many daughters there be that gather riches
together, but thou go above them all. As for favor it is deceitful, and
beauty is a vain thing. But a woman that fears the Lord, she is worthy to
be praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise
her in the gates.

Judge and judgment.
Pro. 17. 15.
THe Lord hates as well him that justifies the ungodly as him that condemns
the innocent.

Prou. 18. 5.
It is not good to regard the person of the ungodly, or to put back the
righteous in judgment.

Pro. 18. 13.
He that gives sentence in a matter before he hear it, is a fool and worthy
to be confounded.

Pro. 22. 22.
See that thou rob not the poor because he is weak, and oppress not the
simple in judgment, for the Lord him self will defend their cause, and do
violence unto them that have used violence.

Pro. 24. 11.
Deliver them that go unto death, and are led away to be slain, and be not
negligent therein: if thou be able to do them good.

Pro. 24. 23. 24. 25.
It is not good to have respect of any person in judgment. He that says to
the ungodly thou art righteous, him shall the people curse: yea the comminaltie
shall abhor him. But they that rebuke the ungodly, in them does God delight,
and a rich blessing shall come upon them.

Prou. 29. 7.
The righteous considers the cause of the poor, but the ungodly regards no
understanding.

Prou. 31. 8. 9.
Be thou advocate for the dumme, and stand in judgment thy self to speak for
all such as be succourlesse in this transitory world. Open thy mouth, defend
the thing that is lawful and right, and the cause of the poor and helpelesse.

Ecclesiastes 3. 16. 17.
I saw under the Sun ungodliness in the stead of judgment, and iniquity instead of righteousness. Then I thought in my mind: God shall separate the
righteous from the ungodly, and then shall be the time and judgment of all
counsel and works.

Ecclesiastes 5. 7.
If thou see the poor to be oppressed and wrongfully dealt withal, so that
equity and the right of the law is wrested in the land, marvel not thou at
such a thing: for one great man keeps touch with an other, and the mighty men
are in authority over the poor.

Ecclesiastes 5. 5. Wis. 1. 1. 2
See that thou justify the small and great alike.

O set your affection upon righteousness, ye that be judges of the earth. Have a
good opinion of the Lord, and seek him in the singleness of heart, for he
will be found of them that tempt him not, and appears unto such as put their
trust in him.

Wis. 6. 2. 3 4. 5. 6. 7.
O learn ye that be judges of the earth. Give ear ye that rule the
multitudes, and delight in much people. For the power is given you of the Lord,
and the strength from the highest: which shall try your works, and search out
your imaginations. How that ye being officers of his kingdom, have not executed
true judgment: have not kept the (...) righteousness: nor walked after the
(...) of God. Horrible and that right soon (...) appear unto you: for an hard
judgment (...) they have that bare rule. Mercy is granted unto the simple, but
they that be (...) authority shall be sore punished.

Ecclesiasticus 4. 9. 10.
Deliver him that suffers wrong from the hand of the oppressor, and be not
faint hearted when thou sit in judgment. Be merciful unto the fatherless
as a father, and be (...) of an husband unto their mother, so shall thou be as
an obedier^ son of the highest, and he shall love thee more then thy mother
does.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 1.
A wise judge will order his people with discretion: and where a man of
understanding bears rule, there goes it well.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 2. 3.
As the judge of the people is him self, even so are his officers: and look
what manner of man the ruler of the city is, such are they that dwell therein
also.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 21.
Great is the judge and mighty in honor, yet is there none greater then he
that fears God.

Ecclesiasticus 11. 7. 8.
Condemn no man before thou have tried out the matter, and when thou have made
inquisition, then reform righteously. Give no sentence before thou have heard
the cause, but first let men tell out their tales.

Knowledge and learning.
Prou. 1. 5.
BY hearing the wise, man shall come by more wisdom.

Pro. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
If thou cryest after wisdom, and call for knowledge: If thou seek after
her as after money, and diggest for her as for treasure, then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: For it is the
Lord that gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding.

Prou. 2. 10. 11.
If wisdom enter into thine heart and thy soul delight in knowledge, then shall
counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee.

Pro. 10. 13.
In the lips of him that has understanding a man shall find wisdom.

Pro. 14. 15.
An ignorant body believes all things: but whosoever has understanding looks
well to his goings.

Pro. 18. 15.
A wise heart labors for knowledge, and a prudent ear seeks understanding.

Pro. 22. 17. 18.
My son bow down thine ear, and harken unto the words of wisdom: apply
thy mind unto my doctrine, for thou shall be excellent if thou keep it in thy
heart, and practice it in thy mouth that thou may put thy trust in the Lord.

Ecclesiastes 1. 18.
Where much wisdom is, there is also great travel and disquietnes, and the
more knowledge a man has, the more is his care.

Ecclesiastes 1. 8.
All things are so hard to be known that no man can express them.

Ecclesiastes 3. 11.
God has planted ignorance also in the hearts of men, that they should not
comprehend the ground of his works which he does from the beginning to the
end.

Ecclesiasticus 20. 29.
Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is horded up, what profit is in them
both? Better is he that keeps his ignorance secret, then a man that hides
his wisdom.

Ecclesiasticus 21. 21.
Learning is unto a wise man a jewel of gold, and like an armelet upon his
right arm.

Ecclesiasticus 21. 13.
The knowledge of the wise shall flow like water that runs over, and his
counsel is like a fountain of life.

King or Prince.
Pro. 14. 28.
THe increase and prosperity of the commons is the Kings honor: but the decay
of the people is the confusion of the Prince.

Pro. 16. 10
When the prophecy is in the lips of the King, his mouth shall not go wrong
in judgment.

Pro. 16. 12.
It is a great abomination when Kings are wicked, for a Kings seat should be
holden up with righteousness.

Pro. 16. 13.
Righteous lips are pleasant unto Kings, and he that speaks the truth
shall be believed.

Prou. 16. 14
The Kings displeasure is a messenger of death: but a wise man will pacify him.

Pro. 16. 15.
The cherefull countenance of the king is life: and his loving favor is as
the evening dew.

Prou. 17. 7.
Speech of authority becomes not a fool: much less a lying mouth then
besemeth a Prince.

Pro. 19. 12.
The Kings disfavor is like the roaring of a lion: but his friendship is like
the dew upon the grass.

Prou. 20. 2.
The King ought to be feared as the roaring of a lion: Whosoever provoke him to
anger offends against his own soul.

Prou. 20. 8.
A King that sits in the throne of judgment, and looks well about him,
drives away all evil.

Pro. 20. 26.
A wise King destroys the ungodly, and brings the wheel over them.

Pro. 20. 28.
Mercy and faithfulness preserve the King: and with loving kindness his seat
is holden up.

Prou. 21. 1.
The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, like as are the rivers of
water, he may turn it whither so ever he will.

Pro. 24. 21. 22.
My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and keep no company with them
that slide back from his fear: for their destruction shall come suddenly, and
who knows the adversity that may come from them both.

Prou 25. 1.
It is the honor of God to keep a thing secret, but the Kings honor is to
search out a thing.

Prou. 25. 2.
The heaven is high, the earth is deep, and the Kings heart is unsearchable.

Prou. 25. 3. 4.
Take the dross from the silver and there shall be a clean vessel thereof.
Take away ungodliness from the King, and his seat shall be established with
righteousness.

Pro. 28. 15.
Like as the roaring of a lion and an hungry bear, even so is an ungodly Prince
over the poor people.

Pro. 28. 16.
Where the prince is without understanding, there is great oppression and
wrong: but if he be such a one as hates covetousness, he shall long reign.

Prou. 29. 4.
With true judgment the King sets up the land: but if he be a man that
oppresses the people with gatheringes, he turns it vpside down.

Pro. 29. 14.
The seat of the King that faithfully judges the poor shall continue sure for
evermore.

Prou. 31. 4.
It is not for Kings, it is not (I say) for Kings to drink wine, nor Princes
strong drink: for there is no secret where drunkenness raineth, lest they
being drunken forget the law, and pervert the judgment of all poor men's
children.

Ecclesiastes 10. 15. 16.
Woe be unto thee (O land) whose King is but a child, and whose princes are
early at their bankettes. But well is thee (O land) whose King is come of
nobles, and whose Princes eat in due season for necessity and not for lust.

Labor, look more in slothfulness.
Ecclesiastes 3. 9.
WHat has a man else (that does any thing) but werines and labor? For as
touching the travel and carfulness which God has given unto men, I see that
he has given it them to be exercised in it.

Ecclesiastes 3. 13.
All that a man eats and drinks, yea, whatsoever a man enjoys of all his
labor, that same is a gift of God.

Ecclesiastes 3. 22.
I perceive that there is nothing better for a man then to be joyful in his
labor: for that is his portion.

Law of God and man.
Pro. 13. 14.
THe law is a well of life unto the wise, that it may keep him from ye snares
of death.

Pro. 25. 7. 8 9.
Be not hasty to go to the law, lest happly thou do some offense after the
strife be ended, whereby thy neighbor put thee to shame. Handle thy matter
with thy neighbor him self, and discover not an other man's secret, lest when
men hear thereof, it turn to thy dishonor, and lest thine evil name do not
cease.

Prou. 28. 4.
They that forsake the law praise the ungodly: but such as keep ye law abhor
them.

Prou. 28. 7.
Whosoever keeps the law is a child of understanding: but he that is a
companion of riotous men shameth his father.

Pro. 28. 9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abominable.

Prou. 29. 9.
If a wise man go to law with a fool, (whether he deal with him friendly or
roughly he gets no rest.

Pro. 29. 18.
When the word of God is not preeched, the people perish but well is him that
keeps the law.

Prou. 30. 5. 6.
All the words of God are pure and clean, for he is a shield unto all them
that put their trust in him. Put thou nothing unto his words, lest he reprove
thee and thou be found a liar.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 38.
Let thy mind be upon the commandments of God, and be earnestly occupied in
his laws, so shall he establish thy heart and give thee wisdom at thine own
desire.

Ecclesiasticus 8. 14.
Go not to law with the judge, for he will judge according to his own honor.

Ecclesiasticus 19. 24.
A crafty subtell man can be wise, but he is unrighteous, and with gifts he
wrasteth the open and manifest law.

Lending and borovving.
Ecclesiasticus 29. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Whosoever will show mercy let him lend unto his neighbor: and he that is able
let him keep the commandment. Lend unto thy neighbor in time of his need,
and pay thou thy neighbor again in due season. Keep thy word, and deal
faithfully with him, and thou shall always find the thing that is necessary for
thee. There have been many that when a thing was lent them, reckened it to be
found, and made them travail and labor that had helped them. While they
receive any thing they kiss the hands of such as give them, for their
neighbors good they humble their voice: but when they should pay again, they
keep it back, and give evil words, and make many excuses by reason of time:
and though he be able, yet gives he scarce the half again, and reckeneth the
other to be found. And if he with hold not his money, yet has he an enemy of
him, and that undeserved. He pays him with cursing and rebuke, and gives him
evil words for his good deed.

Ecclesiasticus 29. 7. 8. 9. 10.
There be many one which are not glad for to lend, not because of evil, but
they fear to lose the thing that they lend: yet have thou patience with the
simple, and withholde not mercy from him. Help the poor for the
commandments sake, and let him not go empty from thee because of his
necessity. Lose thy money for thy brother and neighbors sake, and bury it not
under a stone where it rusteth and corrupts.

Liberality.
Prou. 11. 24
SOme man gives out his goods and is the richer: but the nigard (having
enough) will depart from nothing, and yet is ever in poverty.

Pro. 11. 25.
He that is liberal in giving shall have plenty: and he that waters shall be
watered also him self.

Pro. 11. 26.
Whosoever hordeth up his corn shall be cursed among the people: but blessing shall
light upon his head that gives food.

Pro. 18. 16.
Liberality brings a man to honor and worship, and sets him among great
men.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 33.
Be liberal unto al men living, yet let not but do good even unto them that
are dead.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 23.
Whosoever is liberal in dealing out his meat, many men shall bless him, and
praise him with their lips, and the same is a sure token of his love and
faithfulness.

Ecclesiasticus 40. 17.
Friendlinesse and liberality is the increase and blessing of God, is like a
paradise and garden of pleasure: such mercy also and kindness endures for ever.

Love and evil will.
Pro. 10. 12.
Evil will stirs up strife, but love covers the multitude of sins.

Pro. 15. 17.
Better is a mess of pottage with love, then a fat ox with evil will.

Pro. 23. 6. 7
Eat thou not with the envious, and desire not his meat: for he does as a man
that prescribes a measure to thee in his heart. He says unto thee, eat and
drink, where as his heart is not with him.

Pro. 24. 17. 18.
Rejoice not thou at the fall of thine enemy, and let not thine heart be glad
when he stumbleth, lest the Lord (when he sees it) be angry and turn his
wrath from him unto thee.

Pro. 26. 23.
Venomous lips and a wicked heart are like a potshard covered with silver
dross.

Pro. 26. 24. 25.
An enemy shall be known by his talking, and in the mean season he imagines
mischief, but when he speaks fair believe him not, for there are seven
abominations in his heart.

Pro. 26. 26.
Whosoever keeps evil will secretly to do hurt, his malice shall be showed
before the whole congregation.

Ecclesiasticus 8. 7.
Be not glad of the death of thine enemy, but remember that we must dye all the
sort of us.

Ecclesiasticus 25. 1.
Three things there are that my spirit favors, which be also allowed
before God and man. The unity of brethren, the love of neighbors, a man and
wife that agree well together.

Ecclesiasticus 28. 3. 4. 5. 6.
A man that bears hatred against an other, how dare he desire forgeuenes of
God? If he that is but flesh bears hatred and keep it, who will entreat for
his sins? Remember the end, and let enimitie pass, which seeks death and
destruction, and abide thou in the commandments.

Living.
Pro. 30. 7. 8 9.
TWo things have I required of thee (Lord) that thou will not deny me before
I die. Remove from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches,
only grant me a necessary living, lest if I be to full I deny thee and say:
Who is the Lord? And lest I being constrained through poverty, fall unto
stealing and take the name of God in vain.

Ecclesiasticus 29. 23.
The chief thing that keeps in thy life, is water and bread, clothing and
lodging to cover thy shame.

Ecclesiasticus 29. 24.
Better it is to have a poor living in a man's own house, then delicat fare
among the strange.

Ecclesiasticus 29. 25. 26. 27.
Be it little or much that thou have, hold thee content withal, and thou shall
not be blamed as a vagabound, for a miserable life is it to go from house to
house, and where a man is freinded he dare not open his mouth. Though one be
lodged and have meat and drink, yet shall he be taken as unworthy, and hear
many bitter rough words.

Ecclesiasticus 32. 21. 22.
Give not thy self into a laborious slippery way, and beware of thy children,
and take heed of them that be thine own household.

Ecclesiasticus 33. 18. 19. 20.
Give not thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over thee, while
thou live, and give not away thy substance and good to an other, lest it
repent thee that thou be feign to beg therefore thy self. As long as thou
live and have breath, let no man change thee: for better it is that thy
children do pray thee, then that thou should be feign to look in their
hands.

Ecclesiasticus 33. 22.
At yt time when thou shall end thy days, and finish thy life, distribute
thine inheritance

Ecclesiasticus 39. 26. 27.
All things necessary for the life of man are created from the beginning:
water, fire, iron and salt, meal, meat and honey, milk and wine, oil and
clothing. Al these things are created for the best to the faithful. But to the
ungodly shall all these things be turned to hurt and harm.

Manners.
Pro. 11. 22.
A Fair woman without discrete manners, is like a ringe of gold in a swines
snowte.

Pro. 23. 1. 2 3.
When thou sit at the table to eat with a Lord, order thy self manerly
with the things that are set before thee. Measure thine appetite, and if thou will rule thine own self, be not over greedy of his meat, for meat beguileth
and deceaueth.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 14.
Put not forth thy self in the presence of Prou. 25. 5. 6.
the King, and prease not into the place of great men. Better is it that it be
said unto thee, come up higher, then thou to be put lower in the presence of
the Prince, whom thou see with thine eyes.

Make not many words when thou art among the elders.

Ecclesiasticus 21. 23.
A fool will peep in at the window into the house, but he that is well
nourtered will stand without. A foolish man stands harkening at the door,
but he that is wise will be ashamed.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
If thou sit at a great man's table, open not thy mouth wide upon it, and make
not many words, lay not thine hand upon every thing that thine eye sees, and
strive not with him in the dishe. Ponder by thy self what thy neighbor would
feign have, and be discrete in every point. Eat the thing that is set before
thee manerly as it becomes a man, and eat not to much lest thou be abhorred.
Leave thou of first of all because of nurtour, lest thou be he whom no man may
satisfy, which may turn to thy decay. When thou sit among many men,
reach not thine hand out first of all.

Ecclesiasticus 32. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
Thou young man speak that becomes thee, and that is profitable, and yet
scarce when thou art twice asked, comprehend much with few words, in many
things be as one that is ignorant, give ear and hold thy tongue withal. If
thou be among men of higher authority, desire not to compare thy self unto
them: and when an elder speaks, make not thou many words therein. Stand up
betimes, and be not the last, but get thee home soon, and there take thy
pastime, and do what thou will, so thou do none evil and defy no man, but
for all things give thanks unto him that have made thee, and replenished thee
with his goods.

Ecclesiasticus 41. 19.
Be ashamed to lie with thine elbowes upon the bread.

Ecclesiasticus 42. 8.
Be shamefast and well manered in deed, so shall every man favor thee.

Merchant.
Ecclesiasticus 27. 2.
THere be two manner of things, which Ecclesiasticus 26. 30.
me think to be hard and perellous. A merchant cannot lightly keep him from
wrong, neither a Tauerner him self from sin.

Like as a nail in the wall sticks fast between two stones, even so does
sin stick betwixt the byer and the seller.

Measure and weight.
Pro. 16. 11.
A True measure and a true balance are the Lords judgment: he makes all
weights.

Pro. 20. 10.
To use two manner of weightes or two manner of measures, both these are
abominable unto the Lord.

Pro. 20. 14.
It is naught, it is naught (says he that byeth any thing) but when he
comes to his own house then he boasts of his penyworth.

Pro. 20. 23.
The Lord abhors two manner of weightes, and a false balance is an evil
thing.

Mercy.
Pro. 3. 3. 4.
LEt mercy and faythfulnesse never go from thee: bind them about thy neck,
and write them in the tables of thine heart. So shall thou find favor and
good understanding in the sight of God and men.

Pro. 11. 17.
He that is merciful does him self a benefit, but whosoever hurts his
neighbor is a tyrant.

Pro. 14. 22.
He that puts his trust in the Lord loves to be merciful.

Pro. 21. 21.
Through mercy and faith are sins Prou. 15. 1.
purged: and through the fear of the Lord does every one escape evil.

Whosoever follows righteousness and mercy, finds both life, righteousness and
honor.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 34.
Let not them that weep be without comfort, but mourn with such as mourn. Let
it not grieve thee to visit the sick, for that shall make thee to be beloved.

Ecclesiasticus 18. 12.
The mercy that a man has, reaches to his neighbor, but the mercy of God is
upon all flesh.

Ecclesiasticus 28. 4.
He that shows no mercy to a man that is like him self, how dare he ask
forgeuenes of his sins.

Ecclesiasticus 35. 2.
Whosoever is merciful and gives alms, gives a thankful offering.

Mirth and joy.
Pro. 14. 30.
A Merry heart is the life of the body: but rancour consumes away the bones.

Prou. 15. 13
A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance: but an heavy heart compels a
man to sigh.

Pro. 17. 22.
A merry heart makes a lusty age: but a sorrowful mind dries up the bones.

Pro. 25. 19.
Like as the moth hurts a garment, and a worm a tree: so does the heaviness
of a man hurt the heart.

Ecclesiastes 7. 3.
Gravity is better then to laugh: for when the countenance is heavy, the
heart is reformed.

Ecclesiastes 7. 4.
The heart of the wise is in the mourning house, but the heart of the foolish
is in the house of mirth.

Ecclesiastes 8. 15.
I commend gladness, because a man has no better thing under the sun then to
eat and drink and to be merry: for that shall he have of his labor all the
days of his life, which God gives him under the Sun.

Ecclesiasticus 9. 17.
Let thy mirth be in the fear of God, let the remembrance of God be in thy
mind, and let all thy talking be in the commandments of the highest.

Ecclesiasticus 30. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25.
Give not over thy mind unto heaviness: and vex not thy self in thine own
counsel. The joy and cheerfulness of the heart, is the life of man, and a
man's gladness is the prolonging of his days. Love thine own soul and
comfort thine heart: as for sorrow and heuinesse drive it far from the, for
heuinesse has slain many a man, and brings no profit: zeal and anger
shorten the days of the life: carfulness and sorrow bring age before the
time, unto a merry heart every thing has a good taste that he eats.

Name or fame.
Prou. 10. 7.
THe memorial of the just shall have a good report: but the name of the
ungodly shall stink.

Pro. 15. 30.
Like as the clerenesse of the eyes rejoices the heart, so does a good name
feed the bones.

Ecclesiastes 7. 1.
A good name is more worth then a precious ointment.

Ecclesiasticus 41. 12.
Labor to get thee a good name, for that shall continue surer by thee, then a
thousand great treasures of gold.

Ecclesiasticus 41. 13.
A good life has a number of days, but a good name endures for ever.

Neighbor.
Prou. 3. 29. 30.
INtend no hurt unto thy neighbor, seeing he does dwell in rest by thee,
strive not lightly with any without a cause, where as he has done thee no
harm.

Pro. 20. 23.
Whosoever despises his neighbor does amiss, but blessed is he that has pity on
the poor.

Pro. 20. 24.
The soul of the ungodly wishes evil, and has no pity upon his neighbor.

Pro. 22. 28.
Thou shall not remove the land mark which thy forelders have set.

Pro. 25. 16.
Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of thee and so
abhor thee.

Pro. 25. 17.
Whosoever bears false witness against his neighbor, he is a very clubbe, a
sword, and a sharp arrow.

Ecclesiasticus 4. 23. 24.
Be not ashamed of thy neighbor in his adversity, and keep not back thy
counsel when it may do good.

Ecclesiasticus 6. 1.
Be not thy neighbors enemy for thy friends sake: for whosoever is evil shall
be the heir of rebuke and dishonor, and whosoever bears envy and a double
tongue, offends.

Ecclesiasticus 19. 10.
If thou have heard a word against thy neighbor, let it be dead within thee,
and be sure thou shall have no harm thereby.

Ecclesiasticus 19. 14. 15.
Reprove thy neighbor that he keep his tongue: and if he have spoken that he
say it no more, tell thy neighbor his fault, for often times an offense is made,
and give not credence to every word.

Ecclesiasticus 22. 23.
Be faithful unto thy neighbor in his poverty, that thou may rejoice with
him also in his prosperity.

Ecclesiasticus 28. 2.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done to thee, and so shall thy
sins be forgeuen thee also when thou prayest.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 31.
Rebuke not thy neighbor at the wine, and despise him not in his mirth, give
him no despitefull words, and preasse not upon him with contrary sayings.

Ecclesiasticus 34. 23.
Whosoever robs his neighbor of his living, does as great sin as though he
slew him to death.

Obedience and rule.
Prou. 29. 2.
WHen the righteous have the over hand, the people are in prosperity, but when
the ungodly bears rule, then the people mourn.

Ecclesiastes 8. 2.
I must keep the Kings commandment, and the oath that I have made unto God.

Ecclesiastes 10. 19.
Wish the King no evil in thy thought, and speak no hurt of the rich in thy
privy chamber: for a bird of the air shall betray thy voice, and with her
feathers shall she bewray thy words.

Ecclesiasticus 4. 7.
Humble thy soul unto thy elder, and bow down thy head to a man of worship.

Ecclesiasticus 4. 25.
Withstand not the face of the mighty, and strive thou not against the stream.

Pro. 26. 1.
Like as snow is not meet in Summer, nor rain in harvest, even so is worship
unseemly for a fool.

Patience.
Prou. 14. 11.
THe pacient abiding of the righteous shall be turned to gladness: but the
hope of the ungodly shall perish.

Pro. 14. 29.
He that is pacient has much understanding: but he that is soon displeased,
provoke foolishness.

Pro. 15. 18.
An angry man stirs up strife: but he that is pacient stilleth discord.

Pro. 16. 32.
A pacient man is better then one strong: and he that can rule him self, is
more worth then he that wins a city.

Pro. 19. 11.
A wise man can put of displeasure: and it is his honor to let some faults
pass.

Pro. 25. 14.
With patience is a Prince pacified: and with a soft tongue is rigorousnes
broken.

Poverty.
Prou. 19. 17
HE that has pity upon the poor lends unto the Lord: and look what he
lays out it shall be paid him again.

Pro. 21. 13.
Who so stops his ears at the crying of the poor: he shall cry him self
and not be heard.

Prou. 22. 16
Who so does a poor man wrong to increase his own richesse, and gives unto
the rich to please him, at the last comes to poverty him self.

Pro. 28. 3
One poor man oppressing an other by violence is like a continual rain that
destroys the fruit.

Pro. 28. 6.
A poor man leading a godly life, is better then the rich that goes in
froward ways.

Pro. 28. 27.
He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack: but he that turns away his
eyes from such as be in necessity, shall suffer great poverty him self.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 32.
The poor is honored for his faithfulness: but the rich is had in
reputation because of his goods.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 33.
He that orders him self honestly in poverty, how much more shall he behave
him self honestly in richesse.

Ecclesiasticus 13. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24.
The wild ass is ye lyo^s pray in ye wilderness, even so are poor men the
meat of the rich. Like as the proud may not away with lowliness, eue^ so do
the rich abhor the poor. If a rich man fall his friends set him up again.
But when the poor falls his acquaintance forsake him. If a rich man fall
into error he has many helpers, he speaks proud words, and yet men
justify him. But if a poor man go wrong he is punished: yea though he speak
wisdom, yet can it have no place. When the rich man speaks, every man
holds his tongue: and look what he says, they praise it unto the clouds.
But if the poor man speak, they say: what fellow is this? and if he do amiss
they shall destroy him.

Ecclesiasticus 21. 5.
The prayer of the poor goes out of the mouth and comes unto the ears of
God, and his defense shall come and that hastly.

Praise.
Prou. 27. 2.
LEt another man praise thee and not thine own mouth: yea other folks lips
and not thine.

Pro. 27. 14.
He that is to hasty to praise his neighbor above measure, shall be taken as
one that gives him an evil report.

Pro. 27. 21.
Silver is tried in the moulde, and gold in the furnace, and so is a man when
he is openly praised to his face.

Prayer.
Ecclesiasticus 18. 21. 22.
Let not to pray always, and stand not in fear to be reformed unto death,
for the reward of God endures for ever. Before thou prayest prepare thy
soul, and be not as one that tempts God. Think upon the wrathful
indignation that shall be at the end, and the hour of vengeance when he shall
turn away his face.

Ecclesiasticus 35. 13. 14. 15. 16.
The Lord hears the prayer of the oppressed. He dispiseth not the desire of
the fatherless, nor the widow, when she powers out her prayer before him.
Does not God see ye tears that run down ye chekes of the widow? or hears
he not her complaint over such as make her to weep? from her cheeks do the
tears go up into heaven, and the Lord which hears them does accept them:
whosoever serves God after his pleasure shall be accepted: and his prayer reaches
unto the clouds. The prayer of him that humbles him self goes through the
clouds.

Priests.
Ecclesiasticus 7. 29. 30. 31.
Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and honor his ministers, love thy maker
with all thy strength, and forsake not his servants: Fear the Lord with all
thy soul, and honor his priests. Give them their portion of the first
fruits and increase of the earth like as it is commanded thee: and reconcile
thy self of thy negligence with the little flock: give them the shoulders, and
their appointed offeringes and firstlinges.

Ecclesiasticus 14. 11.
My son, do good to thy self of that thou have, and give the Lord his due
offeringes.

Ecclesiasticus 35. 8. 9. 10.
Give God his honor with a cheerful heart, and keep not back the
firstlinges of thy hands. In all thy gifts show a merciful countenance, and
hallowe thy tithes unto God with gladness. Give unto God according as he has
enriched and prospered thee. And look what thy hand is able, give with a
cheerful eye: for the Lord recompenceth and gives the seven times as much
again.

Phisician and Phisike.
Ecclesiasticus 38. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Honor the Phisician, honor him because of necessity. God has created him:
(for of the highest comes medecin) and he shall receive gifts of the king.
The wisdom of ye Phisician brings him to great worship, and in the sight
of great men of this world, he shall be honorably taken. The Lord has
created medicine of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor it.

Ecclesiasticus 38. 9. 10.
My son despise not this in thy sickness, but pray unto the Lord, and he
shall make the whole.

Leave of from sin, and order thy hands aright, cleanse thine heart from all
wickedness.

Ecclesiasticus 38. 15.
He that sins before his maker shall fall into the hands of the Phisician.

Pride and lowliness.
Pro. 11. 2.
WHere Pride is there is shame also and confusion: but where as is lowliness
there is wisdom.

Pro. 15. 25.
The Lord will break down the house of the proud, but he shall make fast the
borders of the widow.

Pro. 15. 33.
The fear of the Lord is the right science of wisdom: and lowliness goes
before honor.

Pro. 16. 5.
The Lord abhors all such as be of a proud heart, his hand is against
their hand, and they shall not escape as innocents.

Pro. 16. 18. 19.
Presumpteousnes goes before destruction, and after a proud stomach there
follows a fall. Better it is to be of humble mind with the lowly, then to
divide the spoils with the proud.

Pro. 18. 12.
After pride comes destruction, and honor after lowliness.

Prou. 21. 4.
A presumptuous look, a proud stomach, and the plowing of the ungodly is sin.

Pro. 21. 24.
He that is proud and presumptuous is called a scornful man which in wrath
dare work maliciously.

Prou. 21. 5.
The end of lowliness and the fear of God is richesse, honor, prosperity
and health.

Pro. 28. 25.
He that is of a proud stomach and without fear, stirs up strife: but he
that puts his trust in the Lord shall be well fed.

Pro. 29. 23.
After pride comes a fall, but a lowly spirit brings great worship.

Ecclesiasticus 3. 19.
The greater thou art the more humble thy self in all things, and thou shall
find favor in the sight of God.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 7. Ecclesiasticus 10. 13. 14.
Pride is hateful before God and man.

The beginning of man's pride is to fall away from God, and why? his heart is
gone from his maker, for pride is the original of all sin. Whosoever takes hold
thereof shall be filled with cursinges, and at the last it shall overthrow him.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 15. 16.
God has destroyed ye seats of proud princes, and set up the meek in their
stead. God has withered the roots of the proud heathen, and planted the lowly
among them.

Ecclesiasticus 10. 18.
God has destroyed the name of the proud, and left the name of the humble of
mind.

Richesse.
Prou. 10. 2.
TReasures that are wickedly gotten profit nothing: but righteousness delivers
from death.

Prou. 10. 22
The blessing of the Lord makes rich men: as for careful travail it does
nothing thereto.

Prou. 11. 4.
Richesse help not in the day of vengeance: but righteousness delivers from
death.

Prou. 13. 7.
Some men are rich though they have nothing: some men are poor having great
richesse.

Prou. 11. 28
He that trusts in his richesse shall have a fall: but the righteous shall
flourish as the green leaf.

Pro. 13. 11.
Vaynely gotten goods are soon spent: but they that be gathered together with
the hand shall increase.

Pro. 13. 22.
The richesse of the sinner is laid up for the just.

Pro. 14. 20.
The poor is hated eue^ of his own neighbors: but the rich has many
friends.

Pro. 15. 16.
Better is a little with fear of the Lord, then great treasure with sorrow.

Prou. 16. 8.
Better is it to have a little thing with righteousness, then great rentes
wrongfully gotten.

Prou. 18. 10 11.
The name of the Lord is a strong castle, the righteous flies unto it, and
is in sauegarde: but the rich man's goods are his strong hold: yea he takes
them, for an high wall round about him.

Prou. 19. 4.
Riches make many friends: but the poor is forsaken of his neighbor.

Prou. 21. 6.
Who so hordeth up riches with ye deceitfulnes of his tongue, he is vain and a
fool, and like unto them that seek their own death.

Prou. 23. 4. 5.
Take not over great travail and labor to be rich, beware of such a purpose.
Why will thou set thine eye upon the things which suddenly vanish away.

Prou. 28. 8.
He that by usury and unjust gains gathers richesse, he shall lay them in
store for a man that will pity the poor.

Pro. 28. 11.
The rich man thinks him self to be wise: but the poor that has
understanding, can perceive him well enough.

Prou. 28. 20.
A man that deals faithfully shall be filled with blessings: and he that
makes to much haste for to be rich shall not be unguilty.

Pro. 28. 22.
He that will be rich all to soon, has an evil eye, and considers not that
poverty shall come upon him.

Ecclesiastes 5. 19.
He that loves money will never be satisfied with money: and who so deliteth
in richesse shall have no profit thereof.

Ecclesiastes 5. 11.
A laboring man sleeps swetely, whether it be little or much that he eats:
but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

Ecclesiastes 5. 12. 13. 14.
Yet is there a sore plage which I have seen under the Sun, (namely) riches
kept to the hurt of him that has them in possession: for often times they
perish with his great misery and trouble, and if he have a child it gets
nothing. Like as he came naked out of his mothers womb so goes he thither
again: and carries nothing away with him of all his labor. This is a
miserable plage that he shall go away even as he came.

Ecclesiastes 5. 18.
Unto whom so ever God gives riches, goods, and power, he gives it him to
enjoy it, to take it for his portion, and to be refreshed of his labor: this
is the gift of God.

Ecclesiasticus 5. 1.
Trust not unto thy richesse, and say not, tush I have enough for my life, for
it shall not help thee in the time of vengeance and temptation.

Ecclesiasticus 5. 8.
Trust not in wicked riches, for they shall not help in the day of punishment
and wrath.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 1. 2.
Travail and carfulness for richesse, take away the sleep, and makes the
flesh to consume. When one lies and takes care he awaketh ever up, like as
a great sickness breaks the sleep.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 3.
The rich has great labor in gathering his richesse together, and then with
the pleasure of his richesse he takes his rest and is refreshed.

Servant.
Prou. 17. 2.
A Discrete servant shall have more rule then the sons that have no wisdom,
and shall have like heritage with the brethren.

Pro. 27. 18.
Whosoever keeps his fig tree shall enjoy the fruits thereof: even so he that
waits upon his master shall come to honor.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 20.
Whereas thy servant works truly, entreat him not evil, nor the hireling
that is faithful unto thee.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 21.
Love a discrete servant as thine own soul: defraude him not of his
liberty, neither leave him a poor man.

Ecclesiasticus 33. 23. 24. 25. ad finem cap.
The fodder, the whippe, and the burden belongs unto the Ass: Meat,
correction, and work, unto thy servant. If thou set thy servant to labor
thou shall find rest: but if thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty.
The yoke and the whip boweth down the hard neck, but tame thou thy evil
servant with bonds and correction, send him to labor that he go not idle,
for idleness brings much evil. Set him to work, for that belongs unto
him, and becomes him well. If he be not obedient, bind his feet: but do
not to much unto him in any wise, and without discretion do nothing. If thou
have a faithful servant, let him be unto thee as thine own soul: entreat
him as a brother, for in blood have thou gotten him. If thou have a servant
hold him as thy self, If thou entreat him evil and keep him hard, and
make him to be proud and to run away from thee, thou can not tell what
way thou shall seek him.

Ecclesiasticus 34. 23.
He that defraudeth the labourer of his hyre is a blood shedder.

Shame, whereof we ought to be ashamed and whereof not.
Ecclesiasticus 41. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.
BE ashamed of whoredom before father and Mother. Be ashamed of leasing before
the Prince and men of authority: Of lying before the judge and ruler: Of
offense before the congregation and people: Of unrighteousness before a
companion and friend. Of theft before thy neighbors. Be ashamed to lie with
thine elbowes upon the bread: Be ashamed to look upon harlottes: Be ashamed
to turn away thy face from thy friends: Be ashamed to take and not to give: Be
ashamed also to look upon another man's wife, and to make any trifling words
with her maiden, or to stand by her bedside: Be ashamed to vpbraide thy friend
when thou geuest any thing, cast him not in the teeth withal.

Ecclesiasticus 42. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8
Of these things be not ashamed. Of the law of God: Of the covenant of
judgment: To bring the ungodly from his ungodliness unto righteousness: and to
make him a good man: To deal faithfully with thy neighbor and companion: To
distribute the heritage unto thy friends: To be dilligent to keep true measure
and weight: To be content whether thou gettest much or little: To deal truly
with temporal goods in bying and selling: To bring up thy children with
diligence: To correct an evil servant: To keep that thine is from an evil
wife: To set a lock where many hands are: what thou deliuerest and geuest out
to be kept, to tell it and to wey it: To write up all thy out giving and
receiving: To enfourme the unlearned and unwise: Of the aged that are judged of
the young: if thou be diligent in these things, truly thou shall be learned
and wise and accepted of all men.

Son, and the duty of children tovvard their parents.
Pro. 1. 8. 9.
MY son hear thy fathers doctrine, and forsake not the law of thy mother:
for that shall bring grace unto thy head, and shall be as a chain about thine
neck.

Prou. 6. 20. 21. 22.
My son keep thy fathers commandment, and forsake not the law of thy
mother: put them up together in thine heart, and bind them about thy neck:
that they may lead thee where thou go, preserve thee when thou art a
sleep, and that when thou awakest thou may talk of them.

Prou. 10. ^
A wise son makes a glad father: but an indiscreet son is an heaviness
unto his mother.

Prou. 13. 1.
A wise son will harken to his fathers warning: but he that is scornful will
not hear when he is reproved.

Pro. 14. 35.
A deceitful son shall have no good: but a discrete servant shall do full
well, and his way shall prosper.

Prou. 17. 6.
Childers children are worship unto the elders: and the fathers are the honor
of the children.

Pro. 17. 25.
An indiscreet son is a grief unto his father, and an heaviness unto his
mother.

Pro. 19. 26.
He that hurts his father or shuts out his mother, is a shameful and an
unworthy son.

Pro. 20. 11.
A child is known by his conversation whether his works be pure and right.

Pro. 20. 20.
Whosoever curses his father and mother, his light shall be put out in the midst
of darkness.

Pro. 23. 22.
Give ear unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when
she is old.

Pro. 23. 25.
Do so that thy father and mother may be glad of thee, and that she that bare
thee may rejoice.

Pro. 28. 24.
Whosoever robs his father and mother, and says it is no sin: the same is
like unto a destroyer.

Prou. 29. 3.
Whosoever loves wisdom makes his father a glad man: but he that keeps company
with harlots, spends away that he has.

Pro. 30. 17.
Whosoever laugheth his father to scorn, and sets his mothers commandment at
naught, the ravens pick out his eyes in ye valley, and devoured be he of the
young egles.

Ecclesiasticus 3. 3. 4. 5 6. 7.
The Lord will have the father honored of the children: and look what a mother
commands her children to do he will have it kept. Whosoever honors his
father, his sins shall be forgeuen him, and he that honors his mother is
like one that gathers treasure together. Whosoever honors his father shall
have joy of his own children, and when he makes his prayer he shall be heard.
He that honors his father shall have a long life, and he that is obedient
for the Lords sake his mother shall have joy of him.

Ecclesiasticus 3. 9.
Honor thy father in deed, in word, and in all patience, that thou may have
Gods blessing, and his blessing shall abide with thee at the last.

Ecclesiasticus 3. 10.
The blessing of the father builds up the houses of the children: but the
mothers curse rooteth out the foundations.

Ecclesiasticus 3. 11. 12 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
Rejoice not when thy father is reproved, for it is not honor unto thee but
shame. for the worship of a man's father is his own worship, and where the
father is without honor, it is the dishonesty of the son. My son make much
of thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he lives, and if his
understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him not in thy
strength, for the good deed that thou show unto thy father, shall not be
forgotten, and when thou thy self want, it shall be rewarded thee, and for
thy mothers offense, thou shall be recompensed with good, yea it shall be found
for thee in righteousness, and in the day of trouble thou shall be remembered:
thy sins also shall melt away, like as the yse in the fair warm wether. He
that forsakes his father shall come to shame: and he that defieth his mother
is cursed of God.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 27. 28.
Honor thy father from thy whole heart: and forget not the sorrowful travel
that thy mother had with thee: remember that thou wast borne through them, and
how can thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee.

Sclaunder.
Ecclesiasticus 5. 15.
BE not a privy accuser as long as thou live, and use no sclaunder with thy
tongue, for shame and sorrow goes over the thief, and an evil name over him
that is double tonged: but he that is a privy accuser of other me^ shall be
hated, envied and co^fou^ded.

Ecclesiasticus 27. 16.
A privy accuser of other men shall defile his own soul, and be hated of
every man: but he that keeps his tongue and is discrete shall come to honor.

Ecclesiasticus 28. 13.
The sclaunderer and double tonged is cursed, for many one that be friends
sets he at variance.

Prou. 18. 8.
The words of a sclaunderer are very wounds, and go through the innermost
parts of the body.

Sluggishnes and idleness.
Pro. 6. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
Go to the Emmet (thou sluggard) consider her ways and learn to be wise. She
has no guide nor ouerseer, nor ruler: yet in the summer she provides her
meat, and gathers her food together in the harvest. How long will thou
sleep, thou sluggish man? When will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yea sleep
on still a little, slumber a little, foulde thy hands together yet a little, that
thou may sleep: so shall poverty come unto thee as one that trauaileth by
the way, and necessity like a weaponed man. But if thou be not slothful, thy
harvest shall come as a springing well, and poverty shall fly from thee.

Prou. 10. 4.
An idle hand makes poor: but a quick laboring hand makes rich.

Prou. 10. 5.
Who so gathers in Summer is wise: but he that is sluggish in harnest,
brings him self to confusion.

Prou. 12. 9.
A simple man which labors and works, is better the^ one that is gorgeous
and lacks bread.

Pro. 12. 11.
He that tilleth his land, shall have plenteousnesse of bread: but he that
follows idleness is a very fool.

Pro. 12. 24.
A diligent hand shall bear rule: but the idle shall be under tribute.

Prou. 13. 4.
The slogarde would feign have, and cannot get his desire: but the soul of the
diligent shall have plenty.

Prou. 18. 9.
Who so is slothful and slack in his labor, is the brother of him that is a
waster.

Pro. 19. 24.
A slothful man shuts his hands in to his bosom, as in to the pot: and
will not take pain to put it to his mouth.

Prou. 20. 4.
A slouthful body will not go to plow for could of winter: therefore shall he
go a begging in Summer, and have nothing.

Pro. 20. 12.
The ear to hear, the eye to see, the Lord has made them both: delight not
thou in sleep, lest thou come unto poverty: but open thine eyes that thou
may have bred enough.

Pro. 26. 14.
Like as the door turns about upon the henges, eue^ so does the slothful
welter him self in his bed.

Pro. 26. 15.
The slothful body thrusts his hand in to his bosom, and it greueth him
to put it again to his mouth.

Pro. 26. 16.
The slogarde thingeth him self wiser then seven men that sit and teach.

Pro. 28. 19.
He that tilleth his land shall have plenteousnes of bread: but he that
follows idleness shall have poverty enough.

Ecclesiastes 10. 17.
Through slothfulness the balkes fall down, and through idle hands it raineth
in at the house.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 22.
In all thy works be diligent and quick so shall there no sickness happen unto
thee.

Strife or discord.
Prou. 17. 1.
BEtter is a dry morsel with quietness, then a house full of fatt offering
with strife.

Pro. 22. 10.
Cast out the scornful man, and so shall strife go out with him: yea
variance and sclaunder shall cease.

Pro. 26. 20.
Where no wood is there the fire goes out: even so where the tale betrayer is
taken away, there the strife cease.

Pro. 26. 21.
Coals kindle heat, and wood the fire: even so does a brawling fellow stir
up varia^ce.

Pro. 26. 22.
A tale bearers words are like men that strike with hammers, but they pearce
the inward parts of the body.

Pro. 20. 3.
It is a man's honor to keep him self from strife: but they that have
pleasure in brauling are fools every one.

Ecclesiasticus 8. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Strive not with a mighty man lest thou chance to fall into his hands. Make
not variance with a rich man, lest he happen to bring up an hard quarrel
against thee. Strive not with a man that is full of words: and lay no sticks
upon his fire. Strive not with him that is angry and cruel, and go not with
him in to wilderness: for blood is nothing in his sight, and where there is
no help he shall murder thee.

Suertishippe.
Pro. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
IF thou be suertie for thy neighbor and haste fastened thine hand for an
other man, thou art bound with thine own words, and taken with thine own
speech. Therefore my son do this and thou shall be discharged: when thou art
come into thy neighbors danger, go thy ways then soon, humble thy self,
and with thy friends entreat thy creditour, let not thine eyes sleep, nor
thine eye liddes slumber. Save thy self as a Do from the hand of the hunter,
and as a bird from the hand of the fouler.

Pro. 11. 15.
He that is suerty for a stranger, hurts him self: and he that medleth not
with suertiship is sure.

Pro. 17. 18.
Whosoever promises by the hand and is suertie for his neighbor, he is a fool.

Pro. 20. 16.
Take his garment that is suertie for a stranger: and take a pledge of him for
the unknown man's sake.

Pro. 22. 26.
Be not thou one of them yt bind their hand upon promise, and are suerty for
weighty causes: for if thou have nothing to pay, they shall take away thy bed
from under thee.

Ecclesiasticus 8. 12.
Lend not unto him that is mightier then thy self: If thou lendest him count
it but lost. Be not fuertie above thy power: if thou be, then think surely to
pay it.

Ecclesiasticus 29. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22.
A good honest man is suertie for his neighbor, but a wicked person lets
him come to shame. Forget not the friendship of thy suertie, for he has given
his soul for thee. The ungodly despise the good deed of his suertie, and the
unthankful and ignorant leaves his suertie in danger.

Some man promises for his neighbor, and when he has lost his honesty, he
shall forsake him. Suertiship has destroyed many a rich man, and removed them
as the sea. Mighty people has it driven away, and caused them to wander in
straung cuntries. An ungodly man transgressing the commandment of the Lord,
shall fall into the suertiship: and though he force him self to get out, yet
shall he fall into the judgment. Help thy neighbor out after thy power: and
beware that thou thy self fall not into such debt.

Swearing.
Ecclesiasticus 23. 9. 10 11. 12.
LEt not thy mouth be accustomed with sweari^g, for in it there are many falls.
Let not the naming of God be continually in thy mouth: and meddle not with the
names of Saints, for thou shall not be excused of them: for like as a servant
which is often punished can not be without some sore, even so what soever he be
that swears and names God, shall not be clean purged from sin. A man that
uses much swearing shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague shall
never go from his house. If he begyle his brother, his faith shall be upon him:
If he knowledge not his sin, he makes a double offense, and if he swear in
vain he shall not be found righteous, for his house shall be full of plagues.
The words of the swearer brings death.

Time.
Ecclesiastes 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
EVery thing has a time: yea all that is under the heaven has his convenient
season. There is a time to be born and a time to die. There is a time to plant,
and a time to pluck up the thing that is planted. A time to slay, a time to
make hole. A time to break down, and a time to build up. A time to weep, and a
time to laugh. A time to mourn, and a time to dance. A time to cast away
stones, and a time to gather stones together. A time to embrace, and a time to
refrain from embracing. A time to win, and a time to lose. A time to spare,
and a time to spend. A time to cut in pieces, and a time to sow together. A
time to keep silence, and a time to speak. A time to love, and a time to
hate. A time of war, and a time of peace.

Ecclesiastes 7. 10.
Say not thou: What is the cause that the days of the old time were better
then they be now? for that were no wise question.

Truth and lying.
Pro. 12. 17.
A Just man will tell the truth, and show the thing that is right: but a false
witness deceaueth.

Pro. 12. 22.
The Lord abhors lying lips: but they that labor for truth please him.

Ecclesiasticus 4. 20.
My son, make much of the time, eschew the thing that is evil, and for thy
life shame not to say the truth.

Ecclesiasticus 4. 25.
In no wise speak against the word of truth: but be ashamed of the lies of
thine own ignorance.

Ecclesiasticus 20. 23. 24. 25.
A lie is a wicked shame in a man, yet shall it be ever in the mouth of the
unwise. A thief is better then a man that is accustomed to lie: but they both
shall have destruction to heritage. The conditions of liars are dishonest, and
their shame is ever with them.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 12. 13
Accept not leasing against thy brother, neither do the same against thy
friend: Use not to make any manner of lie, for the custom thereof is not good.

Ecclesiasticus 40. 12.
All brybes and unrighteousness shall be put away, but faithfulness and truth
shall endure for ever.

Vanity of the world.
Ecclesiastes 1. 2.
ALl is but most vain vanity (says the preacher) and all is most vain (I
say) and but plain vanity.

Ecclesiastes 2. 1. 2 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
Then said I thus in my heart: Now go to, I will take mine ease, and have good
days. But lo that is vanity also: in so much that I said unto the man given
to laughter, thou art mad: and to mirth, what do thou? So I thought in my
heart to give my self unto wine, and again to apply my mind unto wisdom,
and to comprehend foolishnes, until the time (that among all the things
which are under the Sun) I might see what were best for men to do, so long
as they live under heaven. I made gorgeous fair works. I builded me houses,
and planted vineyardes. I made me orchardes, and gardens of pleasure, and
planted trees in them of all manner fruits. I made pooles of water to water the
grene and fruitful trees withal. I bought servant and maidens, and had a
great household. As for cattle and sheep, I had more substance of them then
all they that were before me in Jerusalem. I gathered silver and gold
together, even a treasure of kings and lands. I provided me singers, and
women which could play on instruments to make men mirth and pastime. I gatte
me psalteries and songs of music. And I was greater and in more worship,
then all my predecessors in Jerusalem. For wisdom remained with one: and
look what soever mine eyes desired, I let them have it: and wherein soever my
heart delited or had any pleasure, I withhelde it not from it: Thus my heart
reioysed in all that I did: and this was my portion of all my travail. But
when I considered all the works that my hands had wrought, and all the labor
that I had taken therein: lo all was but vanity, and vexacion of mind, and
nothing of any value under the Sun.

Ecclesiastes 2. 22. 23. 24
What gets a man of all the labor and travail of his mind, that he takes
under the Sun, but heaviness, sorrow, and disquietnesse all the days of his
life: in so much that his heart cannot rest in the night, this is also a
vain thing: is it not better then for a man to eat and drink and his soul
to be merry in his labor, yea I saw that this also was a gift of God.

Wis. 13. 1.
Vain are all men which have not the knowledge of God.

Wife, good.
Pro. 5. 18. 19.
BE glad with the wife of thy youth, let her breasts always satisfy thee and
hold thee ever content with her love.

Pro. 11. 16.
A gracious woman mainteineth honesty, as for the wicked they maintain riches.

Prou. 12. 4.
A housewifely woman is a crown unto her husband, but she that behaueth he
self unhonestly, is a corruption in his bones.

Pro. 14. 1.
Wise women uphold their house: but a foolish wife plucketh it down.

Prou. 18. 22
Who so finds a good wife, finds a good thing: and receaueth a wholesome
benefit of the Lord.

Pro. 18. 22.
He that puts away a good woman, puts away a good thing: but he that
keeps an harlot is a fool and unwise.

Prou. 19. 14
House and riches may a man have by the heritage of his elders: but a discrete
woman is the gift of the Lord.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 19.
Depart not from a discrete and good woman that is fallen unto thee for thy
portion in the fear of the Lord: for the gift of her honesty is above gold.

Ecclesiasticus 7. 26.
If thou have a wife after thine own mind, forsake her not, but commit not
thy self to the hateful.

Ecclesiasticus 26. 1. vsque ad 19.
Happy is the man that has a virtuous wife, for the number of his years
shall be double. An honest woman makes her husband a joyful man, and she
shall fill the years of his life in peace. A verteous woman is a noble gift,
which shall be given for a good portion unto such as fear God. Whether a man
be rich or poor, he may have ever a merry heart, and a cheerful
countenance. A loving wife reioyseth her husband, and feeds his bones with
her wisdom. A woman of few words is a gift of God, and to all well
murtered minds may nothing be compared. An honest and manerly woman is a gift
above other gifts, like as the Sun when it arises is an ornament in the
high heaven of the Lord, so is a verteous wife the beauty of all her house.
Like as the clear light is upon the holy candelsticke, so is the beauty of the
face, upon an honest body. Like as the golden pillars are upon the socketh of
silver: so are the fair legs upon a woman that has a constant mind.
Perpetual are the foundacions that be laid upon an hole stony rock: so are
the commandments of God, upon the heart of an holy woman.

Ecclesiasticus 36. 22. 23. 24.
A fair wife rejoices her husband, and a man loves nothing better: if she
be loving and verteous with all, then is not her husband like other men. He
that has gotten a virtuous woman has a goodly possession: she is unto him a
help, a pillar where upon he rests.

Wife, evil.
Pro. 19. 13.
A Brawling wife is like the top of an house where through it is ever
dropping.

Pro. 20. 13.
It is better to dwell in a corner under the house top, then with a brawling
woman in a wide house.

Pro. 21. 19.
It is better to dwell in wilderness, then with a chiding and an angry woman.

Ecclesiasticus 9. 4.
Use not the company of a woman, that is a player and a dauncer, and hear her
not, lest thou perish through her entysing.

Ecclesiasticus 25. 15. vsque ad finem.
All punishment and plage is nothing in comparison of the plage of the heart,
even so all wickedness, is nothing to the wickedness of a woman. There is not a
more wicked head then the head of a serpent: and there is no wrath above the
wrath of a woman. I will rather dwell with a lion and a dragon, then to keep
house with a wicked wife. The wickedness of a woman changes her face, she
shall muflle her countenance as it were a bear, and as a sack shall she show
it among the neighbors. Her husband is brought to shame among his neighbors,
and when he hears it, it makes him to sigh. All wickedness is but little to
the wickedness of a woman, the portion of the ungodly shall fall upon her.
Like as to clime up a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, even so is a wife
full of words to a still quiet man. If a woman get the mastery, then is she
contrary to her husband. A wicked wife makes a sorry heart, an heavy
countenance, and a dead wound. Weak hands and feeble knees is a woman that
her husband is not the better for. Of the woman came the beginning of sin,
and through her we all are dead. Give thy water no passage, no not a little,
neither give a wicked woman her will. If she walk not after thy hand, she
shall confound thee in the sight of thine enemies. Cut her of from thy flesh
that she do not always abuse thee.

Wine.
Pro. 23. 29.
Whosoever has pleasure to continue at the wine, leaves dishonesty in his own
dwelling.

Prou. 20. 1.
Wine makes a man to be scornful, and strong drink causes a man to be
unquiet: whosoever deliteth therein shall never be wise.

Pro. 23. 29. 30.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has strife? who has brauling? and who has
wounds without cause? or who has red eyes? even they that be ever at the
wine and seek excess.

Pro. 23. 31.
Look not thou upon the wine how red it is, and what a color it gives in
the glass. It goes down softly, but at the last it biteth like a serpent,
and stingeth as an adder.

Prou. 31. 6.
Give strong drink unto such as are condemned to death, and wine unto those
that mourn: that they may drink it and forget their misery and adversity.

Ecclesiasticus 31. 27. 28. 29.
Wine soberly drunken quickens the life of man. If thou drinkest it
measurably, thou shall be temperate. What life is it that may continue without
wine? What takes away life? even death. Wine was made from the beginning to
make him glad, and not for drunkenness. Wine measurably dru^ken, is a rejoicing
of the soul and body: but if it be drunken with excess, it makes bitterness
and sorrow unto the mind.

Ecclesiasticus 40. 20.
Wine and Music rejoice the heart.

Wisdom, whereof you may read at large 1. 2. 4. 8. 9. of Pro.
Prou. 3. 13. 14.
WEll is him that finds wisdom and obtains understanding: for the getting
of it, is better the^ any merchandise of silver, and the profit of it is
better then gold.

Prou. 3. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
Wisdom is more worth then precious stones, and all the things that thou
can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Upon her right hand is long
life, and upon her left hand is richesse and honor. Her ways are pleasant
ways, and all her paths are peaceable. She is a tree of life to them that lay
hold upon her, and blessed is he that keeps her fast. With wisdom has
the Lord laid the foundation of the earth, and through understanding has he
stablished the heavens. Through his wisdom the depthes break up, and the
clouds drop down the dew.

Prou. 4. 7.
The chief point of wisdom is, that thou be willing to obtain wisdom, and
before all thy goods to get thee understanding.

Pro. 16. 16.
To have wisdom in possession, is better then to have gold: and to get
understanding, is rather to be chosen then to have silver.

Wis. 6. 1.
Wisdom is better then strength, and a man of understanding is more worth then
one that is strong.

Wis. 7. 28. 29.
God loves no man but him in whom wisdom dwells, for she is more bewtiful
then the Sun, and gives more light then the stars, and the day is not to
be compared unto her, for upon the day comes night, but wickedness can not
overcome wisdom, and foolishness may not be with her.

Ecclesiasticus 1. 1.
All wisdom comes of God the Lord, and has been ever with him and is before
all time.

Wrath or anger
Pro. 12. 16.
A Fool utters his wrath in all the have: but a discret man covers wrong.

Pro. 27. 3.
The stone is heavy, and the sand weighty: but a fools wrath is heavier then
them both.

Pro. 27. 4.
Wrath is a cruel thing, and furiousnes is a very tempest: but who is able to
abide envy.

Ecclesiasticus 28. 1.
He that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance of the Lord, which shall
surely keep him his sins.

Ecclesiasticus 28. 10.
An angry man kindles variaunce, and the ungodly disquiet friends, and
puts discord among them that be at peace. The more wood there is, the more
vehement is the fire: and the mightier that men be, the greater is the wrath,
and the longer the strife endures, the more it burns. An hasty brauling
kindles a fire, and hasty strife sheddeth blood.

Witness.
Pro. 12. 17.
A Just man will tell the truth, and show the thing that is right: but a false
witness deceives.

Prou 14. 5.
A faithful witness will not dissemble: but a false record will make a lie.

Pro. 14. 25.
A faithful witness delivers souls: but a deceitful witness brings
forth lies.

Prou. 19. 5.
A false witness shall not remain unpunished: and he that speaks lies shall
not escape.

Pro. 21. 28.
A false witness shall perish: but he that is a true man boldly speaks that
he has heard. Be no false witness against thy neighbor, and speak no
falsehood with thy lips.

THE CONCLUSION of the Book.
THis much (gentle reader) had I gathered for mine own instruction, not every
saying that is of importance, for there is none at all in any parcel of the
holy Scripture unfruitful or unnecessary: but those, which in my simple
judgment, seemed most vvaighty and pythy, and usual. And whereas contrary
matters be knit together in one sentence, as pride and lovvlines, health and
sickness, prosperity and adversity, and such others, (which oftentimes
falls out as by reading every man may observe) I have likewise placed them
together, that the one by the other might the better be perceived. For such is
the nature of contraries, (as Aristotle witnesses) that, Inuicem opposita
magis elucescunt. And this my labor I trust every well disposed person will
take in good part: seeing that I have set it forth for none other intent, then
as well as I might to make others partakers of my commodity. And to let the
ignorant plainly understand, that the Scripture it self being diligently
vveyed, may give knowledge sufficient, even in vvorldly affairs. And I would
to God, that all our dealinges were measured by this rule, then should not
Christians be found so unfaithful, yea faithless in dealing with their
brethren. Which fault now a days, even in this our country of England is to
to notorious. Yea Fides, after Tullies definition, that is, Dictorum
factorumque constantia and veritas, is Rara auis in (England) nigroque similima
cigno. Yea truly in this fault, we be much worse then our forefathers, who
though they lived in a time of ignorance, and knevv not the will of God openly
by his word, yet shevved in dealing one with an other, better understanding
and obedience then we do. But God of his mercy who now tells us our
duties, every way, and every where in plain english, will (I trust)
lighten our hearts, and give us grace to show forth the same in works,
which we profess in words, or else no doubt our condemnation shall be the
greater, nay our forefathers shall rise to condemn us. God grant us all of his
heavenly wisdoms. And as thorovv wisdoms, Prou. 8. 15. 16. 17.
Kings do reign, and Princes make just laws, and Lords bear rule, and
judges of the earth execute judgment: So (God grant) that our Soueraign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, thorovv wisdoms may long reign and make good laws. That
her Lords and Counsel thorovv wisdoms may bear rule, and all Judges of
England thorovv wisdoms may execute true judgment, Amen.

A TABLE OF THE COMMON PLACES.
A
Adversity and Prosperity. page 1. Aduoutrie and Fornication. page 2. Age.
page 4. Alms. page 5. Ambition. page 7.
B
Battle. Ibidem Beauty. page 8. Boasting and Presumption. page 9.
C
City. Ibidem. Company. page 10. Communication or talk. page 11. Constancy.
page 13. Correction. Ibidem Countenance. page 15 Counsel and Counsaylers.
Ibidem Covetousness. Look more in Liberality. page 18. Curiosity. page 19.
D
Daughter. Ibidem Death. page 21. Delicate living. pa. 23. Diet. Ibidem
Dissembling. page 24. Doings of men. Look Good men. page 25. Dreams. page 27.
Drunkenness. Look more in wine. page 28.
E
Enemy. Look more in Love and evil will. Ibidem
F
Father and mother. page 29. Fear of the Lord. page 31. Folly. page 33.
Fortune, commonly called in deed nothing else but the providence of God. pa. 35
Friendship. page 37.
G
Gifts or rewards. page 39. God. page 40. Good men and evil. page 43.
H.
Health and Sickness. page 45. House and Husbandry page 46. Housevvife. page
47.
I
Judge and Judgment. page 48.
K
Knowledge and Learning. page 52. King or Prince. page 53
L
Labor. Look more in Slothfulness. page 56. Law of God and man. page 57.
Lending and borovving. page 58. Liberality. page 60. Love and evil will.
Ibidem Living. page 62.
M
Manners. page 64. Merchant. page 66. Measure and vvayght. Ibidem Mercy. Ibidem
Mirth and joy. page 68.
N
Name or fame. pa. 69. Neighbor. page 70.
O
Obedience and rule. page 71.
P
Patience. page 72. Poverty. page 73. Praise. page 74. Prayer. page 75.
Priests. Ibidem. Phisician and Physic. page 76. Pride and Lowliness. page
77.
R
Richesse. page 79.
S
Servant. page 82. Shame, whereof we ought to be ashamed, and where of not.
page 84. Son, and the duty of children toward the parents. page 85.
Sclaunder. page 89. Sluggishnesse and Idleness. Ibidem. Strife or discord. pa.
91 Suertiship. page 92. Swearing. page 94.
T
Time. page 95. Truth and lying. pa. 96
V
Vanity of the world. page 97.
VV
Wife good. page 99. Wife evil. page 101. Wine. page 102. Wisdoms. page
104. Wrath or anger. page 105. Witness. page 106.
printer's device of Thomas Vautrollier, featuring a woman's head with
cornucopias (McKerrow 179) T. V.




