Hebdomada Sacra: A WEEKS DEVOTION: OR, SEVEN POETICAL MEDITATIONS, UPON THE
SECOND Chapter of St. Matthewes Gospel. Written, by ROGER COCKS.

Woodcut printer's device, featuring a bearded face (not in McKerrow).

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at
his shop in St. Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Tigers head. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, LORD Strange.
POetry (noble Lord) in these loose times,
Wherein men rather love, then loath their crimes,
If hand in hand with piety she go,
(Though without blushing she her face may show)
Finds but cold welcome, such things only take,
As flatter greatness, or fond fancy make
A baud to base delight: yet grauer eyes
No sacred lines (though rudely drawn) despise,
And such are yours: upon this work of mine
Vouchsafe to let them fall, or rather shine,
With kind acceptance do but daine to grace it,
And envy shall want power to deface it.
To the Reader.
REader my fortunes are so meanly friended,
I come into thy presence vncommended:
Nor would I have thee for Encomiums look,
Or frontispeece, far better then the book,
My vein is not so high, to be commended,
Nor yet so low, but it may be defended,
By one sole Patron: Some that carpe will gather,
This is no Poem, but a Sermon rather,
But let them know who thus severely note it,
No professed Poet, but a Preacher wrote it.
A WEEKS DEVOTION.
Sundaies Meditation, or the first Canto for the first day.
The Argument.
Christ's obscure Birth described, the Place,
To which he did vouchsafe such Grace.
The Time when he was borne is named:
The Jew for unbelief is blamed.
WHen Caesar famous for his Gallian war,
Had ended that unnatural civil jarre,
Twixt him and Pompey, and by his defeat,
Got him a greater name the^ that of great,
Perpetual Dictator, Envy rose
To join with coward Murder, and depose
Virtue from bearing rule, the Senate made
A bloody shambles, and a covert shade.
For horrid treason, was the fatal place,
Where his black tragedy was wrought, in base
Unmanly manner, falling by the hand,
Of an unthankful Brutus: the command,
Of Romes fair Empire then in three did lie,
Augustus, Lepidus, and Anthony:
Lepidus soon gave over, whether in doubt,
Had he held still, he could not long hold out,
Or for some other reason, the other twain,
Shared equally Romes glory, and the gain
Of foreign kingdoms, till at length there past,
(For great men's freindship does not always last)
Unkindness twixt them, Anthony had wed
Augustus Sister, but forsook her bed,
For Aegypts Cleopatra, This gave fire
To new dissension, his unjust desire
Must be made good by Arms, for gentle words
Turn him to fury, our impartial Swords
Shall soon decide this difference said he,
And soon they did indeed, fate did agree
To second his proud saying, for his forces,
Broke by Augustus powers, he life divorces,
From her weak hold, and being thus overcome,
Caesar went back triumphant unto Rome.
Augustus now having sole rule, soon brought
His Provinces in awe, all humbly sought
To have his friendship, some few* did rebel,
But with undaunted courage he did quell
Their vain attempts, and to his fames increase,
Established through the world a welcome peace.
While Ianus Temple was shut up and war,
Chased back to Plutoes kingdom, while no jar
Kept out soule-ioyning concord, whose sweet art
Did Spears to Mattockes, Swords to Plowes convert,
While Noah's Dove brought in her mouth (the Mark
Of general peace) and Olive Branch toth' Arc,
Christ the celestial Solomon was borne,
That King of peace, whose Amalthaean horn,
Powered peace and plenty on us; so they say,
That when the Eagle flies abroad to prey,
The prattling birds are silent, should not then
Wars tongue be silent, when the best of men
Like to a Royal Eagle from his nest,
Came from the Virgins womb in manhood dressed.
When Halcyons build their nest, and breed their young,
The Seas are quiet, the wind finds no tongue,
'Twas fit the world should have the like behavior,
When the pure Virgin did bring forth our Savior.
Philosophers observe the dewes descent,
Is in a clear night, when the wind is pent Aristotle.

In Aeols prison: and the Prophet told
Christ should come down like dew, and such, behold,
Was his sweet entrance, never was the earth
So much refresht by dew, as by his birth,
Fit was it then for wars loud noise to cease,
That this dew might come in a calm of peace.
If in two Kingdoms, suppose Spain and France,
Which long in hostile manner did advance.
Arms against arms, one Kings eldest son
Marries the others daughter, wars are done,
And they which erst contended eagerly,
Now meet in love, and feast in royalty,
So stood the case with us, by fair pretense,
Malicious Satan made man to commence
A war with God, a war that would have wrought
His endless ruin, had not mercy sought
A means to settle peace, the only son
Of the Almighty, when he did put on
That veil of flesh, did by it fast combine
Our humane nature to his own divine,
And made a reconcilement, which no power
Can break or time wear out, though every hour
Satan attempt new practices, and Hell
Spit out her rankest venom, to expel
Man from his Makers favor, but her spite
Falls on her head redoubled, while delight
Crowns our desires, such happy union began
The blessed Messiah make 'twixt God and man.
No sooner had Augustus brought each land Luke 2.

Into subjection, but by his command
A general Tax was laid on every nation,
Judea amongst the rest, by Proclamation,
Each person to his native city went
There to be taxed: O that men were bent
With ready mind, and prompt alacrity,
To yield obedience unto Gods decree,
As well as Caesar's, in the rank of those
Who with submissiue duty did dispose
Their wills to this edict, a blessed pair:
Joseph the just, Mary the chaste and fair,
Both Abraham's issue, both of David's stem,
Came unto David's City, Bethlehem,
There to be taxed, as the Law required,
She being near her time, which soon expired,
While they were there the days accomplished,
That the pure Virgin should be brought to bed,
And yet that phrase is it but improper here,
Because the Inn, though full of guests, yet clear,
Of Grace and goodness, would afford no room,
Where she might child her issue, her ripe womb,
Found, save a stable, no convenient place,
To rest it self, hard hearts whom such a case,
Moved to no pity, here she forth did bring
The Worlds Redeemer, heavens eternal King.
A King, where were the nobles of his Court?
Where all his followers? Where the full resort
Of honorable Matrons? to attend
Upon his mother, was there near a Friend
To give soft music? by whose gentle touch
Her sorrows might be swagde, did all hearts grutch
To lend assistance? at a Princes birth
The voice of joy speaks high, and from the earth,
Unnumbered fires to such perfection grow,
As they would make another heaven below,
Here all was hushed and silent, to his own
Christ came vnentertaind, because unknown.
But why, O Lord, were thou thus poorly borne?
Why did thou make thy self to be a scorn
To after Ages? Was it to conceal
Thy Deity from Satan? or reveal
Thy unexampled goodness unto man?
The like whereof, since time and place began
To circumscribe our actions, was not known,
Nor shall unto succeeding age be shown.
As Isreal's King did once his habit change, 1. King. 22.

When he wagde war against Syria and did range
The field in strange disguise: So Christ our King
Whom an unbounded love from heaven did bring,
To fight against hellish Syrians, and by arms
To give us freedom from death-threatning harms,
Exchanged his habit for bright Majesty,
Clothing himself with base infirmity:
If some great King put on his royal Crown,
And regal ornaments, he may be known,
But if his Kingly dignity he hide
In vile array, he may pass vndiscried.
So had our kingly Savior clothed with light
As with a garment, come at first in sight,
He would have then been known unto his foe,
And none have dared once to exchange a blow
That he might therefore come unto the fight
Unknown, this King of Israel had him dight
In strange array: A Stable was his Throne,
A Cratch his Cradle, His attendance none,
With hunger, thirst, disgrace, and poverty,
Our Savior covered his divinity.
Lo here full low he in a Cratch does lie,
Who sometimes on the winged wind does fly, Esai. 66. 1*

And he whose throne is heaven, whose footstool earth
Has but a sordid Stable at his Birth:
O had not man layne miserably defiled
In sins polluted Stable, this fair Child
Had found a better lodging, but 'twas fit
That he which is our food, the sweetest bit
That ever mortal tasted, should be laid
In a poor Manger, since it may be said,
Men were turned worse then beasts, and therefore they Bernard.

To be refresht as beasts that feed on Hay.
The ancient Prophets had foretold of yore
That Bethlehem was the place whereas ybore,
Should the Messiah been: the learned read
The word to signify the house of bread:
Whether because for fruitefulnesse and food,
It as a storehouse to the country stood,
So amongst the ancient Romans Sicily Horreum Italiae. Tully.

Was sometimes called the barn of Italy:
Or because Christ true heavenly bread indeed,
Whereon our souls, and not our mouths do feed,
Was there brought forth, so fathers moralize, Hierom. Gregory.

Indeed from him all bread that does suffice
Our souls and bodies is derived: he gives
Corporal bread, by which the body lives:
Doctrinall bread he also does afford,
And this we call his holy heavenly Word,
Bread Sacramental, in which we receive
Spiritually the Giver, and conceive
A blessed union made in a strange fashion,
By Faith, and not by transubstantiation:
In fine, celestial bread he does dispose
At his eternal Table, unto those
Which are his Servants whose delicious tasting
Shall give our bodies an immortal lasting.
In Joseph's time the come of Egypt land, Genes. 41.

Was without number, like the Ocean sand,
Bethlem had greater plenty at Christ's Birth,
For here was bread to nourish all the earth,
And of more blessed continuance: those full cares
In Pharaohs country lasted but seven years,
Lean famine then took place: our Bethlehems store
(As inexhausted) lasts for evermore:
There the Egyptians when they wanted Cates,
Were feign to buy them at excessive rates.
Here Bread like to the Prophets Milk and Wine, Esai. 55. 1.

A man may purchase without price or coin:
And therefore as all nations in their need,
To Joseph came for corn, whereon to feed:
So let all people unto Bethlehem haste,
And seek out the true Joseph which is placed
By the celestial Pharaoh over the earth,
To furnish men with corn, against the dearth
Threatening the souls destruction, who will give
If they but ask, enough for them to live
Here, and hereafter, where they shall be fed,
In an eternal house of living bread.
Thrice happy Bethlehem, thou blessed house of bread
On whom the Sun of glory first did spread:
The comfortable beams of his man God
United nature, and there made abode:
But O more happy they, within whose heart
Faith gives him second birth, and will not part
With this blessed store, I would our souls might be
The Bethlehem of his Nativity:
But ere this can be so, we must put on
Mystically such a condition,
As that place had: first Bethlehem did seem
But little in extent, less in esteem,
The least of Iudahs thousands: So must we,
If we expect a blessed renascency Micah. 5. 3.

Of Christ within our souls, or would inherit
The purchase of his all-sufficient merit.
Be mean, and little in our own esteem,
How great, how good soever we may seem:
In others judgment: every Christian knows
That Christ a Lilly is, but such as grows
In the low valley of an humble mind, Cant. 2. 1.

Not on proud mountain tops, and as we find
Floods run not up steep cliffs, but through low grounds
Conueigh their current: So his Grace surrounds
With a sweet stream of goodness, only those,
Which like low bottomes humbly do dispose
Themselves to that blessed moisture, we must then
If we would have our Christ the best of men
Spiritually borne in us, all agree
To be a Bethlehem in humility.
Again we must be storehouses of bread,
To feed the hungry, he that does not spread
A wing of mercy on the poor shall find,
Christ will not house them there, the supple mind
Like pliant wax, loves gentle fire must soften
Ere he imprint his seal, and we must often Eccles. 11. 1.

Cast our bread on the waters, if we look
That he which humane nature on him took,
To save the world, while here we live on earth,
Should have within our hearts a second birth.
Now was the Scepter taken from Iudahs hand,
Nor 'twixt his feet sat he, who did command
The Laws coerciue power: an argument Genesis 49. 10.

The promised Shilo was already sent
Blind Jew, which dazeled with abundant light,
Sit'st like a dull Egyptian, in the night
Of soule-deluding error, could record
Of ancient Prophets, make thee give thy Lord
No better welcome, will thou yet deny
This firm vnquestion'd truth obstinate eye
Shut up in wilful blindness, let the place
Where Christ was borne, the time when, from ye chase
This cloud of darkness, look not still in vain
For thy Messiah, who till all again
Turn into Chaos, shall no more be sent
What time for want of faith thou shall be shent
And sentenced to destruction, if in time,
Thy tears like Jordan wash not out thy crime.
But as when Moses was in Egypt borne, Exodus 2.

He was of his own mother as forlorn
Cast out into the river, and there found
By Pharaohs daughter, who from being dround
Preserved the Infant, and with tender care
Brought up this foundling, as her womb had bare,
That goodly Hebrew: So was Christ bereaved
Of a glad welcome by the Jews, received
By the now happier Gentiles, happier far
Then Abraham's issue, whom so bright a Star
Cannot enlighten, but his word despise,
And against the Sun of glory shut their eyes.
Mondaies Meditation, or the second Canto.
The Argument.
The Magi come out of the East,
Unto Jerusalem, in quest
Of the Messiah, and enquire,
But meet not there their full desire.
BEhold while Gideons fleece, the Juice is dry, Iugd. 6.

His floor (the Gentiles) does it self apply
To drink the heavenly dew: From Hebers land
A country far in the east parts did stand,
But in what place uncertain, whether Persia,
Nearer Chaldea, or the farthest India,
(Each have their several authors) did send forth Primitiae Gentium. Augustine.

These first fruits of the Gentile (whose high worth
Makes them thought kings by some) I dare not say
Only from thence they came, from whence the day
Breaks, and Aurora chases thence black night,
Where Sol first rising shows his glorious light,
And guilds the lofty mountains, whence his beams
Reflect a brightness on the eastern streams.
Whether these wise men came from Abraham's line,
Yet not of Sarahs offspring, some assign
Keturah their grandmother, or begot
By Baalams successor, or it is not
Material to examine, so to lay
For firm position, were to much to say:
Whether they were Magicians as some think,
And such who for deep science chose to link
Their Souls to Satan, or Philosophers
Moral and natural, or Astronomers,
(To which opinion I assent thus far,
Because we find God called them by a star
I list not to examine may't suffice,
They have this only title they were wise.
Wise men indeed, it is true wisdoms lore,
To seek for Christ, and never to give ore
Till we have found him, so did these that came
Out from the East, would we could do the same.
It is a rare thing to be skilled in arts
Abstrusest cunning* and to have all parts
That better humane knowledge, but to know
Christ, is more worth, then all that art can show:
And therefore as when Phoebus 'gins to rise,
The stars ecclipsed luster hidden lies
From eye of mortal; So when as divine
Soule-quickning wisdom, as the Sun does shine,
Each humane science like a petty star,
Must veil unto it: as a ship from far
Spying the Kings ride on the narrow seas,
When she comes near (though little for her ease)
Bends her proud head, and does withouten fail,
In most submissiue manner strike her Sai^e.
See here the (never enough to be admired)
Attractiue power of Christ, by which ensp^rd
To find their Savior out, with joyful hearts
These Magi come from the remotest parts:
The Sun does not exhale more forcibly
The purest vapors up, the Loadstone nigh
The Sympathetique steel, makes it not cling,
More close unto it, then this heavenly King,
(His innate virtue did such love distill)
Made their affections cleave unto his will. 2. King. 10.

That Sheba's Queen drawn by the bare report
Of Salomons fair virtue, left her Court,
For Judah's country may full strange appear,
But see then Solomon a greater here. Luke 11. 31.

More strange to Christ the coming of those wise,
Then hers to Solomon we must agnize:
She was but one alone, they many were,
She but a woman, they men, she came there
Led by the tongue of Fame, but they from far
Were guided by the leading of a star:
She came to one whose riper years did speak
Him grown to man's estate: they to a weak
And tender Infant: She to one that swaid
A royal Scepter; They to one was laid
In a poor Manger; She came but to try
The truth of Fame, and curiously to spy
His state and knowledge, in effect mere vanity:
They to adore their God in his humanity:
In fine we find her coming is expressed
From forth the South: but theirs is from the east.
Like as the Sun when he does first display
His radiant luster, and with lightsome day
Break from the East, and getting in his throne
Fixed in the middle of the heavenly Zone,
Makes his diurnall progress to the West,
And then returns again into the East:
So those wise men do first their journey gin,
From out the East nor did they ever lin;
Till to Jerusalem the West they came,
And fitly may this occidentall name
Be given to it, since the glorious Sun
Of righteousness having his course run,
Did there sit red and bloody, there he died,
Who for the sin of man was crucified,
From thence they Eastward pass, and never cease
Till to their country they come back in peace.
Of all the parts in the worlds continent
The East has aye been held most excellent.
Whether because that fruitful Paradise,
Was planted Eastward or that Sol does rise
There in his glory, or that the day spring
Is made an attribute to heavens great King: Luke 1. 78.

Hence is it that in Churches (when addressed
In Prayer to God) we look unto the East.
Either because the earths most honored part Justin Martyr.

To the Almighties worship we convert:
Or because Paradise, which Eastward stood,
Lost first by Adam's fall, and since made good Greg. Nysse.

By Christ our Savior, we by look desire:
Or cause the Lamb of God, which did expire
Upon the Cross, extended to the West, Damascen.

We to behold him look into the East;
For many causes which might be assigned,
This quarter of the World, the East, we find
In high repute, of which the least in worth
Is not, that such wise men it did bring forth.
Well does the title with the place accord,
Wise from the East, for eastern parts afford
Best intellectuals: so when holy writ
Would Solomon commend for rarest wit,
This Elogie it gives, he did exceed, 1. King. 4. 30.

The best of those, which the East parts did breed:
As if the men which did inhabit there,
Then all the rest of mortals wiser were,
Which commonly is so, either because
Of Phoebus near vicinity, which draws
Gross vapors thence, and by his quickening ray,
Refines the fluent blood, whose pure allay
Gives vigor to the Spirits: So we see
That Plants by Gardners careful industry
Set, that the morning Sun may on them glow,
Do soonest ripe, and to perfection grow:
So natures well red secretaries say,
That in the morn of all times, of the day,
The fairest Pearls are generate, and most bright
Then shines the gold Excelling Chrysolite*
Or happily in wisdom they excel,
Cause our first Parents in the East did dwell,
And might to their Successors, more confined
Some monuments of knowledge leave behind,
How fitly come they from the East, to express
The rising of the Sun of righteousness:
And with the glad report of this bright morrow Bernard.

To chase from humane hearts the night of sorrow,
From thence they come, from whence the day is borne*
And Phoebus hides the blushes of the morn,
That from the place where the day gins to clear, Chrysostom.

Faith the souls daylight also might appear
Where after Adam was create of earth,
Began humane bodies first to have their birth,
After our blessed Saviors Incarnation,
The soul did (...) receive Regeneration,
Where sin and nature first beginning had,
There G(...) and truth arise, where mischief clad
In mercies habit did first ^^ine man
His blessed reparation there began
Indeed 'twas fit that part which did begin
To poison humane nature with foul sin,
Should send forth those that did in Grace excel,
And of a general Antidote foretell.
Within the heart of Iudahs fertile land,
Salem the soiles Metropolis did stand,
Builded by Shem, the Magi to this place,
Arrive, in hope to see their Saviors face;
And where indeed on humane state to ground,
Was the Messiah likelier to be found,
To see the King where could they have opinion,
If not in the chief seat of his Dominion:
To find the heart, they that body the enter,
Seek out the midst, because there lies the Center.
Christ was our head, and where could men expect
Him, but in Shem's fair City, which erect
Above the rest in Judah, did so stand
As does the head the body to command Josephus.

Jerusalem the vision of peace
Imports, as Learned say, stern war did cease,
When Christ was borne, where the^ could make abode
Better then in Jerusalem the God
Of Peace and Mercy? Was not there the Court?
Why should the King be absent? the resort
Of Priests was thither; there the Altar stood,
Why should not Christ the Sacrifice, whose blood
Did expiate our sins, be also there?
There was the Temple, whose fair frame vpreare
Did Solomon the wise, but since despoyld
Herod in greater beauty did rebuild:
Why should not then the Temples God abide
In such a place, so highly beautified?
To question this no more, 'twas Gods behest,
Nor are the greatest places still the best:
Experience tells us, Christ is sometimes found
In a poor smoakie cottage, when the ground
Of goodly Palaces, pau'd with fairest stone,
And Rooms of choicest beauty stand alone
Unvisited by him, he may receive
Birth in a petty cottage, while him reaue
Of life a city does: So was it here,
As plain in sacred Story does appear:
Bethlehem at first into the world him sent,
Jerusalem out of the world him hent,
In The first of these a cradle he did sinde,
But in the last a Grave was him assigned,
Borne, though obscurely borne, at Bethlehem,
And crucified at Jerusalem:
The wise men then at Salem may enquire,
But shall not there find out their Souls desire.
But why, O Lord, since there thou wast not then,
Did thou permit those well devoted men
To wander from their way, and go about,
Protracting time in seeking of thee out:
Did their own error lead them from the way?
And thou in justice suffer them to stray?
Subtracting from them thy stars glorious light, Bernard.

Because they trusted more to humane might,
Then thy assisting power: into my thought
It cannot sink, that ignorance then brought
But their all careful providence, whose hand
Makes all our actions wait on thy command:
Perhaps it was thy will these men should come
First, to Jerusalem, lest they should rome
Uncertainly about, for their records
Of ancient Prophets, kept, could show the Lords
Most certain place of birth and as one says
Inform their knowledge and confirm their Faith: Chrysostom.

Or it may be as Legates thou did send
These Magi unto Salem, to the end
The Jews might their Messiah Birth discern,
And these teach others, while they seek to learn,
Or was it not to stir up Isaacs Line,
To seek their Savior out, when thus combine Chrysostom.

They saw the Gentiles: or as some conclude
To argue them of foul ingratitude,
Who would not their Messiah entertain Augustine.

Whom they saw strangers seek with so much pain?
O let not us like these hard-hearted Jews
Out of a wilful blindness thus refuse
Grace freely offered, let these wiser men
Lead us by their example, how and when
To seek out Christ, but yet take heed their fashion
Be not abused by apish imitation:
As it is by Iesuited Rome, which draws
From hence her pilgrimage to Saints, because
The Magi come to Salem, who indeed
Their action gives no countenance, nor our Creed
Warrant to this device, for but compare
The Romanists with them, and they will share
No correspondencie at all, unless
A kind of poor resemblance they express,
In their long iourneys, and their larger gifts,
They offer at their shrines, impotent shifts
For their gross Idol worship; first we know
The wise men taught by God to Salem go,
He blessed that journey which they had begun,
And sent a Star to lead them to a Sun:
These have no star at all, the heavenly Word,
That light unto our feet, does them afford
No help in all their journey, ne have they
The star of Faith to guide them in the way:
Blind zeal may hale them forward, or perchance
Humane tradition may it self advance
But as a wandering Plannet, no true guide,
Or else the like does unto them betide,
Which does to those, who iourneying in the night
Epsy an Ignis fatuus, whose false light
Leads them ore ditch and hedge, though dirt and mire,
His maine invention is just such a fire,
Deluding those that follow it, let me say
Romes Pilgrims are thus guided in their way:
Again the Magi seek for Christ alone, Mat. 2. 2.

Where Is Judahs King? O show us him or none*
Whereas the Romish Pilgrims Christ forsake,
And for their Savior unto Saints them take:
The wise men came Christ living to behold;
These but dead rotten relics to unfold:
They came to worship God; these idle drones
Come but to worship senseless stocks and stones:
Shall we then say, these imitate the wise?
Alas, I cannot, no we must devise
To follow them a better way then this,
Or find we shall not, cause we seek amiss:
And would ye know, wherein to imitate
These blessed Magi? Let it be in that
Which is praiseworthy, as their care and pain,
To find out Christ, for as the learned saine,
They took their journey when the colder air,
Changed dewes to frosts, when winters silver hair
Stuck full of Snow, and Boreas bitter breath
Blew numbnesse on their limbs: yet did pale death
Stand, as the Angel stood in Balaams way Numb. 22.

With a drawn Sword, their bodies he might stay,
Not their affections, they went forward still,
Choosing to die, rather then want their will,
Like them, so us no rub, no bar should hold
From Iudahs King: As covetous for gold,
Ambitious after honor: So must we
Seek Christ, with fervor and alacrity:
Religion is not bred in sloth and ease,
The sweat of labor, ere she God can please,
Must sit upon her brow: yet see we are
Happy in this, we need not journey far
To find Christ out, our lot so fair does stand,
That we may still keep in our native land,
And meet our wishes, Christ is to be found
Within our Kingdom, in the hallowed ground,
Whereon our Temples stand, each Sacrament,
May every good soul is his continent:
Yet we to find him out (so mean our care)
More slow then Snailes, more lame then Cripples ar^:
O how shall the great care and diligence
Of those, condemn our sloth and negligence?
How should we fear, since in offense we stand
Equal with Judah, Gods all-powerfull hand
Should throw down vengeance on us, and our eyes
^est that fair light which now they do despise.
The country of these Magi was the East,
And commonly men love their own soil best,
Yet ready pressed they in obedience stand,
To leave (as Abraham did) their native land:
When that blessed Maid and Mother lost her son,
At her return from Salem, as undone
Without him (who can have so great a loss
And not go home again by weeping cross?)
She sought him sorrowing amongst her friends and kin, Luke 2.

But could not find him, she might there begin
Her search anew, Christ is not always found
Amongst kindred and acquaintance, if the ground
That gave us birth, will not our Lord receive,
For him we must our native country leave,
Our Friends, our home, and stranger places greet,
Though our own Jthaca be nere so sweet.
Thrice happy is that man, which can with these
Forsake his soil, bannish neglect and ease,
Go from the East of pleasure, till he find
Jerusalem, that is, the peace of mind.
Now had the Magi found this City out,
Where Sion stood, and walking round about,
(Not to suruay the building or behold
The stately Temple, richly decked with gold)
Enquire for Iudahs King, her newborn King,
This seemed to Jsaacs Line an uncouth thing,
They knew the Scepter was from Judah gone,
And Herod who was now their King, was one
Inaugur'd by the Romans, therefore they
Posed by this question, knew not what to say:
But the wise men the more they found them slow,
To answer, were the more inflamed to know:
Tell us we pray (for we desire to learn)
Where lives this Infant King? we can discern
No sign of joy, to make us think him here:
O then where is he? we account not dear
Our travel or expense, so we may gain
The long-wisht sight of Iudahs Sovereign:
That he is borne, we do true tidings bring,
Borne yours, your promised, your expected King,
Borne in your Country, what we speak we know,
What we have seen we willingly will show,
We have his star seen, whose unusual light,
Shone in our eastern climate, and made night
Excel the day in beauty: There Is no cause
You should suspect we come to break your Laws,
Or to invade your Kingdom, for we bring
No armed troops to set upon your King,
We do not come as spies, to understand
The fruitfulness and strength of this your land,
Our travel is not to increase our wealth,
By traffic with you, or by private stealth
To get your treasure, see, we bring great store
Of costly spices, and rich Indian Ore,
Unto this royal Infant to present,
Which with submissiue reverence our intent
Is to lay down before him, and fallow
Our selves before his footestoole, for we know
That more then man is in him, and are come
Thus far to worship him: This is the sum
Of all our wishes, let but your report
Be our direction, to this Princes Court:
This said they ceast, but none can them resolve
In their demand, which does their souls inuolue
With a new cloud of sorrow, in which plight
A while I leave them, till a clearer light
^nfuse more knowledge, time ere long will bring
The devout Magi, to this newborn King.
Tuesdaies Meditation, or the third Canto.
The Argument.
Herod and his the News appalls,
The King in haste a counsel calls:
Next to confer in secret wise,
He with the Magi does devise.
BY this time same having new impt her wings,
Flies from the City to the Court, and brings
News of these men's arrival, and the end
Of their intended journey: to commend
Their diligence Court-Parasites will strive,
Like Ahimaaz and Cushi, who shall thrive ^. Sam. 18.

Best in their expedition: Princes ears
Do like their hands reach far, and tyrants fears
Place Spies in every corner, whose close art
Sliely insinuates into the Heart,
Of the abused Subject, and from thence
Draws danger on his head, under pretense
Of more then common kindness, what he find^
Sincerely spoken from plain meaning minds,
He poisons in report, when he it bears
To his Kings greedy, all-suspecting ears.
After this tatling goddess once had spread
This News abroad* and buz'd into the head
Of fawning Sycophants, a pick-thanke tale,
Look how a ship driven with a fore-right gale
Cuts through the Ocean: they hie fast to court,
And to stern Herod make a loud report.
No sooner had fame touched the tyrants ear,
But that his coward blood gave way to fear,
To take possession of him, that he stood
Astonished at the news: the raging flood
When the fierce winds impetuously do blow,
And in their unresisted fury throw
The angry billows, against the sandy shore
Spits not out some, or does more loudly roar,
Then vexed Herod, who did inly burn,
When ycie fear to fiery rage did turn.
Like as a silver Current, whose clear strea^^
When sweetly gilded by the lightsome beam
Of gold-lockt Phoebus, it reflects a light,
Becomes a pleasant object to the sight,
But if some ruder Swain disturb the flood
By taking in it, fetching dirt and mud
The water thickens, and begins to look
More like a foul sink, then a christ all b^ooke:
So while the river of man's life runs clear,
And Sun-like reason, from his lofty sphere
Guilds it with beauty, it is a precious thing,
Surpassing Thames and Isis, or that spring
Which fond N^rcissus in his journey found,
In which the selfe-admiring Boy was drowned,
But if that passion easy passage find,
It soon disturbs the quiet of the mind,
Then the Conceit grows muddy to the brinke,
Like puddle, bad to view, but worse to drink.
So stood the case with Herod, and indeed
Suspicious Tirants seldom better speed:
A panicke ^er^out takes them oftentimes,
When none seek to offend them, but their crimes:
And reason good, for this truth has been said,
He whom all fear, of all must be afraid: Seneca.

O heavy burden of a Monarchs crown,
O Pillow stuffed with thorns, and not with dowlne,
O glorious bondage seldom blessed with age,
O lofty building subject to the rage
Of storm and tempest, O fair gilded Cup
Containing poison, who would take thee up,
(So once a Macedonianking did say,) Antigonus

Though he should stumble on thee in the way.
As a fair room at some great nuptial feast
Hung with rich Arras, and each corner dressed
With costly furniture, here goodly plate,
There curious glasses, all set out in state,
Tables well wrought, with perfumed damask covered,
Embroder'd stools, nothing amiss or slubber'd,
By some rude fray of the distempered guest
(As with the Centaures at the Lapythes Feast) O(...)

Becomes disordered, so that all the frame
Naught but a Chaos you can justly name:
Such a confused heap was Judah's King,
When fame humming about his ears, did sting
His very heart and soul, with the report
Of a new rival, to his Crown and Court.
Now began remembrance of his Tyrant reign
^o torture him with an unwonted pain,
^he stormy rage which on his subjects fell
He thinks they will revenge, and now rebel,
Dismayed at this, he does begin to moan him,
As if they came already to dethrone him:
F(...)e is an ill Interpreter of things,
Especially within the hearts of kings:
He thinks that strangers will invade his land
In hostile manner, and with powe^full hand,
Expel him thence, and in his seat advance
The newborn Infant: then he sees a glance
Of a great Persian Host, that hard at hand,
Have got already at their full command
The bulwark of his kingdom, Salems town,
Or else the Magi durst not up and down
Make such enquiry, quite against his will,
Who with a very frown was wont to kill:
Moved with the wind of different thoughts he raues,
Like the bark, beaten by the furious waves
Of the enchafed flood: the Devil too
Exagitates his mind, yet doubtful who
The newborn Infant was: he knew decreed Genesis 3. 15.

A time in fate, wherein the woman's seed
Should break the Serpents head: As when the queen
Of heaven, fiercely enraged with jealous spleen
Against Alcmena, and her Ioue-borne son
From Affricke brought two Snakes to seize upon
His infant body, that their gripe so fierce
Might cause his cradle to become his Hearse,
But young Alcides made his tender hands
About the Serpents such death-threatning bands,
They could not hurt him, squeesing them so sore,
That 'twixt his fingers a foul purple gore
Issued apace, in which their life was drowned,
Then let them drop quite senseless to the ground:
So stood the case, when as dissension rose
Bet^ixt this royal Infant and his foes:
H^rod and Satan two foul Serpens were,
Whom this new Hercules did squeese with fear
Of his all-powerfull hand, they both did dread
Their kingdoms ruin, and by this were led
Into unwonted troubles, Satan thought*
That this was he, by whom was to be wrought
(As a new Moses) Isreal's Redemption
From Hels proud Pharaoh, and a full exemption
From all Egyptian bondage, which oppression
Lay heavy upon man for his transgression:
This troubled Satan in infernal shade,
And with new horror did his thoughts invade:
Like as the greedy wolf, when as he spies
The careful Shepherd near, or hears the cries
Of the fierce Mastife troubled therewithal,
A chilling fear his senses does apall:
So woluish Satan when he saw so near,
The Shepherd of our soul, a deadly fear
Took hold upon him, and disturbed him so,
As does the presence of a powerful Foe
A weak opponent: robbed of his content,
He vexes Herod his fit instrument,
Knowing that fear of such a danger will
Stir up a care, how to prevent his ill,
Regardlesse so he may securely reign
Though deep in blood he do his hand ingraine,
Well hoping this distraction would him bring
To seek the ruin of the newborn King.
That such a Tyrant should so far give way
To his perplexed thoughts, and so dismay
With fear of future troubles his weak mind,
Is not to be admired: But when I find
That all Jerusalem was rent in sunder
With him in this strange Passion, then I wonder
She, that as one or'eioy'd at this new birth
Should have expressed a triumph and with mirth
Have crowned her brows, she that does represent
A peaceful city, and with full content
Should the great King of peace have entertained,
Was at Christ's birth, as in her travel, paind.
But wonder not, a Princes fashion
Is soon observed by Subjects imitation:
Cameleons cannot into colors turn
Faster then Courtiers: if their Sovereign mourn
Black clouds of sorrow cover all their face,
If smile, they change their copy; it is a grace:
Clysophus thinks to be without an eye,
If Philip be but blind: to go awry
If Alexander do so: Parasites
Are just like glasses to their Princes sights,
Fitly resembling every look they have,
Merry or sad, ridiculous or grave:
And as the Echo answers the voice Iuuenal. Satyr. 3.

In the same tone it speaks, if it rejoice
Sending forth joyful accents, if it sorrow
Utter, as sad a language it does borrow.
So Herod's Courtiers Eccho-like, but sound
What they receive from him by a rebound:
Thus with him these (true royalties worst bane)
Sea-like, or like the moon do wax and wane.
Another sort of Courtiers, Herod's friends
Did sympathize with him, but in their ends
Much differing from the former, some did doubt
A new commenced war, others more stout,
Expected alteration, for the Theme
It is best fishing in the troubled stream,
Did whet desire, only they did not know
Which part to side on, when the storm should grow
And this perplexed them: A third sort there were
Of grauer Citizens; much dismayed with fear,
That Herod vexed at this strange report
Would wreake his spleen on them: or if the court
Should change her King they feared a heavier yoke,
For seldom comes the better when the stroke
Falls from a farre-fetcht hand, it heavier lights
To have an unknown Prince it even affrights
Their understanding: As that vlcerous man,
Stuck full of flies, when some in pity 'gan
To chase them thence, cried out in piteous wise,
O do not wrong me so, these full fed flies
Now sated with my blood, I well can bear,
But if you drive them thence, I much do fear
New ones will fill their places, and the ease
You think to do me, me far more displease:
So these thought better, with the rusticke swain
Once to dig up Antigonus again,
And to endu^e those flies that had their fill,
Rather then new ones, which more blood might swill.
The common sort seeing their sovereign sad,
Thought it their duty also to be clad
In the minds mourning habit: Princes are
Like the first mouer to the lower star,
Unto the Subjects, by their swifter motion
They draw them strongly to their own devotion:
And as a Horse though full of force and spirit
Backed by a skillful Rider seems ^i^herite
His will and judgment, one while standing still,
Then paci^g, running, bounding at his will,
So fares it twixt the Subject and the King,
Backed by the Prince Rules snaffle does him bring
To what his sou^raigne please: the King's the head,
The ^ubiect are the members, which do spread
And grow from thence, now when the head's diseased
How should the members but be much displea'd?
But here a doubt is moved, Must Subjects still
Conform their manners to their sovereigns will?
May not Jerusalem with fair intent,
In this, or like perplexity dissent,
From troubled Herod, must the Princes fashion
Still lead the Subject to an imitation?
Not so, Kings are but men, and so may err,
The King of Kigs Edict we must prefer
Before a mortals: though Augustus say,
Do this, if God forbide it, to obey
Is to become a traitor? Gods Command
Compared with man's, must like an Ocean stand,
To swallow up that drop, to quench that spark,
As Idol Dagon fell before the Arc;
As stars are hidden when the Sun does shine:
So humane laws must stoop unto divine.
The tyrant thus with fear perturb'd, at last
Summons his wits together, and does cast
How to prevent all danger, and in mind
Reuoluing many things, at length does find
No better course can with his safety stand,
Then by an Edict sent throughout his land,
To call a counsel, and lest by delay
He might incur a hazard, men that day
With special writs to further his intent
Go out, and summon straight a Parlaiment:
In this, though else full of impiety,
Herod to Kings a President may be,
Not on their own sole judgment to rely,
But to consult with their grave counsels eye,
Which can see far into high points of state,
And deepest matters learnedly debate.
Well knew the cunning Tyrant how to make
A fit Election, and such men to take
As his design might further: for which cause
He conuocates the wisest in the Laws,
And those whom he knew fittest to expound
Old Prophesies, and mysteries profound,
For Priests and Elders, with the learned Scribe,
He picks the best for ^ame from every Tribe:
Had war the subject been to be discust,
He wo^ld have called Commanders for the trust
Of mar^iall matters, fits them best that are
Well seen and practiced in the feats of war,
But this was no such thing: Herod's desire
Was by all means he could devise, t'exquire
Where he to whom so many ages past
Judah's Dominion was assigned at last
Should take his birth: the true Messiah place
Was the maine question that they had in chase.
They had not sat in consultation long,
But they were soon agreed, and yet among
So many* scarce there could be one found out
To be their speaker, and resolve the doubt
At last an aged Priest did undertake
To be the tongue for all the rest, and make
A full relation of Prophetique truth,
So up he ro^e, and spoke what next ensues.
Great King led sure by some diuiner light.
From the black darkness and Cymmerian night
Of the Worlds error since state policies
Thou leauest to search out heavens high mysteries:
Happy are we thy subjects to behold
Such goodness in such greatness, keep thy hold,
Go on in Grace and virtue though alone,
And thou (...) th^se prop^^, hold thy throne:
Know thou brig^t (...) Bethlehem is the place,
Which our M^ssias c^o^en has, to grace
With his maiestqu^ presence, when he shall
First see the light o^ (...) Ball:
So write our ancient Prophets, amongst the rest,
Mi^ah, whose Oracles are thus expressed:
And thou, O Bethlehem, in Iudahs Land,
Shall not for least among the Princes stand,
For out of thee shall come a King* which well
Shall know to guide my people Israel:
Thus in few words I do my sovereign show,
What he with so much care desired to know;
Herod well pleased with this* bestowed a nod,
And they their adoration, as some god
Had sent them a rich favor: then they kissed
His hand, and so the assembly was di^mist.
But I (though Herod) not dismiss you so,
Something I have to say before ye go,
O can ye be so light, yet seem so grave,
Profess so much zeal, yet so little have*
Can you to Herod truly point the place
Where your Messiah is, yet want the grace
To visit him you selves? As larger stones
Erected in some high way for the nounce,
Dir^ct the Passenger, but do not move
A i^t from thence, where they were fixed in love:
Or as the Bells loud repercussiue sound
Calls unto Church, neighbors that hear it round,
But in it self does not least motion feel,
To make it leave it semicircled wheel:
So these could show where Christ was to be found,
Yet never seek him, all was show and sound,
No solid substance: They must needs be ill,
Who rich in knowledge, are so poor in will.
By this time Herod who in thought reuolu'd,
Many a Plot, and Plat-forme, was resolved
To fix on one for all: sliely he sent
For the wise men to court, with whom he spent
Some time in free discourse, the maine thus far
Did reach, to know what time the eastern star,
Made his first apparision, this once told
Herod his mind did in these words unfold.
With how great care my self have sought to know
This Infant Prince ye come to, well does show
The counsel called of late, called for your good
For now we know the place of his abode:
That he is more then humane I believe,
Though clouded in obscurity, and grieve
Time and occasion will not give me leave
To go this progress with you, and receive
That soul securing comfort, and delight
Which you will ^eet with in the gracious sight
Of such an Object: but do you go on,
And search with Linceus eyes, to light upon
The house that holds him, and if once you fortune
(For which I will the higher powers importune)
But bring you to him, after you have done
That you are led to by Devotion,
Do but so much of happy time afford,
As may return you back, to bring me word,
And I my self submitting state and glory,
Although to aftertimes I make a story,
Will winged in my desire approach before him,
And falling prostrate on the ground adore him.
O subtle Fox, that with so fair pretense
Could such a deed of cruelty commence,
As the sweet Infants murder, for we find
Such Lambe-like se^ blance hid a woluish mind:
Of Christ the Lamb he spoke, as if he meant
To worship, when to worry he was bent:
Hypocrisy with a fine thread is spunne,
And seems an Eagle that dares face the Sun,
But once exposed unto that glor^ous light,
Shrinkes back amazed, and canopies her sight.
Herod by craft thought he might quickly gain
What by plain dealing he could not obtain:
So Generals in their exploits of war,
Seeing the Lions case will not reach far,
That they may bring their Stratagem about
Piece on the Foxes skin, to eke it out.
So the sly Fox as dead himself does lay,
When he intends to make the largest prey:
So Ioab hugs him whom he means to slay,
So Judas kisses whom he does betray:
But Herod's cunning does himself beguile,
The Wolf delays, the Lamb escapes the while:
The wise men lend an ear unto the King,
But that we find answer not any thing,
Yet since by silence they do show consent,
They are dismissed, and Herod seems content.
Wednesdaies Meditation, or the fourth Canto.
The Argument.
By the stars help the wise men find
Our Savior out, their gifts defind,
Admonished from God before
In Herod's sight they come no more.
THe Magi finding not what they do lack,
Upon Jerusalem soon turn their back,
They had not trauail'd from the city far,
When the thrice welcome luster of their star
Did reappeare unto them: God withdrawes
His b^essings from us, that a little pause
Of absence may endeare them: so the light
To one immured in prison seems more bright
When his enlargement comes: so when the blast
Of some impetuous wind rends up the Mast
Of the Sea-tossed-Hulke, ready as food
To stop the mouth of the devouring flood,
A sudden Calm is sweetest: A disease
Makes health in the repurchast better please:
Vicissitude delights, and breeds respect,
Where long enjoying generates neglect.
Ha^ the wise men in all their journey kept
The Star a daily guide, they had not lept
For joy, as they did now: indeed content
Might then have kept pace with them, but as pent
Within too strait a prison, their vast joy
Breaks forth into expression, no annoy
Able to counter-check it, 'twas more great Gauisi sunt gaud^o magno valde.

Then text could well describe, or I repeat.
Like as a mother of a son beloved
As her eye sight, from her eyesight removed
By a long absence, and no news arriving,
Whether he do consort the dead or living,
Grieves at her hap, while heart-dismaying fears
V^nt out her sorrow, not in words, but tears;
Which when past hope she sees him home return,
Ceast any longer his decease to mourn,
And ravished in her joy, her spirits drowned
In such a deluge, falls into a swound:
But having once those powers recollected,
Seeing the object by her so affected,
Kisses, e^braces, hugs her dearest Boy,
Ready to skip out of her skin for joy:
So fared it with the Magi; when the Star
First disappeared, it made no doubt a war
Within them, sundry passions did contest,
But gri^fe soon gets the mastery of the rest;
Yet ^ong the ^rabbed tyrant does not reigue,
Ere he be clean^ deposed, the Star again
By new appearing a^ters quite the state;
So joy succeeds, and does pr^dominate;
Tuned to a holy key, their tongues does sound
Lauo^taes, while their heart ^oth dance a Round.
This Star^^, ^hether a^ (...) in that fashion,
Or else some radiant holy inspiration, Chrysostom.

Whether an errant P^a^et among the seven,
Or one of those fair bodies ^ixt in heaven,
Sent down to serve the turn or else created
For this sole use, and then anihilated,
I will not stand to question: on it went
As a sure conuoy, for the course it hent
Was not orbicular, but so direct
As they could wish a guide, whose best respect
Might lead them on; the motion of it slow,
And as it may be well concluded, low,
Else could it not have kept an equal pace,
Nor yet hauefully pointed to the place.
Come to the house, as if it had no will
For any further motion, it stood still,
And over the poor cottage long did houer,
Or like some golden Canopie, did cover
The place of Christ's abode: which once descride
By the wise men, its luster it did hide,
And never was seen again, although some tell,
Gliding from thence, it fell into a Well.
Interpreters do by this Star express,
Such as turn men to faith and righteousness.
Thrice happy are those Starre^, which souls do guid^
To Christ, and also there themselves abide.
Entered they find the Infant with his Mother;
She puts not out her Child unto another:
Me thinks it is an error against kind,
That Mothers which have store of milk assigned,
Should dry those fountains, to preserve their beauty,
From whence their infants should suck love and duty
Or that for state, for trouble, or for pleasure,
They should expose such an vnualew'd treasure
As children are, unto another, care,
While they themselves thereof will bear no share.
The blessed Virgin bare a better mind,
To her own issue then to prove unkind,
Milk she a blessing knew, dry breasts a curse,
Therefore she dain'd her self to be a nurse:
The wise men when they come, the Infant see
Hang at her breasts, or dandled on her knee.
Now did the Magi meet their full desire,
And might with Simeon wish they might expire:
Great was their joy, when they beheld the Star.
To see the Sun must needs transcend it far:
Abraham reioyc'd to see Christ's day in spirit; Ioh. 8. 46.

Your joy must needs be greater, which inherit
A larger blessing, you in flesh behold him,
And have that favor in your arms to fold him:
Prophets and Kings have long desired in vain,
To see what you see, Judahs Sovereign; Luke 10. 24.

Therefore (to him who best can censure things)
Happier you are then Prophets, or then Kings.
Yet let me say, 'twas not the sight alone
That made these wise men happy, had they gone
No further, they had never arrived at bliss,
Many eyes saw him which of that shall miss:
But these wise men when once they come before him,
Fall prostrate on the ground, and do adore him:
Well might good Bernard this strange act admire,
That wise men, great men, who to sense were higher
Then what they fell so low to, should afford
Such worship to an Infant, poorly stord
With what should fit a Royal birth, the place,
Attendants dressing, cradle had no grace
To move such vassalage; sure God inspired
(A thing which well deserves to be admired)
Such Faith into their minds, as made them see
A God head clothed with humanity.
Being to come fore one of more command Athanasius.

Then Persiaes Monarke, with an empty hand
They dare not make approach, but open their treasure,
And give their own in an abundant measure:
The gifts they dedicate to Christ are three, Augustine.

To note they did adore the Trinity:
Or else to show, the person they adored,
Although but one, was with three Natures stored,
Deity, Soul and Body; or to bring
His threefold Office of Priest, Prophet, King,
To our remembrance; therefore some do call
These, sacramental gifts; Prophetical Cyp^tian. Rupertus. Basfil.

Others entitle them; the first was Gold,
Which with a King does correspondence hold;
Or else they offer plenty of their Ore,
That to supply their wants they might have store
When Christ should f^ie to Egypt: they bestow
Mirrhe, that a mortal man we might him know:
The Frankincense they offer does define,
As God he must have sacrifice Divine.
Again, pure Gold, clear Mirrhe, sweet Frankincense,
Do each of them afford a moral sense;
Gold signifies pure doctrine, Faith sincere,
A charity refined, which God holds dear:
Myrrh represents the tears of penitence
Shed for our sins a mortified sense
To worldly matters: Frankincense does show
Perfumed devotion, where we must bestow
The Incense of our prayers: these well presented,
Are offerings wherewith God is much contented.
The wise men having their oblat^on ended,
And seen, and known what might be comprehended,
Take leave, and do betake them to their rest,
Deeming themselves to be not meanly blessed
In such a happy issue, now their mind
At quiet, a sweet sleep their sense does bind.
About the dead time of the silent night,
They saw, or thought they saw a glorious light;
In it a shape more bright, an Angel^ stood,
Who came from heaven to warn the^ for their good,
And having gently waked them, with a voice
Able to charm attention, and rejoice
The very heart to hear it, thus he said;
Let not your minds with terror be dismayed,
Almighty God, whose I rejoice to be,
Has sent me to you on this embasie:
The honor which you lately did his Son,
Has so much favor from his goodness won,
That knowing you are bent to undertake
A dangerous journey, he desires to make
The hazard known unto you: Iuda's King,
Herod I mean, is rather any thing,
Then wha^ he seemed unto you: his pretense
Of worship, when in that close conference
He brake about the Infant, was a wile,
Both you and him the better to beguile;
For in his heart he plotted long before,
To wash his hands within the purple gore
Of his l^e blood, and chose for this intent
Your simplen^sse to be his instrument;
Meaning when he had served his turn, to reaue
You of your dearest lives, striving to leave
A president unto posterity,
Of an vnmat^^^, unheard of tyranny:
Be mindful of ^. ^ words, and take good heed
How you return to Herod, rather speed
Into your Country b^ some other way,
For no ^^al^ danger waits upon delay.
This said, he quickly vanished out of sight,
And they fell to their rest that rest of night.
No sooner did the grav-eyed Morn appear,
And by her blushi^g show the Sun was near,
But to their ^ourney they themselves address,
And mindful of the vision, which did press
Their memories afresh, they leave the rode
Which leads to S^^em, though the tract were broad,
And ride through la^es, and by-waies, till at last
The confines of ^udea they are past.
Secure from danger, their post-haste they stay,
And travail on at leisure, by the way
Discoursing with joy not to be expressed,
How highly they were in that journey blessed:
Ere many days their Country smoke appears,
And they in peace at ho^e live many years.
I cannot leave this part of history,
Till I have showed a useful mystery:
Herod by the unanimous assent
Of Fathers, does the devil represent,
They then which by Gods mercy are set free
From bondage, worse then Egypts slavery,
Satan's oppression, must abhor such bands,
And take good heed they fall not in his hands.
The silly Bird having escaped the net,
Far from the fatal place herself will get.
The Lamb which from the Wolf has got away,
Will no more venture from the flock to stray.
If by the Gospels Star we once are brought
To Christ, let us by no temptation wrought,
Turn back to Herod; but forsaking quite
The works of darkness, in Gods Word delight.
Indeed I know we are to travail far
To our own Country, in this world we are 1. Pet. 2. 11.

But strangers: he that lives the longest age,
Does waste his life in tedious pilgrimage:
Heaven is our happy home, and we must strive,
Though close by hell we pass, how to arrive
Unto that blessed Harbor, by the way
Removing all such rubs as would us stay.
But let me tell you, lest we chance to stray,
Our journey thither lies another way:
It Is not the too-too common road of vice,
Which is the passage unto Paradise;
Ah no, the path which unto bliss does lead Matthew. 7. 13.

Is straight, and few they are that do it tread:
Then, only then, another way we take, Immutatio viae emendatio vitae:
Eusebius Emissenus. 1. King. 13.

When of our vicious life a change we make.
Like as the Prophet which was sent to cry
Against that Altar of impiety,
Set up by Jeroboam, had command
Not to go back unto his native Land
By the same way he came: the like have we,
We must our old ways leave, and speedily
As we new creatures are, new ways enquire,
Such as may bring us whither we desire.
He that by sin has left heavens usual track,
Must by repentance a new way come back.
Have thou walked on in lusts impurity?
Return another way, by chastety.
Did thou with pride a stately march maintain?
Another way humility regaine.
In avarice did thou delight to move?
Return another way, and walk in love.
Did sharp contention make thee trudge to Law?
From that misleading path thy feet withdraw,
And strive to live in peace. Did thy heart range
In vsuries wild maze? O let it change
(Though much against thy native constitution)
With good Zacheus to a restitution.
In fine if we wander from truth, or stray
Never so little from the narrow way,
We ^isse our path, and so abberring rome
From the right way, should lead us to our home.
And therefore as the trauailer in doubt
Which way to take, with heed does look about
To spy some house, or person, which may be
A help to him in his perplexity,
And never leave enquiring, till he know
Which way he must decline, and which way go:
So if ye be in doubt which path to hold,
With Salomons fair Spouse get to the fold,
Where shepherds keep their flock, of them enquire, Cant. 1. 8.

And they will satisfy your just desire;
Then having found it, keep it with delight,
And neither turn to the left hand, nor right:
So shall ye find what ever may betide
In your way thither, 'twill you safely guide
To your own Country, where you shall possess
More good then heart can think, or tongue express.
Thursdaies Meditation, or the fifth Canto.
The Argument.
An Angel is to Joseph sent,
To tell him Herod's foul intent:
He with his charge to Egypt flies,
And there remains ti^l Herod dies.
NO sooner had the Magi left the Land
Of Palestine, but He which has command
Of all that know a being, and can see
Things plotted with the greatest secrecy,
And easily elude them, di^ intend
To Herod's project a vain* fruitless end:
God can (though man be crafty to devise)
Infatuate the Counsels of the wise,
And free his children from what may annoy them,
Though malice join with cunning to destroy them
So Pharaoh, who from Israel will not part,
Wants of his will, yet for it feels the smart: Consilium diuinum dum
deuitatur, impletur, humana sapientia dum reluctat^r, comprehenditur. Greg.

So Saul, who practiced David ^^ confound,
Did himself fall, and Jsh(...)s son was croun'd:
So Herod who did seek ^^ have deprived
Christ of his life, did find ^imselfe short lived.
Thus Gods decree while hund, does take effect,
And humane wisdom w^ile it strives, is checked.
Now were all humane eyes shut up in sleep,
But such whom care, or pain did open keep,
When a blessed Angel (Angels are prepared
To be to Gods Elect a surer guard
Then mortals can be) unto Joseph came,
Sent to that just man in Iehouahs Name,
Whose Sun-like presence had so bright array,
That it made midnight to excel midday:
Yet the good man fearelesse, because untainted,
And with such apparitions pre-acquainted,
Expected the event; when thus made bold,
The Angel did his Embasy unfold:
O thou which from the Lord such grace have won,
To be the Foster-father of his Son,
And husband (though thou live more like a brother)
Unto that ever blessed Virgin Mother,
Look well unto thy charge, the Wolf does warch
With bloody mind, both Lamb and Eve to catch,
That he may prey upon them, therefore take
The tender Infant, and his Mother make
Co-partner in thy flight, to Egypt flee,
There Is room and safety for thy Charge and Thee:
There plant thy habitation, and remain,
Till thou may safely venture back again,
Which safety when the time shall once afford,
I Will be a Messenger to bring thee word.
This message ended, back the Angel goes,
When presently good Joseph does dispose
Himself to Gods command, that very night
With his dear charge he 'gins to take his flight.
But though such haste Joseph made to be gone,
We Will stay a while, and meditate hereon.
That woman in the uncouth Wilderness, Revel. 12.

Whom near her time the Dragon did distress,
One thinks, does represent the Church; another
(Not much amiss) the blessed Virgin Mother:
Indeed the Dragon suits with Herod well,
And Mary is the woman's parallel:
The story tells us, that the woman fled
The Dragons fury, when delivered:
So was the blessed Virgin glad to fly
With her young Babe from Herod's cruelty:
The Dragon there stood ready to devour
The Child, when he was borne; and every hour
Herod did gape for news, that he might slay
The blessedst Infant ever yet saw day:
Yet Child and Mother both escaped there:
So Christ and Mary both preserved were:
As Moses guarded by Gods mighty hand,
Came safely of from the unjust command
Of persecuting Pharaoh, and became
A mighty Captain in Iehouahs Name
To quell the pride of Pharaoh, and set free
The Hebrews from Egyptian slavery:
So by Gods providence did Christ escape
From Dragon Herod's mouth which wide did gape,
To swallow him alive, that he might be
Unto his people in captivity
A mighty leader, and the power quell
Of Sin, and Satan, of the Grave, and Hell,
And so in fine his Israel safely bring
From bondage worse then under Egypts King:
Finally when the Dragon did perceive
Hi^ force against the woman vain, did leave
To persecute her, yet did i^ly burn
In indignation, and his fury t^^ne
To war upon the remnant of her seed,
Hoping to meet ther^ with succesfull speed:
So Herod frustrated of his desire,
Suffers his heart to burn in flaming fire
Of furious rage, and will needs wreake his spleen
On silly infants, but this shall be seen
More largely, in the progress of this story,
Christ's flight a while keeps back the Infants glory.
Like as a gardner when he spies a plant,
Full of fair hope fit elbow room to want,
As nigh some ouerspreading tree, bereauen
Of the Suns heat, and the fat dew of heaven,
With care remoues it to another place,
Where it thriues mainly, in a little space:
So when the Lord his Son that plant did see
Placed to near Herod that far spreading tree,
Yet fruitless, therefore worthy to be feld
Lest the unwholesome shadow death should peld
To the near neighboring plant, his powerful hand
Does now transplant him to another land.
He that in flight our refuge is here flies,
He that assists us against our enemies,
Auoids the fury of his mortal foes,
And like an exile into Egypt goes:
That in such kind of dire calamities
He might with us the better sympathize:
Our Savior Christ without a Gyges ring
Could have obscured his person from the King.
Or had he pleased what ever was intended
Against Herod's malice have himself defended:
He that by fire did his Eliah guard
He that an host of Angels had prepared
Elisha to secure, he that did save
Daniel from Lions, Lazarus from the grave,
Had it seemed good could here have gone as far
And quail'd the force of Herod's men of war:
But he chose rather to sepose his might,
And to expose his person unto flight:
Either to show what he himself does say,
He came no worldly Scepter here to sway: Ioh. 18.

Or else by his example to declare,
The Church for persecution must prepare:
Or it may be to teach us, that the Lord
No extraordinary will afford,
When we have ordinary means at hand,
By which we may withdraw, and quit the Land,
To work our safety: or to teach in fine
Us personal persecution to decline:
So Moses fled from Pharaohs cruelty:
So David from his sons impiety:
So Paul, no safety being in the Town,
Was in a basket by the wall let down,
That he might escape the danger; so again
He fled from Salem, fearing to be slain:
So Polycarpe in persecutions heat,
Did by advice, for a while change his seat: Eusebius.

So Athanasius did often fly
From that blood thirsting Arrian tyranny:
So when Iustina, Valentimans Mother, Socrates scholaslicus.

Her rage against S Ambrose could not smother,
He fled from Millaine: Chrysostom like fate
Drew from Bizantium, to shun the hate
Eud^xia bare unto him: Christ our Savior,
When past an Infant, had the like behavior:
So when the Pharisees a counsel took
Against his life, their presence he forsook: Mat. 12. 15. Luke 4. John. 8.

So when the Nazarens malicious will
Would throw him headlong from the City hill,
He left the place: so when with fell despite
The Jews did seek to stone him, from their sight
He hid himself: to make this truth more plain,
He gives this as a precept, to remain
To all succeeding times, when tyrants hate,
Shall rather seek your lives, then your estate,
Out of one City to another fly, Mat. 10. 23.

And save your selves from their st^rne cruelty:
This is to be like cunning Serpents wise, Mat. 10. 16.

When innocence of Doves will not suffice.
But we must know our Savior ^led not death, Mortem distulit non fugit:
Chrisost:

Out of a fear to leese his vicall breath:
Only for this cause he did now foreslow it,
That afterward he better might bestow it:
He meant to lay it down, as a rare gift
Of his own bounty, not by Herod's drift,
By his freewill he did intend to die, Morietur non vinculo necessitatis, sed
proposito voluntatis: Fulgen.

And not out of a fore'd necessity.
But seeing thou would have thy Son, O Lord,
To fly, wherefore to Egypt so abhord?
Can that to thy beloved safe harbor give,
In which thy Israel did in bondage live.
Have the Egyptians those plagues forgot
Thou did impose upon them? Will they not
Study revenge? Or may not Joseph fear,
If Egypts King of his arrival hear,
He shall be taken for an Hebrew Spy,
And by some uncouth torment forced to die.
O let not flesh and blood expostulate
With Gods determination, or debate
The matter any further, God who draws
Honey from He^lock with the Be, can cause
Each place that is to serve unto his will,
And safety raise even from those would kill.
The time was once when his almighty Hand
Threw plagues apace on the Egyptian Land,
The worst of which wherewith they were annoi'd
Was, when their first borne issue was destroi'd;
To recompense this loss he sends his own
And by his bounty his great love makes known.
Once making Moses his fit instrument, Exodus 10.

Cymmerian darkness on their Land he sent.
And which was worse, groping for light as blind
Suffered them live in darkness of their mind.
Therefore his son, that Sun shall now arise
To give them light, which do not shut their eyes
Against his splendor, for as stories tell,
When he came thither all their Idols fell.
And as we read that Joseph best beloved
Of Jacob, from his Fathers eye removed
By envy of his brethren, was conuayed
To Egypt where by Gods direction stayed;
He was a kind of Savior to the land,
In keeping famine out which did command
After a seven years plenty: so more want
Threatening to ruin Egypt which grew scant
Of grace and goodness, Christ a Savior came,
And in great mercy did preserve the same.
For he the true bread is where he does dwell
All fa^ine from the soul he does expel.
By this time Joseph whom much care did press,
Had gotten all things in a readiness,
And in the covert of the shady night
Begins his journey, darkness could not fright Non attendit verus obediens
quale sit quod praecipitur: hoc solo contentus quia pracipitur. Bernard.

Him or his charge: obedience does contend
How to please God although it sense offend.
Not into what commanded is, it pries,
But that it is commanded does suffice:
Good Joseph murmures not at the great pain
Or the long journey he must entertain,
He staggers not in faith, that he does fly
Which must save others from their misery:
But as he came from Abraham, behaues
Himself like Abraham, in his mind he graves
How ready the glad father was to go
When God commanded, and should I be slow,
To execute said he what God enioynes,
I should want worth, to issue from such loins
Man's heart must be like paper, clean, and white,
Whereon the Lord what he shall please may write:
Or like to wax well suppled by the hand,
Be soft and pliant to his just command
We must in all things, seem they good or ill,
Conform our wishes to out sovereigns will:
Faith and obedience stand not to dispute,
But are still ready pressed to execute:
Our God, obedience does so highly prize,
That he prefers it before sacrifice. 1. Sam. 15.

And worthily, fot they who with consent
A legal sacrifice to God present,
But other flesh, the flesh of beasts do till, In victimis allena caro
obedientia vero voluntas propria mactatur^ Greg.

Where we obeying sacrifice our will.
Thus did good Joseph, whom no let could stay
No not so long as for the lightsome day:
And well in the black night did they begin
Their travail from a place more black in sin.
Now began the day from out the east appear,
Whose comfortable light their hearts did cheer,
And ere the Sun had fully shone an hour
They found themselves got safe from Herod's power:
At length in Egypt they arrive what town
Did give them harbor, the text sets not down
Nor will I seek to know, there they remain,
Till Herod's death did call them back again.
All this says the Evangelist was done,
To firm that prophecy which said, My Son
From Egypt have I called: the literal sense
I know, concerns Israel, who from thence
Was brought by mighty hand, yet has respect
To Christ, as types do upon truths reflect:
And as Gods people, Israel, did stay
A time in Egypt, till the Lord made way
For their departure; so his blessed Son
Had for a while his habitation
In the same Egypt, till the Lord did call him,
Whom there I leave to that which did befall him.
Fridaies Meditation, or the sixth Canto.
The Argument.
The Kings fierce rage, his men of war
The innocents do massacre:
Rachel does mourn her heavy loss,
And will no comfort in her cross.
TIme now (which erst did unto Iudabs King
Seem to move forward with a lazy wing)
Made him suspect, or rather plainly see
The wise men did delude his subtilty:
And th^re was reason for it, he that thought
To mock, is mocked, and rakes but what he brought;
The law of taliation did require
He should meet this event: the sit hire Nequc enim lex lustior vila: Ovid.

For fraud is slic deceit, and they that cherish
Dissembling, in their art do justly perish:
God on these men his judgments does express, Job 5. 13.

And takes the wise in their own craftiness.
Now this delusion in the King begets
An indignation, and in rage him sets.
When Tyrants cannot by their craft prevail,
In a red Sea of cruelty they sail.
But why, O Herod, were thou thus perplexed?
Why do thou rage? or wherefore art thou vexed?
Did thou not know that Christ's birth was divine?
Or were thou blind, because the Sun did shine?
Did thou not conuocate from every Tribe
Many chief Priests, many a learned Scribe?
And did not they by ancient Prophecy
Resolve the truth of this deep mystery?
Did thou not know the wise men came thus far
To worship Christ. led by a glorious Star?
Thy cheek should rather blush, then thy heart flame,
And look red, not with anger, but with shame,
That such Barbarians, which were far below thee,
Should in their zeal to God so much outgoe thee:
The love and faith wherewith they were inspired
Thou should have imitated, and admired:
For unless thou did altogether shun
Prophetique truth, so much it might have won
Upon thy judgment, that by just compare
Of passed things with such as present are,
Thou might conclude, this was' not a delusion
Of the wise men, but a confusion,
Which God, who sometimes counterchecks a King,
Upon thy wicked purpose meant to bring.
But say thou had some injury received,
And by the cunning Magi were deceived,
How had the silly Innocents offended,
That so much misciefe is against them intended:
O why is their unjust destruction sought?
which nere so much as wronged thee in a thought,
Surely, should Jordan lend thee all her store,
It could not wash away the purple gore
That hangs upon thee, with thee still shall bide
The title of a bloody Homicide.
Thou sought'st for Christ, but went too far about,
It Is faith, not fury, which must find him out;
O foolish Herod which do think to expel
Him that will still be King of Israel,
Yea King of Heaven and Earth, in spite of thee
Out of thy poor, and petty liberty:
O wicked Herod, and of lewd behavior
Who fearing thy successor, hat'st thy Savior:
O bloody Herod, which by the fell death
Of harmless children, would prolo^, thy breath:
But little admiration it requires,
That Tyrants seek to compass their desires,
Or found their thrones on slaughtered innocence,
Pharaoh long since had taught him to dispense
With murders of that rank, who to secure
His crown, made Abraham's issue to endure
A heavy burden, while he did command
To drown their issue male throughout the land. Exodus 1.

So did Abimelec the base borne son
Of that courageous warrior, Gedeon,
Who through the blood of 70. brothers waded,
Unto the Crown most wrongfully invaded,
Herod was more unnatural then these,
Against his own son he could not rage appease,
But fearing he should the Messiah be,
Among the rest he wrought his tragedy:
Therefore Augustus did this saying use,
If I were bound to live among the Jews,
With greater willingness I would be swine
Then son to Herod: for by law divine Malo Herodis porcum quam filium esse:
Macrobius.

Swines flesh forbid the Hebrews they did give
A kind of privilege the beasts might live,
Whereas King Herod a worse beast did grutch
Unto his own child to afford so much.
The Lion will not tender Infants slay,
Unless mere hunger force him to such prey,
O With what hunger then was Herod waged,
When he against so many Infants raged,
With hunger of ambition, which of all
The greatest hunger we may justly call:
Hunger of reigning sure must needs be great,
Which to appease it, must have so much meat;
So many Infants flesh, that thirst is sore
Which naught can satisfy but crimsin gore,
Enjoy blood thirsting Herod, re-inioy
Thy kingdom safely, free from all annoy,
He that above does Heavenly crowns bestow,
Gapes not for earthly scepters here below,
Such earth-bred honor Christ does much despise,
Elephants take no mice, nor Eagles flies:
Though he of power be for to cast thee down,
Yet fear no deprivation of thy crown,
For though two Kings can in one kingdom reign,
No more, then Heaven can two bright Suns sustain,
Yet every King may with him, in him daigne
His kingly Lord, his true Messiah reign,
As the fair Heaven with many Stars is dight,
And with the Sun, from whom they take their light:
Only learn mercy from this potent one,
And heap not blood so long upon thy Throne,
Till it become so slippery, as to threat
Each step thou take, to cast thee from thy seat.
But rage, like to the belly, has no ears,
To reason deaf, it only passion hears,
Advice is vain, say what I can or will,
Herod will be himself, a tyrant still.
They say, that Be who of the rest is King,
Either has none, or does not use a sting:
Surely this man, whom wretched Bethlehem sees
Reeke in the blood of Infants, not of Bees,
But Waspes was King, for wasplike full of spleen, 2. King. ^.

He thrusts his poisonous sting (so great his teene)
Into the flesh of children, and does kill
Those, who to hurt him had nor power, nor will.
Indeed two Bears did certain children sley,
But cause they mocked Gods Prophet: thou then they
More fierce destroyst the guiltless: fearful man,
Do thou dread silly childrens force? or can
Faint cowardice with thee prevail so far,
Thou should against Infants wage such bloody war.
Great praise no doubt, and many a worthy spoil
Thou shall enjoy, by giving them the foil.
The noble Elephants will not invade
The weaker sort of beasts: thou shakst thy blade
At sucking children, and sendst men of might,
To challenge those that know not how to sight.
There is a story of great Constantine,
How true, the Authors credit, and not mine,
Must answer: but the matter ^le relate,
And leave the question further to debate:
Before he came to Christianity,
The Prince was troubled with a Leprosy;
To cure this sickness the advice and care
Of his Phisicians would have him prepare
A Bath of Infants blood: sure here the Diuill
Prompted his Doctors to so great an evil:
But being by Gods providence converted,
He from so foul a slaughter was diuerted
By souls Phisicians, who do well assure him,
Baptism a Bath more powerful is to cure him.
He hearkens to them, is baptized, and free
Both from the bodies, and souls leprosy.
Behold, ambition Herod's soul inuades,
Like a foul Leprosy; ^atan persuades
(Such is hells physic) naught will do him good,
Unless he bathe himself in Infants blood;
And not the opening of a ve^e or two,
No, but their life blood this great cure must do:
Therefore to satisfy the soule-sicke King,
Each tender Babe must empty all his Spring;
And now God lets the Wolf the Lambs devour,
Without restraining of his rage, or power,
He puts no bridle into Herod's nose,
But lets him take full swinge in his dispose,
Because he knew how to draw good from ill,
And make this wicked action serve his will:
From Lions mouth sweet honey he can take,
And Marahs bitter waters wholesome make.
Herod in this his rage does type out those
Of the malignant Church, who still are foes
To the Church Militant, and by their will
Religion in it infant age would kill:
Herod like malice, and impiety,
Egyptian, Babylonian cruelty.
It is (though tyrants hold these terms in scorn)
To smother piety as soon as borne,
To quench Religion while it is a spark,
And drown poor souls by keeping from the Arc*
Again, in Herod's foul design of blood,
Satan's condition may be understood,
Who seeks not only by malicious will,
Christ while an Infant in our heart to kill,
But many children more, every good thought,
Though it be never into action brought,
To make those babes good motions in us die,
Though they want strength to go in act, and lie
In meditations cradle, is his glory,
But I leave types to prosecute the story:
While Herod inly vexed, became thus wild,
With furious rage, the Devil rockt his child,
But would not let him sleep: like some mad beast,
By nature feirce, if wounded will not rest,
But doubling his fell fury and even blind
With rage, regards no longer how to find
His foe that hurt him, but with head and feet
Fiercely assailes the next that he does meet:
So Herod, who conceived himself much wronged
By the wise men, for whose return he longed,
His hope deluded like one robbed of sense
Wreakes his reuengefull spleen on Innocence:
For full of doubtful thoughts as well as sins,
To reason with himself he thus begins:
What child is this? that has from Heaven his birth
Foretold, ere it be perfected on earth:
Unto the World himself he has not shown,
Yet is to those that never saw him known:
Over no people yet he has command,
And wise men, great men, leave their native land
To wait upon him: o who is the wight
That ouercomes me, and yet does not fight:
That like a tyrant over me does reign,
Ere he the kingdom (I possess) obtain:
If he already me of state beguile,
What will he do if he increase a while?
Poor as he is, he is more feared, then I
With all my riches, and authority:
Or else these wise men or impostors rather,
(For by their dealing less I cannot gather)
Whom my intelligence is I did make,
Would not have faltered with me for his sake,
But here I vow, who ever do be friend him
Nor heaven, nor hell shall from my power defend him:
No I will make (if my unhappy fate
Cross not my will) Bethlem as desolate
Of Infants, as this Infant has made me
Of comfort, since his new nan^'d sovereignty.
Thus he resolu^s in rage, an^ what that still
To rash attempts a Counselor full ill,
Suggests unto him, he in action brings,
So soon men execute the will of Kings:
And now come other actors on the stage,
The blo^dy instruments of Herod rage
Made ready to present unto our eye
A tragic ^ceane of horrid cruelty.
Not to examine who they were, we see
Subject and King full well, and ill agree,
Tyrants do never want fit Instruments,
To execute their very worst intents:
Would wicked Saul have the Lords Priests be slain*
Doeg the motion soon will entertain:
Does David plot to stop Vr^ahs breath?
Joab will set him in the face of death:
Does Iezabell against Naboths life conspire?
The elders will effect her lewd desire:
The world yet never knew a Prince so vicious,
But that he should have men to be officious,
Such as account it an especial grace
To do their Lords will be it nere so base:
The officers of Herod bare this mind,
Ready to go when he their warrant signed.
And now suppose them unto Bethlehem come,
Ready to act the tyrants fatal doom,
While the Sun hides his head at such a sight,
As if a Noone he meant to make it night,
And with black clouds did cover his sad face,
Grieuing that men should have so little grace:
The melting heavens do also shower down rain,
As if they wept for the poor Infants pain;
Even the walls there in a cold dew stood,
As struck with horror, to see so much blood:
Yet these feel no remorce, nor once desist
From the commanded murder, but persist
In that abhorred work of cruelty,
Which shall them brand with lasting infamy:
With their swords drawn, that none this course may stay,
Into men's houses they do force their way.
Here they an Infant from the cradle snatch,
There from the fathers arms another catch,
And the poor childrens sad destruction wrought,
Ere the amazed parents had a thought
Of any danger near: some they transpierce
With their blood thirsting sword, others in fierce
And savage manner, they divide asunder,
While they that own them stand stone still in wonder:
Me thinks in one place I some father hear
(At his dear Infants danger struck with fear)
Like Nisus in the Poet, or more mild,
Cry out unto the Butcher of his child;
O spare my son! or if you blood must spill,
Here turn your swords, the grieved father kill?
I might, he durst not could not entertain
A thought of wrong unto his So^eraigne.
Me thinks I in another place behold
An Infant stabbed, whose pretty arms lay hold
About his mothers breast, whence he does draine
Milk, that in blood runs out as fast again,
While the affrighted mother, with her hands
Heau'd up, like Niobe, turned Marble, stands.
In every place that does afford an age
Marked out for slaughter, death and fury rage,
While ye poor souls, some for their mothers crying*
Some smiling on their murderers, are dying.
O here a while your speedy haste forbear
Compassionate parents, and vouchsafe a tear!
Think but what sad, what soul affrighting sight
These saw, when they were robbed of their delight.
Suppose your Infants whom you highly prize,
Snatched from your arms, and slain before your eyes,
What would you do in such a case as this?
Nay, what would you not do? surely amiss
I do conceive, or else your sorrow would
Be greater far, then all their suffering could;
While from their pretty eyes salt tears did trill,
Your pierced hearts would liquid blood distill;
And every wound their bodies should receive
From murderers hands, your very souls would cleave.
And yet behold such was the woeful state
Of that late happy City, fortunate
Erst in her Savior, who there first drew breath,
But now most wretched in her childrens death,
Whilst by this fearful act of sin and shame,
Of Bethlehem a Bethauen it became.
But not this bloody act could yet assuage
Either their cruelty, or Herod's rage,
No, the near Villages in her hard fate
The woeful City must associate:
Not one poor cottage can keep out pale death,
Wherein a child sucks in an infant breath.
They pass through all the coasts about, and strive,
That not one Infant may be left alive:
Their charge so ready are they to fulfill,
And satisfy the Tyrant in his will.
O merciless and matchless murderers.
How can you think when justice once preferres
A bill against your lives, and death you brings
Fore the Tribunal of the King of Kings
To answer this foul act? when their blood cries
To Heaven for vengeance, it will not suffice
That you had Herod's Warrant, Gods Command
Did you knew well against murder firmly stand.
But how have I forgot you all this while,
Poor Innocents, delay must not beguile
You of your worthy suffering, ample glory,
The which alone deserves to make a story.
The Church on blood, and the not doing wrong,
But suffering for it, has foundation strong,
By persecution she receives renown,
And martyrdom gives her a glorious Crown.
The blood of Abel at the Worlds creation
Of this truth gives a pregnant demonstration:
So lik^wise in the Gospels pupi^lage,
The blood of Infants, slain by Herod's rage.
There be two colors which God much delight,
And they are white and red: first, the pure white
Of innocence, then martyrdomes blood red,
And b^th these in the Infants largely spread:
Not all the coats, though quartered nere so fair,
W^^re men their arms emblazon, to repair
Th(...) ^^^try of their Family,
Which time would wear out but for Heraldry,
Are half so glorious, as those fair Arms were,
These Innocents did in their Scutcheon bear,
For, cross of Gules in Argent field they carry, Versus est vagitus in ga^dium
luctus in iubilum. Cyprian. O paruuli beati nunquam tentati, multum luctati,
^am coronati. Augustine.

Well may their Crest be a rich Crown of glory.
Some doubt, but such either do judgment want,
Or else of charity are wondrous scant,
Whether these Infants here deprived of breath,
Were saved or no from an eternal death:
But what should this strange dubitation breed?
Is not Gods promise made unto the seed
Of faithful parents? Were not these received
Into the covenant ere of life bereaved?
They were, they were, therefore their cry did turn
To joy, and they now laugh, who then did mourn:
O blessed Infants, whom the cunning Devil
By his temptation never led to evil,
With death you struggled hard, and for that strife,
You are now crowned with immortal life.
Sure Herod's flattery could nere have wrought you
So great a blessing as his fury brought you.
O blessed age, which could not speak Christ's Name,
Yet was thought worthy to die for the same:
Sure you were borne in a thrice happy time,
Felicities high toy so soon to clime.
You are scarce past the threshold of your birth,
When life comes forth to meet you, and from earth
Takes you to heaven; you do no sooner leave
Your infant cradles, but a Throne receive:
In stead of hanging at your mothers breast
In Abraham's bosom you securely rest:
Fair Infants whom the ancient Church did hold
The Flowers of Martyrs, sprung up in the cold
Of unbelief, whose buds were ^pt to death, Flores martyrum. Aug.

By frost like persecutions bitter breath,
O how your death due praise to Christ affords, Sanguine non lingua passione
non Sermon. Chrysostom.

By blood, not tongue; in wounds, and not in words.
When greedy Wolf the Lamb does bear away,
The tender flesh torn by his teeth, some say,
In taste, if eaten, men shall sweeter find,
Then others killed whole of the same kind:
This observation whether true or no,
Is not material any way to know:
Certain it is, the flesh of these brought under
The fangs of woluish Herod, torn asunder,
Was sweet unto the Lord, and gave delight:
For death of Saints is precious in his sight.
That children should teach men, may seem against sense,
Yet we may learn from them, fair innocence
In all our sufferings must companion be:
For if we suffer ought deservedly,
With these we can expect no Crown to take;
The cause, not cross, does a true mart^r make: Causa non poenafacit Martyrem.
August.

If that be good, though Herod's do conspire
Against our lives, and threaten sword or fire,
They may our bodies, not our souls distress,
And their hate shall but work our happiness,
Our cross shall crown us, and the death they give,
Shall be a means to make us ever live.
Now was fulfilled that fatal Prophecy,
Which was foretold of yore by Jeremy; Ier. 30. 15.

A voice was heard in Rama, whose dire sound
In woe and lamentation did abound.
Among those mothers which were childlesse made,
Rachel was one, whom grief did so invade,
That shunning company, she seemed to live,
As she were borne for nothing but to grieve.
A shady Grove near her now hated-home
A neighbor stood, there did she often rome
In that thick Covert, which made day like night,
She sought to hide her from all humane sight:
Sometime she sets her down close by the foot
Of a fair spreading tree, upon whose root
With nimble hand she 'gins to carue her woes,
But ere she half have done, her passion grows
To such a height, she marres what she has made;
Then with stern rage the bark she does invade,
Stabbing, and mangling of it without stint,
As if her Infants wounds she there could print.
Starting at this, as if fear wings did borrow,
She fled, as if she would outrun her sorrow:
At last a burbling Brook she does epsy,
Whose noise, she thought, did hold fit sympathy
With her in mourning, there she stays her pace,
And seated near it, does extend her face
Over the current: having fixed her look
A while upon the Stream, she chides the Brook
For his to speedy passage: Stay, O stay
Thy course, relentlesse Torrent, did she say,
And carry my complaints with thee along,
My words, although my woes, shall not be long:
Say that a Mother of two hopeful twins
Robbed of that ha^lesse issue, for her sins,
Will never cease to mourn their bloody death,
Till the just heavens in pity stop her breath;
And for this kindness, I to thee will pay
My tears, as a due tribute every day.
This said, her eyes a liquid shewre distill,
As they the Fountain were, the Stream to fill.
All that was done, which she thought vndescried,
By a near Kinsman of hers was espied,
Who now approacht, and sitting down beside her,
In this mild manner did begin to chide her.
For shame at last leave to be thus alone,
And unto senseless things to vent your moan;
Your faith and patience I once thought more strong:
Griefs that recurelesse are should not be long:
By your immoderate sorrow you offend
The highest Powers, and hasten on your end.
Beside such grief is vain, whether the dead,
Or else the living be considered:
The first, if they die well, are blessed; if fail
Of a good end, our tears will naught avail:
Your Infants death in innocence found,
This should you rather comfort, then confound.
The body the souls prison's said to be,
Now it is death which sets this prisoner free,
Who mournes for the enlargement of his child?
But it is the bodies death that makes you wild.
If it be so, O be no longer sorry,
That falls to rise again in greater glory.
Who grieves to see a house pulled to the ground,
Which shall he knows be better built? Some bound
Set to your sorrow then, God will restore
The body far more glorious then before.
Look on your self, and you will find it vain,
So great a grief so long to entertain:
For should your tears in as great plenty fall.
As blood did from your Infants, could they call
Your children back to life, no, though you mourn,
And pine to nothing, they shall nere return.
Take comfort then, lest if you sorrow still,
You seem to spurn against Iehouahs will.
The gri^ued Mother, who had all this while
In much impatience heard him, with a smile
Borrowed from scorn, thus answered, that they live
In health can easily good counsel give
To such as languish in disease and pain,
And they as hardly do it entertain:
Words are but words, I never yet could hear,
That the grieved heart was cured by the ear.
As Well may he which has desire to eat,
Be satisfied by seeing painted meat:
Or he that is through cold like to expire,
Warm his numbe limbs at the Apes Gloworme fire:
As I from cold and painted comfort find
A medicine, to recure my thought sick mind,
Withal that I can from poor patience borrow,
I cannot pay so great a debt of sorrow:
In vain you waste your words, my woes are more
Then time can wear away; therefore give ore
Your fruitless counsel, since my children are not,
Though I consume my self in grief, I care not;
Sorrow has taken possession in my breast,
And only can by death be dispossessed.
When she had spoken thus, in hasty mood
She runs, and hides her in the thickest Wood:
But while to trees she does her woes rehearse,
To other matters I must turn my Verse.
Saturdaies Meditation, or the seventh Canto.
The Argument.
An Angel does to Joseph tell
The death of Herod: Israel
He longs to visit once again:
Nazareth does him entertain.
NOw was the time that the Lord meant to take
Vengeance on Herod, therefore he did make
By just permission, his own issue strive
How he might him of Crown and life deprive:
Herod, while these foul treasons were a breeding,
Got notice of Antipaters proceeding,
So was his base son called: the yrkesome thought
Of this unnatural action, quickly brought
Sickness of mind upon him: and that soar
Increasing, God did yet afflict him more,
And on his body lay a foul disease:
A secret fire he had, whose heat appease
No course of Physic could though much he tried, Iosep. de Bello Iud. lib. 1.

All was in vain, the flame did quenchlesse bide,
His bowels full of pain did not within,
And worms to swarm about him did begin;
The Crampe and Dropsy on his limbs did ceaze,
And there was nothing which might give him ease.
Passing over Jordan, near Asphaltis Lake,
Calyrroes hot Bathes, he needs would make
A means unto his cure, there he did baine, Eusebius.

Yet as he went in, came out full of pain.
While Herod thus did in his torments broile,
Phisicians gave advice, that in hot oil
His body should be suppled, they prepare
A vessel for that purpose, and with care
Put him therein; the fume perturbs his head
So much, that he is taken out half dead.
At last come to himself, he knows to sure,
That he this evil seeks in vain to cure.
Full of despair, somewhat before his end,
For Salome his sister he does send,
(Together with her husband Alexander)
And to perform this foul design command her:
Sister, you see (said the sick man), that fate
Has marked me out for death: the deadly hate
My subjects bear me, will not let them mourn
To see mine ashes closed up in their vrne:
The meanest of them will scarce daigne let fall
A tear, to h^^our my sad funeral,
Rather I fear they will exceed in mirth,
To see my body turned into his earth:
But I have laid a plot their joys to cross,
And make the mourn, not mine, but their own loss,
Their joyful exclamations I Will strike mute,
If you but faithful be to execute:
All their young Nobles (so have I disposed)
Within Hyppod^omus are fast enclosed,
And a strong guard about it, at my death,
As Soon as ever you shall see my br^ath
Forsake my body, give a strict command,
That they may all be murdered out of hand;
So when my corpse unto the grave shall go,
The Jews shall mourn whether they will or no:
So shall I have a glorious Epitaph,
And though low under ground, shall highly laugh.
This said, his ill increasing more and more,
And his despair grown greater then before,
Taking an Apple (such was then his meat)
And being wont to pare, and so to eat,
In hasty wise he called for a kntfe,
And with that sought to rid himself of life:
But either his weak arm this foul intent
Could not perform, or others did prevent
The fatal blow: and must I then still live?
Cried out the Tyrant? Will the just Heavens give
No end unto my sufferings? Must I be
The Ball of scorn, and Butt of misery?
Break break my heart! fly forth imprisoned breath!
And welcome, what I have long looked for, death.
More he had said, but that he scarce had spoke
This, when with rage his very heart strings broke.
While Herod thus in horror breathed his last,
A blessed Angel does to Egypt have,
That Joseph may have word of this event,
Which well he knew would give no small content
To him, so long an exile: in the night,
When dreams the fancy please, or else affright,
The Angel makes approach, and thus begins:
The Tyrant Herod, whose abhorred sins
Did cry so long for vengeance unto Heaven,
At last is justly of his life bereauen:
They that delight in blood not long endure,
Though God be slow in striking, he strikes sure;
His hands be iron, though his feet be wool,
And Tyrants never leave, until they pull
Dire vengeance on their heads, which long delaid,
Falls with the heavier weight. Be not afraid
Of any future mischief, he that sought
The Infants* has his own destruction wrought:
Dead is the Wolf, whose rage like fire did burn,
Back to his pasture may the Lamb return:
Therefore arise and take the blessed Child,
Nor let thy care forget the Mother mild,
To Israel with them return again,
In Egypt thou no longer may remain.
This message which the Lord did now direct
To Joseph, shows that he does his respect:
Gods Saints in trouble must not always live,
In time he will a joyful issue give
To all their sorrows: Joseph may be cast
Into a loathsome prison, but at last
He shall come forth with honor: for a ^it
Job may in anguish on the dunghill sit,
Scraping his soars, ere long a happier fate
Shall crown his joys, and double his estate:
Daniel through envy of malicious men
May closed be within the lions den,
But he their utmost fury shall withstand,
And after live advanced in the land:
Babylons king may give command to throw
^ust Sadruc, Messhac, and Abednego.
Into the furnace, but he shall admire
To see them walk unhurt, untouched by fire,
And afterward, their innocence to grace,
Over the Kingdom seat them in high place.
Joseph an exile may from Herod fly,
But in this persecution must not die,
Now the time comes, when he by Gods command
Must trauai^e back to his own native land,
And with a happy salutation greet,
His Galile, whose smoke he held so sweet:
Like as a man for some long tedious time
^^nisht from his dear Country, to a Clime
^arsh and unpleasant, will, if he do hear
His banishment repealed, with greedy ear
Receive the happy news, and in his mind
A not to be expressed comfort find:
So fared it with our Joseph, when he knew
The tidings of the Tyrants death were true,
And that he might return to Israel,
From which in exile he so long did dwell,
With a glad heart, and more then common care,
He all things for his journey does prepare,
And Phoebus scarce salutes the lightsome day,
When he b^gins his travail, by the way
Rendering due thanks to that Almighty power,
Which had preserved him to this blessed hour.
Suppose by this time they are safe arrived
There, where unwearied labor had so strived
To bring them to the Land of Palestine,
Here Joseph does enquire about the line
Of the deceased Tyrant, and being told
That Archelaus did the Scepter hold
After his father: such man's weakness is,
Though hitherto the Lord did never miss
Safely to guard him a cold trembling fear
Passing the maze of his offended ear,
Took hold upon his heart: the best of Saints
While here they live, live not without their taints.
So Lot, when Sodom was consumed with fire,
Did doubt the Mountains safety, and desire
A place of surer refuge: so the sight
Of Esaus Band of men did much affright
Perplexed Jacob, when he did repair
Back to his native home: O can despair
Lay hold on such as these? what then shall we
Do, when in danger and extremity?
So great a power has fear upon our souls, Resest i^periosa timor. Ovid.
Saepius opinione quam re la^oramus. Soneca.

That it checks virtue, and even grace controules,
And yet sometimes (though fear so far proceed,)
We suffer in opinion, not indeed.
But why, O Joseph were thou thus afraid?
Did thou misdoubt the Lord would send thee aid,
And propulse danger from thee? Could thy mind
Conceive a thought of fear? Since thou did find
Thy gracious God so ready still to send
An Angel for thy guard? Did he defend
Thee and thy charge from Herod's cruelty,
To let you fall by his sons tyranny?
Was his arm shortened, or his love grown less,
That now he could not as much care express
In preservation of you, as before?
Ah no, Gods love increases more and more
To such as serve him, and his power extends
Beyond all limitation to his friends.
^ grant thou might, as not unlikely gather,
That Archelaus would be like his father,
A bloody Tyrant, for a wicked Sire Mali coru^ malum ouum. Proverb.

Leaves his son like himself: a strong desire
To be thought apt for imitation,
Leads children to observe their parents fashion:
But yet for all this thou may rest secure,
He who has undertaken, will procure
Safety for thee and thine, only be bold,
And on his goodness by true faith lay hold:
Danger may threaten, but it shall not harm
Such as are guarded by The Almighty's arm.
Now was the time, that Morpheus with his wand
Did charm a silent sleep on all the Land,
Only perplexed Joseph could not rest,
(...)any cares lay tumbling in his breast.
^he while he thought he should most safety find
(...) going back to Egypt: but his mind
Did quickly alter, when the Lords command
Which bad expressly he should leave the land
To his remembrance came: then he thought best
Where he now lodged to set up his rest:
But that was dashed, when being come so near
He did consider an unmanly fear
Should keep him from his home: in maze of doubt
An Angel came at last to lead him out,
Giving direction, he should not abide
Near Archelaus eye* but turn aside
Into the parts of Galile, for there
He might securely live, without all fear
Joseph obeyes and now his course he bends
To Nazareth, where all his travail ends:
Forfully seated there he lives in peace
With his souls comfort, and his joys increase.
And this says the Evangelist was done,
That there might be a consummation
Of what the Prophets told of Christ: for he
A Nazarite say they shall called be.
Expositors have here been much perplexed,
Because they can directly find this text
In none of all the Prophets; some conceive
That time which does of many things bereave
The world, has in his revolution lost
Those sacred books, where these things were engro'st Chrysostom.

Another before this his sense preferres.
And does for Prophets read int^rpre^^rs, Isidor.

For Prophets may be thought to say that thing,
Which men from them by good deduction bring.
But matter fetched so far we need not use,
Or seek the sacred writer to excuse:
For holy writ two ways a thing affords,
Either according to the sense or words:
Now though we meet not the same words in sound,
Yet the same sense in Scripture may be found.
Nazaren signifies one flourishing,
And does not Esaias call this heavenly King
A Rod of Iesses Stem, a branch that grows
Out of his root, each one that Scripture knows, Isal. 11. 1.

Knows this prophetique truth: Again this name
Is given him, that he may have the same
Which his type had before him: Sampsons facts
Did but foresignifie our Saviors acts:
Sampson from barraine parents did proceed:
And Christ alone was the pure Virgins seed:
His killing of the lion did foretell
Christ should that roaring lions power quell:
Slaughtering his foes even when he lost his breath
showed Christ should overcome his foes by death:
Now of the first we read that he was styled
A Nazarite to God: therefore this child Judge. 13. 15.

That truth and type might fitly both agree,
was called a Nazaren as well as he.
But properly his name came from the place
Hight Nazareth, which had the happy grace
To give him education as a bower
Most fit to entertain so sweet a flower.
Nazareth does a flower signify,
And what place could he better dignifie
With his abode, then that whose name expressed
His nature, who of all flowers was the best:
Alcinous garden, or Adonis Bower,
Was never decked with half so rare a flower,
Those of the greatest beauty are but silly
(...) Sharons Rose, or to the Valleys Lilly.
This is not like French Flowers, in out side brave,
Which yet within nor sent, nor virtue have,
No, from an outside mean there does distill
Such virtue, as the Saints with grace does fill.
The Soul a Nosegay is, if this adorn it,
The Lord will take the sent, if not, he will scorn it.
O may this blessed flower which now does grow
In Heavens high Nazareth, not here below,
Make us so sweetly in Gods nostrils smell,
That we transplanted from the earth may dwell
In Heaven for ever, and in such a joy,
As time cannot wear out, or death destroy,
Flourish with Christ, and blisfull Peans sing,
Unto the praise of our eternal King.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. l. 2. r. an. l 25. r. armies. p. 10. l. 10. r. Jew. l 27. r.
successors. p. 13. l. 2. r y'runne. p. 16 l. 25. r. thy. p. 17 l 17. r. when p.
18. l. 6. r. humane. p. 19. l. 20. r. leese. p. 31. l 18. r. nonce. p. 34. l.
10. r. repurchace. p. 43 l. 16. r. Ewe. p. 45. l. 14. r yield. p. 49. l. 19. r.
kill. p. 57. l. 22. r in.


