THE Parricide Papist, OR, Cut-throate Catholic.

A tragical discourse of a murder lately committed at Padstow in the County
of Cornwall by a professed Papist, killing his own Father, and afterward
himself, in zeal of his Popish Religion. The 11 of March last past. 1606.

Written by G Closse, Preacher of the Word of God at Black Torrington in Deuon.

VIRESCIT VULNERE VERITAS
printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for Christopher Hunt, dwelling in Louells Inn in
Paternoster-row. 1606.

THE Parricide Papist, OR, Cut-throate Catholic.
PErusing the plentiful and profitable labors of many learned and zealous
Writers of this time, and the Christian forwardnes of all sorts bending their
batteries against the Bulwarks of Superstition and Popery, some with their
pens, others with their pikes, and all with their prudent policies pursuing
the reculing Miscreants: I thought it not impertinent to my place, profession,
and occasion, to cut a few vacant hours out of my private businesses, ses, and
to latch a blow (amongst others,) at the scull of the seauen-headed Dragon, and
whore Apoc. 17. 3
of Babylon, rather to testify my consenting will to true Religion, then my
contenting skill as able, to add any ornament unto that which the Lord has so
gloriously adorned with wisdom, and power to support it self against all
malignitie of the world, and the gates of hell not able to prevail against it.

Every clear eye, and judicious care, has sufficiently discerned the cause of
Rome to be deserted, and destitute of all defense by argument: enough (if not
too much) has been answered to all their allegations in defense of their
false Sinagogue, and accusations in offense and derogation of our true reformed
Christian Churches: and of these blind Worms; and deaf Adders, may be
verified the saying of Solomon, That though you bray a Prou, 27, 22 23, 9,
fool in a Mortar, yet he will be never the vviser. I shall therefore commend
unto your Christian considerations, the Tragical act and event, which lately
happened in the County of Cornwall, (not far from the place of my habitation:)
and seeing our Popish pamphletors cuculate nothing more than surmised
calumniations against the persons of our godly and most painful Ministers, not
being otherwise able to discredit their doctrines, I will expose to their
Owle-sight eyes examples of their own Sectaries to be looked upon, and
seriously considered. Wherein to shun the just taxation of slander, (which
is most proper to their Popish practices,) I will propose matter in fact
evident, by public Records, in quality execrable, in time new, and freshly
bleeding in our eyes.

Luther and Beza, being surcharged with manifold fictions, and odious
imputations, out-liued the envy of their enemies, and in their life time
confuted their forged imputations: but ye examples of these men's more then
barbarous blood-thirstinesse, shall outliue all ages living, and remain
inchronicled as Prodigies, and stand enroled in public acts, as memorialls to
all posterities, so long as our laws, or any civil government shall be
pracised in the Land: and let them hear me to tell the^ plainly, that which
our blessed Savior told their forefathers the Pharisees roundly, that they
are of their Father John; 8, 44
the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning: they are the progeny of
Caine, sacrificing Abell, because he sacrifices to GOD Gene, 4, 5*
a better smelling oblation then theyrs.

If they will needs judge the Tree by the fruits, and the cause by the
effects: then what piety can be imagined in that Profession, which is so
bloody, as theyrs is notified in all the world to be? Yea, their whore of
Babylon, in all her deliciousnes, is especially banquetted Apoc, 17. 6,
with the blood of the Saints.

If I should speak of usual murders, which common cut-throates commit in
their purse-takings, or that furious swaggerers shed in their hot bloods, and
wrathful reuenges, it were no more in comparison of that which comes in this
argument, then a bloody nose to a gasping wound. For though all killing is
cruel, and an enemy to nature, yet the unnatural and detested Parricides
(whereof this argument entreats) astonisheth all human reason to consider
it, appalleth all the senses to apprehend it, and exceeds all credulity to
believe such a thing to be done, till they behold it actually performed.

The wise Lawgiver answered discreetly, Solon.
excusing himself that he made no Law for him that murdered his Father,
because he never imagined such an odious act against nature would ever be
imagined, much less attempted of any human creature.

But see the blindness of heresy and false religion, which being a poison of
the soul, brought from the den of darkness, and a drugge of the devil, how
it not only opposes the creature against the Creator, man against GOD, and
man against man, but transformeth their whole natures, ingendering in them
unnatural thoughts and desires, and producing effects odious to GOD and
nature. In these our latter days, men being 1, Tim, 4, 1 2, Tim, 3, 2, 3,
departed from the faith, are become (as the Apostle says) unnatural: and God
giving them over into a reprobate sense, which would not receive Rom, 1, 26
the love of the truth, they have changed the natural use of things, to that
which is against nature; as not only their execrable Sodomitries, but their
thrice detested Parricides, openly testify, and cry out against them.

Do I, or dare I enstile them Parricide Papists, or Cut-throate Catholics,
and be destitute of examples pathetically to move, and effectually to prove
it? No, no, amongst many old, I will introduce one new exemplarie instance
thereof, lately acted in the midst of their smoking broils, irrefragably
warranted by unreprovable witnesses. One Inigo Ieanes of Padstow in the
County of Cornwall, being lately somewhat reclaimed from his Popish
profession, and frequenting the Church (though as it appears with no great
devotion) was in the harvest of their late politic platform, assailed with ye
perswasiue tongue of one William Manfil, (a professed Romanist) to return to
his old byas again. Who upon better information of his friends, replied, that
it was in vain now any longer to consect in that Religion, seeing after the
death of the late Queen, the inauguration of a most religious King, forced the
tide and stream against the Romish Church, so that both hap and hope, were
drowned and perished together. Yet the Temptor, like satan his master,
desirous to cast down the strong in faith from the pinacles of the Temple,
persuades Math, 4,
encouragement, and confidence of better success, assuring him, that
platformes were the^ in hand, not only for redemption, but renown of the
Catholics, and that forces were in full preparation both at home and abroad to
advance the Catholic cause, as he termed it. Only it behooved them to apply
their massings, and ceremonial obseruances, to obtain it by merit at Gods
hands.

Perhaps they imagined (as the Prophet Psalm, 50, 21
speaks) that GOD was like unto themselves, and would participate with them
in any wickedness, if they could make him smell to their bloody vnbleeding
sacrifice. But the poor credulous caytiffe, being led on by these fair
pretenses, and hopeful preparations, relapsed Catholic again: and as busy
as other Waspes of that swarm, consorted with the crew of other
corner-creepers, in obscure Caves to do service to the Prince of darkness.
And although James the Father of the^ said Inigo Ieanes often dissuaded him
from those dangerous courses, which the severity of the Laws would sharply
correct, yet he desperately running on, and resolved to persist, not only
refused to obey the admonitions of his father, but became an earnest perswader
that he would permit them a place of secrecy in his house, for the exercise
of their idolatrous massings.

The Father, (whether fearing God or the Law more, I omit to censure) still
constantly contradicted his sons unreasonable and unseasonable request,
alleging, that at this time, Laws were making in ye Parliament, to punish
Popery more severely then ever heretofore: and that upon just occasion of the
late discovery of so damnable a stratageme, as was never plotted against any
Christian or Heathen state: and therefore in some round terms (as it seemed)
checked and rejected his peevish sons Popish petition.

But he, in the frantic spirit of a Papist, hastily took up a club or beetle
(wherewith they used to cleave wood) and rudely, (O let me study a more apt
word for such savage inhumanitie) barbarously assailed his own natural
Father, and struck him violently on the head to the ground. And doubting that
he had not thoroughly dispatched him, took up a bar of iron, and struck him
with maine force and brake his back, so that he presently died of those
wounds.

Then this Inigo Ieanes, leaving his Father groueling on the ground, and
wallowing in his own blood, immediately fled to a Chapel (called Saint
Saviors) near Padstowe, and hastily vnclothing himself, with a bad and blunt
knife (adding all his force thereto) ghastly in two or three places gashed his
own belly athwart, that his bowels were to be seen.

The Mother of the said Inigo shortly after coming into her Garden, and
finding her husband thus cruelly murdered, and utterly dismayed therewith,
came into the house enquiring for her son Inigo Ieanes, and finding him
fled away, she caused another of her sons, and some other messenger to seek
him: who coming unto the foresaid Chapel of Saint Saviors, found him there
leaning to one of his hands, and most greeuouslie wounded.

Upon some speeches and conference, the said Inigo confessed the murdering of
his father, and wounding himself: and was very desirous to speak with Master
Nicholas Prideaux (then and now high Sherieffe of Cornwall,) dwelling near
the said Town of Padstow, to the intent he might reveal some special matters
unto him, wherewith it seemed his conscience was surcharged. And being brought
unto his presence, he instantly made known unto him, how he had been seduced
by the foresaid Manfill unto his erroneous Religion: and that the same morning,
himself, with seven men, and eight women more, had been at Mass, at one
Richard Hores house of S. Eruin.

Heerevpon the said Master Prideaux, sent for three other Justices of the
Peace next adjoining, namely Master Arundell of Trerise, Master Michell, and
Master Cosworth Esquires, to whom upon further examination he confessed all
that is before declared: and that he had been thereunto drawn and moved by
the instigation of the devil, and seeming very sorrowful for the fact, after
some two or three days languishing, departed this life. And so we will leave
him to the tribunal seat of the most righteous, and All-seeing Judge to be
censured.

Before I proceed further in examining the innumerable impieties in this one
fact comprised, I may not omit to note unto ye world, what a blind and
senseless guide they had for their Priest, that from such a director, no hope
of better fruits could be conceived. This paltry Popeling, was well known a
little before to be a badde and rude Schoolemaister, and a fellow of such noted
stupidity, that young Gentlemen, seruingmen, and others, for an exercise and
recreation, would practice to have him stand still, whiles they with all their
force, quoyted sbillings or testernes at his blockish browe, which for a small
piece of money he would as quietly endure, as if a Stoicall stupidity had
possessed his brains and body, even till his face and forehead was
oftentimes most grieuouslie gashed, moving many beholders to pity him,
which did not pity himself.

This Dorus, was now lately become like one of Ieroboams Priests, taken as one
out of the 1, Reg. 13, 13 2, Chro, 11 15 Judges, 17, 10, 11,
basest of the people, and consecrated with the Popes unguent, a priest of the
devil, or Masse-monging Catholic. This calfe of Dan, being now become a
Bell-wether to the scabbed flock, it is doubted whether the sheep infected
him more with the hope of hire, to become a Micahs priest, or he with his
Ramme-like forehead, had hardened the faces of his flock unto this extreme
impudency and impiety: but sure the proverb was well shared amongst them,
such a priest, such people. Their mother was Atheism, their nurse Ignorance,
Darkness their dwelling, and Confusion their inheritance.

Let me return to our seraphicall Doctors of Rome, which accuse all the world
but themselves of impurity: and let them answer me in earnest, shall we know
the tree by the fruits? Math, 7, 16,
judge of the soundnes of the profession by the works of the professors? Will
you try us, not by rules of Divinity, but examples of Divines? Look upon this
pattern, peruse this picture of your Parricide Papist, whose offense is taxed,
not as he is a man falling through infirmity, but as he is a Papist, erring
wilfully, no passion but his profession, no hope of gain, but blind devotion,
no reason but his unreasonable Religion, plunged him into these execrable
enormities. It is your religion that has dubbed you man-quellers, king
quellers, selfe-quellers. Are you not Parricides? alas, your masters are not
like Peter, that forsook Math, 26, 34 John, 21, 15,
his Master, and repenting did counteruaile his triple denial, with a
threefold confession of him: but as your Legend notes of Judas, that had
murdered his father, and committed incest with his mother, and became Christ's
disciple for a color to shadow his horrible impieties, and betraying his
master lastly hanged himself: such succession rightly correspondeth with your
Popedom, by bloodsheds they are hatched, grow great, and strengthen themselves.

Phocas murdered his Master the Emperor Au^. Victor.
Mauritius, and was it not the first and surest step to the Romish Popedom?
But it may be you can allow this lay Parricide to murder Princes, for
establishment of a Popedom: Your holy Fathers, Popes and Bishops, have by
sundry poysonings, some lost their lives and places, and others gained them:
how approve you this spiritual parricide? Christian Kings and Princes, are
designed to destruction by your holy Popes ordinances: is it no Parricide? The
Prince of Orange, and the French-King deceassed, murdered by Papists, and he
that now reigns, assailed to be slaughtered by your unhallowed hands: will
not all men abhor these portentuous parricides? King John of England, long ago
poisoned by Monks, and our late renowned Maiden Queen more often attempted
with trecheries, then your Popes crown has hairs of an honest Prelate, does
it not proclaim to the world your damnable parricides? Let me make an end with
you all, which would make an end with us all, your late stratageme, to blow up
with gunpowder our potent King, Queen, Prince, Prelate, Nobility, and the
whole state of Parliament, was it not an unheard of practice of Parricide?

I hear some of your Politikes under their visards to confess, that it was an
horrible Answer to the Discovery: praeface to the King.
project, which no Religion can excuse, no reason defend, no authority
maintain: that God and heaven are against it, men and earth detest it, (the
silly (you should have said, slilie) delinquents) themselves did lament it.
Go to then, if to murder Parents, (which are in the highest degree of
natural love) if to murder Princes, which are in most eminent dignity of
polyticall parentage, if to murder a whole Commonwealth, your native Country
(quae vna omnes Cicero.
omnium charitates complexa est) compriseth the lives, and loves of us all, be
not an inexplicable parricide, then I must, and will confess, I have
ouer-leaped my limits, and mistitled your professors of the Popish religion, in
terming them Parricides. But a father of children, must needs be touched with
a horrer in his heart, to conceive how many fathers and mothers you would have
made childlesse, and children fatherless by your hellish proiects: A Prince
that is honored as a father in his kingdom, and embraces his subjects with
an affectionate love, abhors the remembrance of so vile an enterprise, to
see a state so flourishing, in a moment torn, and utterly dissigured: All
lovers of God and Religion, yea every man that tastes any sweetness of civil
society, stands amazed, and amated at the consideration of such barbarous
immanitie, ouer-turning Temples, palaces, cities, and families, without any
remorse, or respect of Religion, or order: and yet all these effects, cannot be
denied to be the fruits of your Romish religion. I will conclude, and hold it
maintained with a world of witnesses, that though the term be tart, yet it is
true, Papists are Parricides.

But why (say they) is this rude phrase of Cut-throate Catholics (so harshly
sounding in vulgar ears) applied to our pope-holy professors? Let
Northumberland, above twenty years ago murdering himself in ye Tower, Arden
strangling himself in Newgate, and this our Cornish Catholic, (so lately
killing his father and himself) stand forth as freshbleeding examples to
verify it. Did not Percy and Catesby, which chose rather to die wilfully and
desperately by the soldiers hand, then submit themselves, and live to confess
their faults, satisfy the King and Commonwealth, and permit themselves a
breathing time to repent the^ of their hideous attempts, bear witness against
them, and convince them to be desperate Selfe-murtherers?

I dare not charge all, nor any of their co^plices which died in prison, to be
guilty of Selfe-poysoning, but the manifest desperate attempt of Nicholas Oven,
most bloodily mangling, and massacring himself in the Tower, and with his
own hands tearing out his fat and bowels, the second day of March last past,
(this our Cornish Cut-throate seconding him within nine days after) cannot be
denied, nor exempted from the imputation of barbarous immanity in our Popish
professors.

What is the whole practice of the Romish Church, wading through blood of
Princes and kingdoms to establish a Popedom, continually complotting and
practicing massacres in the whole Christian world, but a public proclamation
to beware of Cut-throate Catholics. Though they go in sheep skins, Math,
7, 15 1, Reg, 14, 2, 6.
we know them to be Wolves: howsoever disguised, the true prophet discerns
the dissembling of Ieroboams wife, and will prophecy the renting of their
kingdom. Whatsoever their oaths and protestations be, we know their
Aequiuocations and Dispensations; not peace but war, not loyalty but
rebellion, not the Kings honor, but the Popes advancement is their errand. And
let the favorers, and furtherers of your treasous understand, that those which
hate their natural Prince, will not long adhere to Strangers. Such as can
consent to the confusion of their native Country, will not be trusted for
friends to any Commonwealth. Such as murder their Parents, will not spare
Aliants. Those that kill themselves, which is the fountain of all loves, (for
sibi nequam cui bonus erit) can never find any who^ they will deem worthy of
preservation, if they shall cross their cursed courses.

Their pontifical Bishop, (that beast which Apo, 17, 1, 2,
sits upon many waters,) and has brewed and broached these bloody broils
in the Christian state, and glories in his title, to be called Ecclesiae
Catholicae Pontifex, a Bridge-maker, to transport his passengers the Catholic
creatures into his Sea of Rome, over the Rivers and streams of blood, mixing
his intoxicating potions of heresies, idolatries, and traditious, wherewith
the Kings of the earth, (quaffing and carousing the cups of his fornication)
are made drunken, as the Evangelical prophet speaks. Else let him be
Pontifaex, et terrae fax, the dregs of the Sea, and firebrand of the Earth,
with his filth polluting the waters, and with his fiery faggots of
persecution, scorching and consuming the inhabitants of the world. No doubt it
shall be done unto him, as he has done unto others, and his measure shall be in
seauen-folde manner, measured unto him again, when the beast shall be cast into
the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for euer-more.

But for a monition to the simple seduced ones, (for ye Seducers seem
desperately hardened in their pertinacie) we pray you to look on the present
state of things, with open and equal eyes, and consider the courses and
carriages of the cause on both sides: and let them in plainenes confess,
whether they have not discerned the hand of God against them and their
attempts, turning their deepest devises like Achitophels policies, into
foolishness, and 2, Sam, 17, 14, 23, 18, 9, 1, Reg, 1, 7, 2, 25. Numb, 16, 1,
2, 31,
bringing the wheel over their Counselors and conspirators, so that they both
perish together, like Achitophell and Absalon, Ioab and Adoniah, Corah and his
accomplices.

Their hardened Pharao, striving to keep Gods people in bondage, and servitude
to his ordinances, and will not let them peaceably depart to serve their living
God, according to his commandment, shall no doubt in the end, receive the
condign wages of his merit, and hardness of heart: and our Moses and Aarons,
Exodus, 21, 51
(our elected Princes, priests and prophets) shall prosper in the deliverances,
informations, and government of Gods people.

The mighty God, who by little and little cast out the Cananites, and planted
Israel in their Land, has his workings constant and consonant, always like
himself, full of patience and justice, with a slow and strong arm bringing 2,
Sam, 7, 10. Exodus, 1, 7, 8,
mighty things to pass. The kingdom of Antichrist is in short time by degrees
cut short, and abated, and the Israel of GOD, has as mightily prospered, out
of a few families enlarging his borders into many kingdoms, and what
remains, but that he which lets 2, These. 2, 6, 7.
be taken out of the way, and that the man of sin being revealed, may be
also removed and rooted Math, 15, 13
out, as a plant which is not of our heavenly fathers planting.

We confess the Church of Rome received, and for many years retained the
sincerity of the Gospel and true religion: and so there was a good Pharao in
Egypt, which by holy Joseph's Gene, 45. 10
direction ordered his kingdom, and gave unto the people of God a fruitful
possession in the Land of Goshen, where they prospered, and Gene, 47, 6
multiplied exceedingly; but there arose in process Exodus, 1, 8,
of time another Pharao, which knew not Joseph, and became a tyrant unto the
people of God, and cruelly oppressed them. So Rome is become Babylon, her
Candlestick is removed, Apoc, 18, 2, 3, 4, Cap, 2, 4, 5.
she is fallen from her first faith, and the faithful City is become an
Harlot, and her Antiquity without Verity, is but oldnes of Errors, and we
must depart from her, which is departed from GOD.

If she will return unto her spouse, and forsake her Lovers with whom she
committed all her fornications and abominations, we will rejoice with her for
such an holy reconciliation: else we will cry unto the people of God to come
out of her, and not to partake with her sins, and idolatries, least they
partake of her grievous plagues and punishments, when the cup of the Lords
wrath shall be powered upon her.

God of his unspeakable goodness, make that your sins be not an hinderance
unto his rich mercies, but that he will speedily, for the Elects sake, cut
short the power of Antichrist, and amplify the borders of his kingdom, that
our eyes may see it, and our posterity may rejoice in his great salvation, and
praise him for all our corporal, and spiritual deliverances. So be it. Amen.

FINIS.

