THE PLEA FOR INFANTS AND ELDER PEOPLE, concerning their Baptism. OR A
PROCESS OF THE PASSAGES between M. John Smyth and Richard Clyfton: Wherein,
first is proved, That the baptising of Infants of believers, is an ordinance of
God. Secondly, That the rebaptising of such, as have been formerly baptized in
the Apostate Churches of Christians, is utterly unlawful. Also, The reasons and
objections to the contrary, answered. Divided into two principal heads.

I. Of the first Position, concerning the baptising of infants. II. Of the
second Position, concerning the rebaptising of Elder people.
Mat. 7. 15. 16. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves, you shall know them by their fruits. 2
Pet. 2. 1. 2. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift damnation. And many shall follow their damnable ways, by whom
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. Printed at Amsterdam by Gyles Thorp.
Anno 1610.

To all them which are called and sanctified of God the Father, and returned to
Jesus Christ.
LEt it not seem strange (dear brethren) neither cause any to distaste the
right ways of the Lord, because from amongst us some have departed from the
faith, and are turned after errors: For the holy Ghost has foretold us* that
even from amongst our selves, there should me^ arise speaking perverse things
to draw Disciples after the^, Act. 20. 30. And with such, the primitive
Apostolic Churches were greatly molested, and that whylest the Apostles were
living. John does also witness that in his time there were many Antichrists.
they went (says he) out from us. 1. Ioh. 2. 18. 19. meaning even out of the
bosom of the Church. And our Savior says, many false Prophets shall arise
and deceive many. Mat. 24. 11. And Peter says, many shall follow their
damnable ways, 2 Pet. 2. 2. All which may teach us not to be offended when the
like does befall to the Churches in our times: Seeing it is incident to Gods
people, not only to be persecuted by enemies without, but also greived with
false brethren, that under pretense of more sincerity of religion, will seek
to destroy the faith, being the very instruments of Satan, whom he subborneth
to deceive the unstable and to corrupt their minds from the simplicity that is
in Christ. 2. Cor. 11. 3. These things being considered, it behooves us to mind
the exhortations and warnings given by the Apostles of Christ, that is, to
stand fast and keep the instructions which we have been taught. 2 These. 2. 15.
And not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God
or no: for many false Prophets are gone into the world, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. And the
rather it stands us the more upon to take heed to our selves and be admonished
by the word of the Lord, because, as the Divil on the one hand, prevayleth in
these our times, by worldly arguments, of profit, pleasure and the like^, to
keep many back from walking in the right ways of God: So on the other hand,
(under glorious shows of pretended holiness) has he deceaved many, and drawn
them into damnable heresies, laboring to poison the fountains of wholesome
doctrine, reveiled in these last days unto his Church: And wher^^ God in
mercy has preached unto us the Gospel (that formerly he had ^eached to
Abraham our father, and by the Apostles unto both Jews ^d Gentiles) that a
long time has been greatly obscured through the ^oggy mists of popish
doctrines, now seeks to spoil the church of Christ ^ereof altogether, by
that detestable heresy of Anabaptisme, which as ^ has overspread many places,
to the great annoyance of the people of God: So (as a leprosy) has it at this
present infected some of our own ^ntryemen, who are not only taynted
therewith, but have revolted from ^e faith, and taken upon them the profession
thereof, and published their ^reticall opinions in our own language. For there
is lately set forth (...)rtayne Treatise of theirs, entitled, The Character of
the Beast, ^c. A title as it is most blasphemous (being understood of the
baptising ^f infants) so is the book it self full of many dangerous errors,
wherewith ^he simple may easily be deceaved. And seeing the same book is sent
over ^to our own country, and is spread abroad into the hands of many* I have
thought good also, to give warning to all that loves the Lord Jesus and ^e
careful of their own salvation, to take heed thereof. And for this and have
published this Treatise following, containing a Process of the Passages
between Mr. Smyth (the author of that book) and me, wherein ^l (whose eyes it
shall please God to open) may see the notable sleights of Sa^han by this his
instrument, who first, sought to disgrace the holy Scriptures translated, and
to cast them out of Gods worship, and now in his Charcter, to distroy the
covenant of grace (which of old was given to Abraham including the children
with the parents,) and to bring in a new Gospel that excludes the children of
the faithful both from the covenant and baptism the seal thereof. I had no
purpose of publishing these my writings, had not the occasion been offered by
Mr. Smyth in printing our former private Passages: but so having done, I could
(...)no less, then to publish these my labors also, unless I should have been
injurious to the truth. Seeing I had received the copy of Mr Smythes book in
written hand, which he purposely sent unto me, as a reply to my former answer,
to his two Anabaptistical Positions, whereunto I had almost finished this my
second answer before his book was printed. Otherwise (if I had not been so far
interessed therein) I should have been glad if this work had been taken in hand
by others more sufficient then my self. But thus God having disposed to employ
me in this part of his service at this present: I shall desire the godly
Reader, to accept this my small endeavors, proceeding from an heart, earnestly
striving to mainteyne that faith, which was once given unto the Sainsts and to
supply my weakness with his better labors, as there shall be cause. And withal
to take notice, that I have here set down the whole Passages (touching this
controversy) between Mr Smyth and me. First, his Positions with the Reasons
annexed. 2. My answer thereunto written in private unto him, which (without my
knowledge) he published together with his reply, committing that against me
therein, which he condemns in Mr Barnard against himself. Parallels in the
epistle to the Reader. Thirdly, the Sum of his Reply. And lastly, my Answer
thereunto. So that the Reader may see how these things have (from the
beginning) passed between us. The Lord give us to discern the truth from
falsehood, to look to our selves that we loose not the things which we have
done, but that we may receive a full reward. And now unto him that is able to
keep us that we fall not, and to present us faultlesse before the presence of
his glory with joy: To God only our Savior be glory and Majesty, Dominion
and power, both now and ever.

Amen. Richard Clifton.

AN ANSWER TO Mr SMYTHES Epistle to the Reader, which he has directed,
To every one that loves the truth in sincerity.

BY these words, it seems Mr Smyth would intimate, that his care is to
mainteyne the truth, and that in sincerity he loves the same, whereas in
deed, he has destroyed the faith, is become an enemy to the covenant of grace,
and a perverter of the right ways ^f the Lord: and withal so confident in
defense of his heresies, that he ^^es to challendge a combat with all the
Separation: belike to fear men ^ith great words, and to boast with Rabsake, as
if his forces were invin^ble: But what they are it will appear in this
discourse following.

In the Epistle it self, first Mr Smyth seems to excuse their mutabilitie in
Religion, saying: It may be thought most strange that a man should often times
change ^s religion, and it cannot be accounted a commendable quality in any
man to make any alterations, etc. this must needs be true (and we confess it)
if one condition be (...)itted, that the Religion which a man changes be the
truth, for otherwise to change (...)lse religion, is commendable, etc.

But Mr Smyth and his company have changed a true Religion for a ^alse, and
therefore that can be no commendable quality in them: And ^uch inconstant
persons (as himself says) cannot escape the deserved imputation ^folly or
weakness of judgment therein. Thus out of his own mouth pro^ouncing sentence
against himself: For that alteration of him and his company, ^s not from
falsehood to truth, but the leaving of the truth (which formerly ^hey professed)
and a taking up of error after error: first calling into question, whether the
scriptures being translated into other tongues, were not the writings of men.
Differenc. page 10. Then casting the reading of them out of the worship of God,
affirming that there is no better warrant to bring translations of Scripture
into the Church, and to read them as parts and helps of worship, then to bring
in expositions, paraphrasts and sermons upon the Scripture, seeing all these are
equally humane in respect of the work, equally divine in respect of the matter
they handle. Differ: page 10. And for the same cause, separated themselves from
other Churches that did read and use the same in their public meetings. After
this, they dissolved their Church (which before was conjoined in the
fellowship of the Gospel and profession of the true faith) and Mr. Smyth being
Pastor thereof, gave over his office, as did also the Deacons, and devised to
enter a new communion by renouncing their former baptism, and taking upon them
an other, of man's invention, bringing in an other Gospel, besides that which
was preached to Abraham, Genesis 12, 3, and 17. 7. etc. Gal. 3, 8. And now again,
many of this new communion have separated themselves from the rest, holding the
error about the incarnation ^f this new ^aptised co^^union ^ere are re^ayning
as ^is reported ^t above ^. persons, ^l the rest ^e run in ^ further ^rors.
of Christ. An other sort are excommunicate, namely M. Smyth and diverse with
him, for holding (as it is reported by some that were of them) that their new
washed company is no true church, and that there cannot be in a church the
administration of baptism and other ordinances of Christ, without Officers,
contrary to his former judgment, practice and writings, and yet rests not
but is inquiring after a new way of walking, (as the same persons affirm)
breeding more errors, as is strongly suspected, and by his manuscripts partly
appears. Whereby it is manifest, that these men can not clear themselves of
instabilitie and changeablenes in Religion, but are guilty of that inconstancy
that is worthy reproof and damnable.

Further he says, For a man of a Turk to become a Jew, of a Jew a Papist, of
a Papist a Protestant, are al commendable changes etc. so that not to change
religion is evil simply: and therefore that we should fall from Puritanisme to
Brownisme, and from Brownisme to true christian baptism, is not simply evil in
it self, except it be proved that we have fallen from the true religion, etc.

Here Mr. Smyth would make the world believe (as it is the manner of al
heretics) that their alterations were goings forward to further truths, and
therefore commendable. But if their true Christian baptism, (whereof they
boast) prove a notable heresy, (as it is indeed, and in this Treatise is
proved) then his comparison holds not, but rather their estate is like to those
in 1 Timothy 1, 19. that put away faith and a good conscience, and as concerning
faith, have made shipwreck. And that bring in damnable heresies. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
etc. denying the covenant of grace, and the lawful use of the scriptures, etc.
to bring upon themselves swift damnation, if God give them not speedy
repentance.

Next M. Smyth setts down the questions controverted, and hereafter answered,
affirming that this controversy is between them and the Separation, whereas he
might as well have said, between them and all christian churches, that have
been or are at this day: for it is not we alone that ^ndemne these their
heresies, but both the ancient and modern Chur^es, and vvriters in all ages,
(as with one consent) have opposed against ^em.

But where he pretends the publishing of this controversy, to be for the ^ay of
God the manifesting of the truth to our own nation, and the destruction of
^man of sin, he geveth us to mind how Satan has bewitched his soul ^
believe that such can be the effects of his heritical opinions. It is the
^ollicy of the Divil to propound glorious ends, to such as he seduceth, as ^
Evah and others, and teaches his Ministers to do the like, that by fair and
^attring speeches, and shows of good, they might more easily deceave the
^mple. And therefore seeing we are forwarned that there shall be false Teachers
amongst us, which privily shall bring in damnable heresies, it behooves us ^o
mind the counsel of the Apostles, to try the spirits, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. And not ^o
be carried about with every wynd of doctrine. Ephe. 4. 14.

Now happily, (says Mr. Smyth,) some man will wish that the controversy had
(...) with the Rabbis of the Separation, and not with Mr Clyfton, whom they
ca(...)iate to be a weak man, unable to deal in so great a controversy: well,
let the Reader take notice that though it be Mr Clyftons pen, yet it is not
only Mr Clyftons (...)se and def^nce, but his allegatio^s and Reasons are the
best plea of the greatest Rabbis the^ ^elves, And if they can say better, they
may now speak, for by publishing answer to their Reasons, we do chalendge all the separation in special to the combat.

This Challenger would feign have the world to take notice, that he deals with
an adversary that is too weak to try out this controversy with him, and so to
forestall men's judgments before ever they come to the reading of my answer.
And because he would not be seen to be the Author himself of my disgrace, he
imputes this report to the Rabbis of the Separation (as it pleases him in
his taunting manner to term them) who (I am persuaded) are guiltles thereof.
But if any had so said unto him in private, yet does he in publishing the same,
break the bounds of love. For mine own part, whether any have so spoken or
not, it shall not offend me, I know the Lord measures his guiftes to every one
as he will. 1 Cor. 12. 8. -- 11. I praise God for that I have, and do not envy,
but rejoice in the graces that God bestows upon others, and pray that they
may use them to his glory, and to edification. Notwithstanding though Mr Smyth
think me to weak to encounter with him, yet the Lord assisting me, I mean
not for all these his disgraceful speeches, to yield him the cause, or give
back one foot from the defense thereof, knowing that the truth which I contend
for: will discover and convince his damnable errors: the which though he set a
glorious show upon (as a merchant of false wares) by misapplying of Scriptures:
yet will the falsehood of them appear, to al such whose eyes God shall open, to
discern between the truth and lies. Moreover if I in my weakness, make to
appear how unconscionably and untruly Mr Smyth deals against the truth: his
glorious boasting and Philistine valor, will have the more disgrace, then if
he had dealt with men of greater gifts: and God shall have the greater glory,
to foyl such a warlike Champion with weak and base means.

As for my allegations and reasons which he says, are the best plea of the
greatest Rabbis, etc. herein he both taxes me and wrongeth them, me, as if I
had been but their pen man in my former answer; them, in saying my reasons are
their best plee, whereas he has had neither conference with them, by speeches
or writing about these matters, save only with Mr Robinson. And therefore so
to speak without trial, bewrayes but the bitterness of his spirit against them.
Thus Mr Smyth preparing way for his great challendge, by pretending mine
insufficiency, calls forth the Rabbis (as he terms them) to speak,
challendging the whole Separation to the combat: whereas a wise man would have
spared such speeches until he had seen the issue of his combat, already
attempted: and not thus to provoke others, until he had greater likelihood of
victory. As for those reverend men whom now he calls upon for better, if they
can say better, they have already said and written so much against his errors,
as I am assured he will never be able to answer, and when it pleases him to
reply, (if there be occasion) I doubt not but as they have done, so the Lord
will enable them to batter down with spiritual weapons, his greatest forces,
that he shall be able to raise against the truth.

And whereas Mr Smyth seems to insinuate, that by his answering of my
reasons, he has answered theirs, herein he is deceaved: for the Reasons in my
former answer, (be they what they are,) I acknowledge for mine own, (though
written unto him without any purpose of publishing) if therefore weakness be
found in them, let it be imputed unto me, and neither to our Teachers, (who had
no hand in setting down thereof) nor yet to the truth it self. As for his
challenging of the whole Separation, and other his intemperate speeches in his
epistle, they bewray in him a malicious heart against our poor Church,) and
puffed up with too lofty a conceit of his (...) strength. Did ever any of the
Prophets or servants of God thus chal(...)ge a combat with the Lords people?
in deed such braving speeches (...)eeded from Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 10. that
defied the whole host of Is(...); and from Rabsake. 2. King. 18. 23-25. against
the Jews: But ^as never heard that an Israelite professing the religion of
God, used (...) proud chalendges, as this man does.

I pray you Mr. Smyth, wherein has the separation offended you, or my wise
wronged you, that you desire rather to quarrel with them, then with other
Churches holding the same truth in this thing, against you? To the Elders and
brethren were you most welcome, and glad they were of you, so long as you
walked in the faith with them. Why is it that you ^^e become their adversary?
is it because they have rejected you, and your company for your errors, which
you wilfully maintain? Alas, they must ^o it, unless they would become
unfaithful to God.

Next after this Chalendge, Mr. Smyth charge the separation with a (...)
constitution, ministry, worship and government, saying.

Be it known to all the Separation, that we account them in respect of their
con(...)tion, to be as very an harlot, as either her mother England, or her
grandmother (...) is. And although we held her a true church in our ignorance,
yet now being better informed etc. we protest against her as well for her false
constitution, as for her false Ministry, worship and government etc. the false
constitution is of infants baptized.

Concerning the constitution of a Church we do not hold that any visible Church
can stand only of infants, neither that their baptism does geve the being
thereof 1. Seeing there can be no baptising of infants, where there are not
first Elder people, with whom they come under the covenant of God 2. Baptism
is an other thing diverse from the Church, Ephe. 4. 4. 5. and it makes none to
be the people of God, only it seals up to be his people, them that are so
formerly by virtue of his covenant. 3. Else Turks or Indians professing the
Popish Religion being baptized, should be a true Church (for Mr. Smyth holds
the Charact. page 51.
baptism of such to be true baptism, if so they confess their faith and sins)
4. Then circumcision should have made the Sichemites a true Church (for that
which baptism can do now in constituting of a Church, circumcision could do
then) wherefore I say, baptism is an ordinance of Christ geven to his Church to
seal up his covenant to his people: but is not that whole essential
constitution thereof. And therefore our baptizing of infants (if it were
admitted to be unlawful) can not make the constitution of our Church to be
false, much les being the commandment of the Lord, can it so do. And thus
Mr. Smyth fails in the first point of his charge. As for the other things he
charge us withal, shall receave answer in their due place.

But here further he proceeds to affirm. That no man can separate from
England, as from a false Church, except he also do separate from the baptism
of Engl. etc. Whereunto he may be answered, that it will not follow, that they
which separate from a Church standing in apostasy, or sin, must separate
from the baptism therein received, or yet from any other of Gods ordinances
there retained. We are commanded to forsake the whordomes of Babylon, Apoc.
18. 4. but not to separate from any ordinance of Christ that is found therein,
save only from the polutions thereof. Yea Mr. Smyth cannot deny, that a Church
standing in Apostasy, is to be separated from, when the baptism therein
received (if it be of such as confess their faith and sins) is still to be
retained, for such baptism, (says he) i^ true Baptism, though administered by
Antichristians, Character p. 51. 2. Those Israelits that separated from
Ieroboams Church (which stood in Apostasy) and went to Jerusalem 2. Cor. 30.
11. did not separate from their circumcision therein received: No more are we
from our baptism, as afterward is proved. As for his Reason.

That the baptism of England cannot be true and to be reteayned, and the Church
of England false and to be rejected etc. It is but as if he should say, the
circumcision of Israel cannot be true and to be retained, and the Church of
Israel false and to be rejected, I speak of Israel being in Apostasy. And
therefore thus I answer unto it, that baptism retained in Rome and so in all
Apostate Churches* is baptism, and is not to be repeated, as in the latter part
of this Treatise, is proved. And seeing Mr. Smyth holds there Character. ^ag.
51.
may be true baptism in an Apostate Church if they confess their faith, does
not he cross himself here to say, neither can the Church of England possibly
be false, except the baptism be false? Now if true baptism may be in an
apostate Church as he affirms, then a Church may be false (that is apostate)
and not baptism, by his own reasoning. Yet this man charge us with
contradiction, vz. to say, England has a false constitution, Engl. has a true
baptism. We hold baptism so to be true in an apostate church, as circumcision
was in the (...)ate Church of Israel, and otherwise we do not affirm. Now
concerning (...)ptising of infants, Mr. Sm. thus proceeds, saying, It seems
to us the unreasonable heresy, of all Antichristianism, for considering what
baptism is: An (...) is no more capable of baptism then is any unreasonable, or
insensible creature. ^d then adds 3. Reasons against it, 1. from his own
description baptism, saying: baptism is not the washing with water, but it is
the baptism of (...)it, the confession of the mouth, and washing with water,
etc.

These blasphemous speeches, against the ordinance of Christ bewrays ^f what
spirit this man is: Gods ordinance is a most unreasonable heresy with ^im, yea
the most unreasonable of all Antichristianisme. Thus justifying all the
^dolatries of the Papists and their detestable heresies in comparison of
ba^tising of infants. Besides his odious and blasphemous comparison, af^rming
Infants no more capable of baptism, then the unreasonable and insensible
(...)ures. So that in his judgment, a horse, yea a block may as well be
^aptised, as the children of the Church, whom the Lord of his free grace
(...)ceiveth together with their parents, to be his by an everlasting covenant,
Genesis 17. 7. and therefore are holy, and capable of the blessing of Christ, 1
Cor. 7. 14. Ier. 1. 5. Luke 1. 15. Mark. 10. 16. as hereafter is sufficiently
(...)ved. And therefore to compare these infants with unreasonable and
insensible creatures, as touching the participation of Baptism, argues the
author of such comparisons, to be void of spiritual sense and reason, and more
to follow the corruption of his own heart in hatred against the truth, then to
mind what he affirms.

Concerning his description of Baptism and those Scriptures which he quoteth
for proof thereof, see them answered hereafter, page 94. where I have showed,
1. that the baptism of the Spirit, is no part of that outward Ceremony of
baptism that is administered by man, but is the inward work of the spirit in
the elect of God. 2. That the confession of faith and of sins, is no part of
the Sacrament of Baptism: seeing the confession of sins, is so often to be
repeated, as we transgress against the Lord, and likewise of faith, as we have
occasion administered unto us. And therefore baptism, which is given to be the
seal of Gods covenant to his Church, is the baptising of the faithful and
their seed with water, into the name of the father, and of the son and of the
holy Ghost. Mat. 3. 11. with Mat. 28. 19. and of this, infants are capable.
neither is their baptism folly, (as Mr Smyth says) but it will prove his fully
to make man's confession a part of the Sacrament, which oftentimes ^ hypocrical,
(as it was in S. Magus) and to shut out of Gods covenant who^ the Lord has
accepted. And it will prove his folly to deny baptism to infants, because they
cannot perform such actions, as in other respects are required of the elder
sort that are to be baptized, who also not having tra^sgressed in like manner,
therefore need not so to confess. And it will prove his folly, to deny that an
infant can be baptized with the spirit: for so to say, is to deny, that an
infant can be saved. But of these things hereafter.

His 2. Reason is taken from John's baptism, framed thus.

John's baptism was the baptism of repentance. Infants have not Repentance,
and therefore can not have the baptism of Repentance.

To this Argument I answer thus, 1. That repentance is required of such as have
actually transgressed, not as the proper cause of baptism, but as a necessary
fruit of faith, and condition of the Gospel required of them, that being of
years are to be received into the church: whether before or since Christ's
coming. But of the infants of the faithful, whether of those that are newly
received into the church, or of believers borne in the church, it is not so.
Ergo etc.

2. Repentance was not required of the infants of the Jews before they were
circumcised: no more is it to be required of our infants before baptism, these
two Sacraments being the same in use.

3. If Baptism of repentance, be understood only of the time past, and not of
the time to come, then is that a false exposition of John's baptism. For as he
taught that those that came to be baptized should repent: so also his baptism
did preach a continual dying to sin, or practice of repentance* al our life
long, Romans 6. 4. And therefore though children cannot repent of actual sin,
which they are not to do, they having not committed the same: yet is their
baptism the baptism of repentance: seeing it preaches continual
mortification and repentance to the receivers thereof, which is one true use of
baptism.

His third reason is from the testimony of Tertullian and Eusebius. The words
of Tertullian, (as Mr, Sm. himself has englished them) are these.

Therefore to defer and not to hasten baptism, is more profitable for the
condition disposition and age of every person, but especially as concerning
young children, for what* (...) there to bring sureties into danger for the
baptising of Infants, if there be no (...) of hastening the baptising of
infants. Seeing the Sureties are disabled often(...) to perform their promise,
both by reason of mortality, and of the evil dispositi^ s^^e children, when
they come to years, for whom they promised in baptism, etc. ^ First,
concerning Tertullian it is to be noted, that thus he writes, ^n he was fallen
into the opinions of the Cataphriges or Montanists, ^^ so held diverse errors,
as Augustine and others have observed out of ^ works. And therefore being thus
departed from the faith; Let ^e Reader judge if this man be a competent
witness in this case. Yet ^th not this man affirm that infants were not
baptized in his time, but ^ther the contrary, in that he makes mention of
Sureties for infants: say^g, what necessity is there to bring Sureties into
danger for the baptising of infants, which words do plainly argue, that the
Church then used to baptize in^ts.

2. Again, that which he affirms was his own private judgment ^d his
Reasons are of no weight, as the bringing of sureties into danger, and ^^ the
suerties are disabled oftentimes to perform their promise etc. such sureties
^ot being appointed of God. 3. P. Mart. Clas. 4. ca. 8. affirms that
^^tullian denied Baptism to young men and young widows; and his own ^rdes here
related, do seem to intimate some such like thing, in saying, (...)far and
not to hasten baptism, is more profitable for the condition, disposition and ^^
of every person, And this he means of others, then young children. For ^er he
speaks of young children, saying, especially concerning young children. ^ 4.
Crispen, State of the Church, page 47. 48. witnesses that Tertullian brought ^
extreme unction after baptism, the Sign of the Cross, offering for the dead,
and ^er the like dreams of the Montanists. Now if Tertullians judgment be ^and
against infants baptism, why not also for extreme unction the sign ^f the
Cross, and the like his errors, seeing all these are fruits proceeding ^om the
same tree?

But thus this adversary cares not who the witness is, so he will speak in
favor of his heresy, let him be Montanist, Papist or what othersoever.

But let it be further observed, that about Tertullians time and after, some
deferred their baptism, until they thought they should dye, and so were not
baptized until they fell into some great sickness, as Theodosius and others. And
this seems to be Tertullians error; as if baptism was for washing away of
sins past, and not to come.

Concerning that which Eusebius reports of Athanasius his bap(...) of
children in sport, I have answered, page 109. and set down reasons ^ prove
that those children were not children of the church, but of some o^ the
heathen, which were instructed in the faith of Christ by the church, but were
not received into the communion of the same. These are the two Ancients that
M. Smyth produces against us, whereof neither of the^ affirms that the
church did not baptize infants in those times. Now to these two, I will oppose
other two Ancients amongst many others, that do testify that infants in their
times and before, were baptized, viz. Origin, who says, that the church
received from the Apostles, to give baptism to infants. lib. 5. ad Romans And
Augustine de Bap. contra Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 23. who speaking of the
Baptism of Infants, says, that which the whole church holds, neither is
ordained by councels, but always has been holden, we are to believe to be
delivered by Apostolical authority.

The next corruption that the Separation is charged withal, is, to have a false
ministry. Now the Ministers that we have are of Pastors and Teachers, called
thereunto by election of the Church, according to these Scriptures, Ephesians. 4, 9.
11, 12. Romans 12, 7. 8. 1 Cor. 12, 28. Acts. 13, 1, 2. Revel. 1, 20. Nehem, 8,
1, - 8. Mat. 23, 2. Mal, 2, 7. Act. 14. 23. And practice of the primitive
churches. And of this Ministry of Pastors and Teachers M. Smyth himself
approves in his Principles, page 18. and in his Questions, and answers, page
8. printed this last year, 1609. he describing the officers of the Church,
devides them, first into Bishops and Deacons, then the Bishops into Pastors, or
Teachers, or Elders, and withal describes the Pastor, to be a bishop over one
particular Church, excelling in the word of wisdom. The Teacher, to be a
Bishop over one particular church, excelling in the word of knowledge. The
Governor, to be a Bishop of one particular visible Church, excelling in wise
government. Thus has he written: and yet we having no other Ministry, then
he himself approves, charge us to have a false Ministry, not caring to
cross himself, so he may utter his bitterness against the Church of Christ.

The 3. corruption this adversary charge us withal, is, false worship of
reading books. This he says, but proves it not. I will briefly set down our
practice, that the Reader may take notice, how unjustly we are charged. 1. For
prayer and giving of thanks, that is publicly performed by our Pastor or
Teacher, who invocate the name of God and praise him for his benefits ^s the
spirit directs their hearts to conceive and gives utterance, and without the
use of any book during that action, according to those ^ptures, Romans 8. 26. 27.
Ephesians. 6, 18, 19. Col. 4, 2. Act. 6, 4. Number. 6, 23. ^4. - 27. Nehem. 9, 3, - 38.
Ezra. 9, 5, - 15. and 10. 1. Joel. 2, 17.

2. They read the holy scriptures, translated into our own language, ^me two
or three chapters or more, as time will serve, showing briefly the ^eaning
thereof. Which is warranted by these Scriptures. Neh. 8, 3, -- 8. ^eut. 31, 11.
Act. 15, 21. Col. 4, 16. 1 These. 5. 27. 1 Timothy 4, 13.

3. The Pastor or Teacher takes some Scripture, which they ordinarily ^llow,
and after the reading thereof, do expound and apply the same, by doctrine,
exhortation, etc. to the further edification of the church: according to these
scriptures. Luke 4. 16. - 21. Act. 8. 35. and 13, 15. and 26. 7. ^ Tim. 4, 13.
2 Timothy 4, 2. And together with the preaching of the word, the Sacraments are
administered after the rules of Christ, with prayer and thankesgiving, according
to these Scriptures: Mat. 28, 19. 1 Cor. 11, 23. etc. Act. 20, 7. etc.

4. Some of the Psalms of David, before and after the exercise of the lord
(the same being first read and opened by the Pastor or Teacher,) is ^ing of the
whole church together to the praise of God, and our own edi^^cation, according
to these Scriptures: Ephesians. 5, 19. Col. 3, 16. Mat 26, 30. Act. 16, 25. Psalm. 95.
and 92, 1. and 66. 2. and 89. 1.

Lastly, each one as he is able, contributeth to the Treasury, whereby the
Officers and poor of the church, are maynteyned: according to these scriptures.
1 Timothy 5, 17. 18. 1 Cor. 9, 7-14. Gal. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 16. Luke 2^. 1. 2 3. 4.
Mat. 26, 9. 10. 11. Act. 2, 42. 45, 46. and 4, 34. 35. - 37. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. ^
Cor. 8, 4, 1^. And this is that worship and service we publicly practice,
which Mr. S. calls false worship: how truly, let the Reader now judge.

Fourthly, concerning the Government of our church, (which also this adversary
taxes) first, the Governors that we have, are such as Christ has appointed
in his Church, viz. Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, (and such as M. S.
Principles. page 18. Questions and Answers page 8.
affirms the Eldership to consist of) the two former both teaching and
ruling, the Elders employed in the government only, elected of the church for
the overseing, governing and guiding of the same, by the rules of Christ, whose
offices and authority of Ruling, are warranted by these scriptures. 1 Timothy ^.
5. 17. Romans 12. 6. 7. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 5. with Rev. 2. 2. 14. 15.
Act. 20. 28. Heb. 13, 8. 24.

Again, as touching the Censures, we proceed therein after Chri^^s (...) private
faults using private admonitions, and for public, open reb(...) cording to
these Scriptures. Mat. 18. 15. -- 17. 1. Tim. 5. 20. 2. Cor. 2. 6. And when the
offenders continue obstinate in their sins after due admonition and conviction
by the word of God; the Church being gathered together, the Pastor, or Teacher
or one of the Elders in the name and by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ
pronounces the sentence of excommunication against them, all the brethren
consenting, according to these Scriptures. Mat. 18. 17. -- 19. 1. Cor. 5. 3. 4.
etc. 1. Tim. 1. 20. And if the excomunicate do repent, he is with the Churches
consent received again into the communion thereof, by some of the Governors
according to these Scriptures. 2. Cor. 2. ^7. -- 11. Mat. 18. 18. -- 20.

What Mr. Smyth can fault in this or in any other of our practices, he may at
his leisure discover the same, if he be not already satisfied.

Now besides these false imputations, it pleases Mr. Smyth to utter against
this Church many uncharitable and reproachful speeches: wishing also, As the
Tirant wished concerning the people of Rome, that all their heads were joined
into one etc.

To pass by his tart and bitter speeches unbeseeming a professor of the
Gospel, concerning his wish, I do certify him thus much, that if it were
granted, that the Separation had but one head, his wooden sword of man's
doctrine, will never be able to smite it of. Well may he carry the Tyrants mind,
but for his wish, I trust he shall find a like effect thereof, as the Tyrant did
of his, who contrary to his expectation, found the people of Rome not to have
one head, but many hands to smite of his head: So this wisher shall, find that
the Separation has many hands to convince his abominable errors.

And whereas he desires the Separation that they will not in craftines
withdraw from the combat, as hitherto they have done in the matter of the
Tr^nslation, Worship, and Presbytery, etc. He himself now knows that he
has answer to all these things, and if any delay has been herein, it was not
any withdrawing through craftines, as he falsely charge us, but we saw him so
mutable and inconstant, and his latter writings to overthrow his former, that
his own works would be a sufficient confutation thereof: And now that there
was so great occasion of answer, and that he so insulted upon the differring
thereof, he has his answer geven him. For (...) his speeches, of charging and
challendging us to the defense of ^rors, I hope he will stay his pen
henceforth from such vanity, seeing ^^^e not ashamed, or yet neglect to
undertake the defense of that truth ^ profess, and to manifest that he is a
defender of errors and not we, as ^e scanderously reports of us.

Furthermore, Mr Smyth requires of the Separation, and of all men, not ^ impute
unto them, The denying of the old Testament, the Lords day, the ^^^^stracy, and
humanity of Christ. Why this request should be made, I know ^ot, unless they
would bear the world in hand, that they are not taynted ^ith these errors,
which other anabaptists do hold. Concerning the ^st of them, Mr. Sm. affirms
that the Lord made with his people under ^e old Testament, a carnal covenant,
denying that everlasting covenant in Christ to be geven unto them, or
circumcision to be the seal thereof: He ^so denies the seed of the faithful
to be within the covenant of grace, ^yther before or since Christ's coming,
contrary to Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2. ^9. And therefore I cannot see, but that the
denying both of the old and ^ew Testament, in this respect, may justly be
imputed unto him, as in this ^reatise following it will appear.

For their denying of the Lords day, as yet we have little to say,
notwith^anding it is reported that some of their company, makes question thereof.

But concerning the Magistracy, Mr. Smyth bewrays his unsoundness ^ these
words, But of Magistrates converted to the faith and admitted into the Church
by baptism, there may questions be made, which to answer we cannot if we
^^^ld, when such things fall out, the Lord we doubt not will direct us into the
truth concerrning that matter.

Here let the Reader observe how they plead ignorance in the matter of the
Christian Magistrate, if so they thought of his Authority, that he being of
the Church, was to bear the sword, and them of the Church to obey him, as
having civil power over them, and whom he might command in defense of
Religion, and of his country to take up arms; then needed not he thus to
speak. For by his words they geve us to conjecture, that they think more may
be yielded to an heathen Ruler, then to a Christian Magistrate. If they be
clear in this point, they may so explane their minds. Also in this pleading
ignorance of the Magistracy, they seem to tax the new Testament, not to be so
plain, as Mr Smyth affirms, where he says, All the ordinances of the new
Testament are plainly taught by C(...) his disciples. Character, page 34. Now
if all things be taught in the new Testament, why then can he not answer those
many questions that may be made about the Christian Magistrate, or why looks he
for new direction? well: this I perceave, that either he must deny the authority
of the Christian Magistrate, or be driven to confess that the writings of the
Apostles are not plain enough to discribe his office and Authority, without
the Scriptures of the old Testament, from which if it be lawful to reason
concerning this matter of the Magistracy, then I hope it cannot be denied, but
so it is lawful to do, for other ordinances also.

Touching the error of the Incarnation of Christ, which also Mr. Smyth desires
may not be imputed unto them. It is well known that many of their company
holding that error about the incarnation, are separated from the rest. And Mr.
Smyth him self (as some amongst them have reported) makes a question about
the first matter of Christ's humane nature as if it were not a point of faith to
believe that it was of the virgin, though it be to be believed that the second
matter was nourished in her womb. Whether his hearers do wrong him in such
reports, or how he rests satisfied, it is best known to himself. And be it,
that he stand clear of this error, yet is be taynted with the errors of
general redemption and free will, else why has he given forth these Positions?
1. Christ's Redemption strecheth to all men. 2. Man has not lost the faculty
of willing any good thing that is showed him. And with all added thereunto his
Reasons in defense thereof.

Now let the Reader judge what cause he had to desire, that these things should
not be imputed unto them.

Lastly, Mr. Smyth takes upon him to advertise our Church, saying: Let the
Separation be advertised, that whereas they do so co^fidently through their*
self-love, and self conceat, fill their mouths with heresy and heretics, as
thereby they would fear Babes, that therein they tread in the steps of all the
Antichristians their predecessors etc.

For this his advertisment, if any have spoken otherwise then is meet, I am no
Patron of any such speeches, but if it was lawful for John to call the
Phariseis Generation of vipers, And Paul to say to Elimas, Oh full of subtilty
and all mischeiffe etc. then is it not simply unlawful, to use such speeches,
so it be for reproof, and not for reproach. Therefore to call them heretics
and their opinions heresies, (it being true and spoken in detestation of their
errors, not of their persons;) I see no evil in so saying, see these places.
Io. 8. 44. 2. Pet. 2. 1. 2. 1. Io. 2. 18. Act. 13. 10. Gal. 3. 1. Rev. 2. 6.
15. And if this be a fault in us, why does Mr. Smyth fill his mouth with
Antichristian errors, so calling those truths which we hold? Has he a
dispensation so to speak against the truth, and yet to blame us for calling
their false doctrynes, heresy? I should rather have thought, that he ought to
have advertised himself for these reprochful and sclanderous speeches that he
has uttered against our Church, and the Teachers thereof, calling them Char^^
Epistle the Re^
Rabbis of the Separation. The greatest Rabbis. And thus speaking to the
Church. Be it known to the Separation, that we account them in respect of
their constitution as very an harlot as either her mother England or her
Grandmother Rome. We protest against her, as well for her false constitution, as
for her false Ministry, worship, and Government. I could wish as the Tyrant
wished, Concerning the people of Rome, that all their heads were joined into
one. We desire the Separation they will not in craftines withdraw from the
Combat. We require them, nay we charge them, yea we chalendg them to the
defense of their errors. We protest against them to be a false Church. They
tread in the steps of all the Antichristians their Predecessors. Let them take
heed, that notwithstanding their Syrenes songs, they prove not Cages full of
most ugly and deformed Antichristian Heretics. All these reproachful speeches,
if not more, has he published in less then a sheet of paper, besides, what
are contained in his Book. And yet notwithstanding all these speeches have thus
passed from him, he takes upon him to advertise us, for that we can justify
against his doctrines and against themselves, for their obstinate defending of
their errors. But where he charge us to call them Heretics, and their
doctrines heresy, through self love and self conceatednes etc. If he had
applied self love and conceit to him self, I take it he might more justly have
done it, if we may judge by his words. As for self love and self co^ceipt, we
condemn in whomsoever. And howsoever we have our infirmities, I trust he
shalnot be able to tax any of us justly, of these imputations.

And as Mr. Smyth wishes us not to be wise in our own eyes, through pride,
etc. we hope the Lord will so teach us. And we pray the Lord to geve him a sight
of his damnable heresies whereinto he is fallen, openly sinning in the
publishing thereof, to the great dishonor of God, and greiffe of all the godly:
and that the almighty may preserve all that are his chosen, from being poisoned
with the same.

Richard Clyfton.

THE PROCESS OF THE PASSAGES between Mr John Smyth and Richard Clifton.
Mr Smyth. CERTAIN REASONS PROPOVNDED To Mr Rich. Clifton: concerning the two
Propositions following.
1. That infants are not to be baptized 1. Because there is neither precept nor
example in the new Testament of any infants that were baptized, by John or
Christ's Disciples: Only they that did confess their sins, and confess their
Faith were baptized, Marc. 1. 4. 5. Act. 8. 37. 2. Because Christ commands
to make Disciples by teaching them: and then to baptize the^: Mat. 28, 19. Ioh.
4. 1. but infants cannot by doctrine become Christ's Disciples: and so cannot by
the rule of Christ be baptized. 3. Because if infants be baptized, the carnal
seed is baptized: and so the seal of the covenant is administered to them unto
whom the covenant apperteyneth not. Rom 9. 8. which is a profanation.
2. That Antichristians converted are to be admited into the true Church by
Baptism. 1. Because Churches are so to be constituted now after the defection
of Antichrist, as they were first erected by the Apostles: But in the
constitution of Churches the Apostles received in the members by baptism: go:
So must we do now. 2. Because true baptism is but one: but the baptism of
Antichrist is not true baptism, and so not that one baptism of Christ: but
all members of Christ must have true baptism. 3. Because as the false Church
is rejected and the true erected: the false Ministry forsaken, and the true
received: So false worship, (and by consequent baptism) must ^e renounced, and
the true baptism assumed.




Richard Clifton. AN ANSWER TO TWO ANABAPTISTICALL OPINIONS. vid
1. That Infants are not to be baptized. 2. That Antichristians converted are
to be admitted into the true Church by baptism.


ALthough with great sorrow I am forced to undertake this busynes against him
that was dear unto me: yet being thereunto provoked by the sending to me these
two Positions with certain reasons annexed under the Authors own hand: I
thought it my part (although the vnablest of many) to contend for the
maintenance of the faith which was once given to the Saints. Iud. 3. And by the
help of God to put a brief answer to these opinions, which by the Churches in
all ages have been and are condemned for heretical: the practice whereof I
could wish might never have befallen to any of mine own country, especially to
them that were partakers with me of the afflictions of Christ for the
witnessing of his truth. And chiefly unto him, to whose charge both I and
diverse others had once purposed to have committed our souls had he not besides
these broached some former opinions, both erroneous and offensive, whereby the
truth (for which we suffer) is like to be the more blasphemed of the wicked and
many hindered in our own country, that shall hear thereof, of whom we had
great hope that they would have walked in the same faith with us.
Notwithstanding for as much as I am informed, that the author has promised
upon the sight of his errors to confess the same, I do the more willingly take
upon me this labor, praying the Lord to give a good issue, to his glory, for
his mercy sake Amen.


Mr Smyth. A REPLY MADE IN DEFENSE OF TWO truths, viz:
1. That Infants are not to be baptized. 2. That Antichristians converted are
to be admitted into the true Church by baptism.
These two truths are by you, Sir, in your answer, entitled, Anabaptisticall
etc.


Rich: Clifton. Sir, Whereas you justify your two Positions to be two truths,
and so ^title your Reply, A defense of two truths: And charge me with using of
^eproachfull speeches in calling them Anabaptisticall. Hereunto I answer,
first, that your two Positions will no more prove two truths, then Ierobo^ns
two calves proved two Gods, as in my former answer I have showed, and shall (by
Gods grace) more fully manifest in this treatise following. Secondly, I deny to
have used any reproach, by intituling your erroneous opinions, Anabatisticall.
But your self do sin in calling evil good, and darkness light: thereby
bringing upon your self, that fearful woe d^nounced by the Lord against such.
Esa. 5. 20. If you repent not. 3. Whereas you bless God that yo^ are accounted
worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's truth, and wish me to know that my
reproach shall light upon mine own head, etc. I could wish you did not rejoice
in vain, for there is a suffering for evil justly deserved, as well as for the
truth, 1 Pet. 2. 20. The Jesuits some of them have sufferred unto death, yet
had they no cause of rejoicing therein, seeing they suffered for their due
desert. And so your opinions being termed, Anabaptisticall, for their
untruths, can bring no true comfort unto you in suffering for them, nor yet my
reproach, (as you call it) any judgment upon my head, being warranted to give
falsehood her deserved titles. Gal. 3. 1. Phil. 3. 2. Gal. 4. 9.

As for Christ and his truth which you say, are by me evil spoken of: it had
been less sin in you to have stayed your pen from publishing of such
sclaunders, unless you could have proved your Positions the truths of Christ,
which I am sure you shall never be able to do.


Mr Smyth. In your Preface you avouch that your are provoked to write, I
mervayle you should so speak: seeing your conscience tells you did make the
first quest or motion ^^ Mrs Bywater etc.


Rich: Clifton. For Answer hereunto, know you Sir, and let all men take notice
that the thing which you charge me with is most untrue, for presently after you
were fallen into these gross errors, came Mr Southworth and Mr Br^mhead two of
your followers to my chamber (as they said) in kindness to see me, and entered
conference with me concerning these opinions, saying that they had heard that I
had been enclyned that way when I was in England, with some persuasive speeches
to consider of this your new walking, saying also, that you were willing to
confer with me, and did wish that either I would come to you, or else if I
were willing, you would take pains to come to me; to whom I answered, that I
never had any thought of embracing such opinions, neither was willing to have
any conference with you thereabout, which when they heard me so to say, they
further did solicit me to write with you about these points, and said, that
you would as willingly and as friendly write with me thereof, as you did in
England in our former conference concerning excommunication and other
differences then between you and me, offering if I would not begin, that yet
I would vouchsafe to read and answer your writing; to whom I said again, that
I would not write first or require your writing, (for I thought not to have any
dealing with you,) yet being so importuned I told them that I would be content
to read it, if you sent it me, but for Answer thereunto I I promised none,
only I said I would consider thereof, and so do then as I thought good. This
was the substance of my speeches to Mr Southworth and Mr Bromehead, and of
theirs to me. Now if this had been true, that I had provoked you by any former
speeches, it is very like they would have made some relation thereof,
especially requiring that you might have conference with me, neither need you
to have sent me word that you would write or confer (if so I pleased) and to
desire either at my hands (as these men did testify,) if I had before moved
you thereunto.

But for witness hereof you produce, Mrs Bywater a gentlewoman ^at has
embraced your errors, with whom, after I had received your po^ions, which also
she said she had seen) I had speech to this effect, that she ^ould be careful
over her self how she entertained your new opinions, af^rming, that I was
persuaded they were grevous errors, and prayed her ^sta^tly to stay a while
until your positions might be answered, assuring her that I could by Gods help
defend this truth we stand for against you, with some other words to like
purpose.

Now let the indifferent reader judge, if you have not greatly wronged ^e, to
say that I did make the first request or motion of writing: nay your own act in
writing first unto me, and your own speeches in this your Page 1.
book which are these: Certain reasons propounded to Mr Rich: Clifton,
concerning the two Popositions following, as also your adiuring us to answer
you, or else you will proclayme us subtily blind and leaders of the blind into
the ditch, do witness the contrary. And that this busynes comes of your self,
though you seek to lay it upon my back, let your own conscience judge: as for
mine own part, being so provoked, I could do no less then answer.

2. You charge me with perverting of this scripture, Jude 3. and say, that I ^^
neither to plead for Baall, nor contend for Antichristian errors:

And I answer, that these being truths for which I contend, as have been proved
sufficiently, and shall be (God willing) as occasion serves, more fully
confirmed, then am I not guilty of any such imputation, but your self is become
faulty in calumniating the ordinance of Christ, viz: the baptism of infants,
accounting it an Antichristian error, which I wish you well to consider of and
not to add sin unto sin, both in pleading for error and in disgracing the
truth and the professors thereof.

Further you say, it will not help me that these two truths have been
condemned for heresy by the Churches in all ages, for if the Apostles affoard
contrary to the succeeding ages that which is most ancient is the truth: I
grant if you can prove, that the Apostles age affoards contrary to the
succeeding ages for the justifying of these your opinions that then you have
good warrant of your side for calling them truths: but if the Churches which
have condemned your positions for error, have agreed herein with the holy
scriptures then I say, the brand of heresy lies justly upon them. And whereas
you allege that many truths whereunto we are come, have been condemned for
heretical, in as many ages as those truths which you defend: I answer that not
many truths, if any which we hold, to my remembrance have been condemned in
the ancient Churches for heresies. And suppose those Churches did fail in some
things, (as every Church is subject to err, yet follows it not, that therefore
they erred in condemning your opinions for haeresie: some things I think you
will grant are heresies which those ancient Churches succeeding the Apostles
age did condemn, as those of Arius, Eutiches, Macedonius, and the rest: and
then is not their judgment so lightly to be passed over, that no reconing is
to be made of what they have done agreeable to the scriptures. As for your
errors we reject them not only because the ancient Churches have so censured
them, but finding them contrary to the word of God, therefore we condemn them.

3. Whereas I did fear your broaching of these and your former opinions, would
be offensive, and to the hindering of the truth, this you pass over in
presuming of the goodness of your cause, saying, if any be hindered from the
truth, it will be their sin, but if you fear (you say) that your
Antichristian Church will fall to the ground, I say, it is that which is
appointed to perdition, and to perdition let it go.

Indeed if any be hindered from the truth, by the publishing of the truth, it
is their sin, Mat. 11. 6. but if you which have stood for the truth, shall
now by publishing of error, cause the truth to be the more blasphemed, and give
offense to weak professors, that is your sin, and will be too heavy to be
answered at the judgment day; if you repent not.

And as for our Church which you blasphemously call Antichristian, know you
that I do not fear the fall of it, for it is built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Ephe.
2, 20. which has a sure promise that the gates of hell shall not prevayle
against it. Mat. 16. 18. And therefore your Anathema cannot hurt us, but shall
rebound back again whence it came.

4. You say, though I have professed to forsake mine errors upon their
discovery, and as I have practiced, for which I am reproached among your
brethren, yet I never profeessed my readiness to be perverted from the truth,
which you call heresy, and therefore if you did undertake to write upon this
ground, you might well have spared your pains and saved your self from so
grevous a sin, by pleading for Antichristian corruptions, etc.

The ground of my persuasion concerning your willingness to yield unto the
truth, did arise partly from that persuasion which I had of your
san^tification, and partly from the speeches of the messengers before named,
^ho did affirm unto me, that if I could manifest by the word of God, that it
was error which you hold, you would acknowledge it: And still ^ou say if you be
in error it is Passages* page 71.
ignorantly. And therefore desirous of ^our good, I did undertake according to
my small ability to manifest ^he truth unto you, by such reasons as I could at
that present gather for the confirmation of the same; which, seeing you make so
small account of, and answer me, that I might have spared my pains, and saved
my self from sin, I am sorry in that respect that I did write, yet in regard of
witnessing the truth and performing a duty toward a brother fallen into error,
I repent ^e not, neither yet of committing any grevous sin thereby, as you
charge me withal, seeing I plead for that which is of Christ's, and not for
Antichristian corruptions. And as for your errors so often graced by you with
the title of truths, which you say, you never professed to be perverted from,
I mervayle not greatly thereat, for heresy is a work of the flesh, Gal. 5. 20.
that is easily and quickly embraced, but not so left, and herein differs from
the truth; to the receiving whereof, we are hardly drawn, as both you and I
had experience; but error drincketh as a pleasant potion, Rev. 18. 3. without
resistance, and bewitcheth many that they should not obey the truth, described
and plainly manifest in their sight, Gal. 3. 1. the poison whereof I am sorry
has so infected your soul, that you seem to be changed into the nature
thereof, and to be as confident therein as in any truth of the gospel: and
though you account my praying to be for an overthrow of the Lords truth, which
is in deed for the conversion of you and that deceived company with you, from
your errors,) yet will I pray still that God may open your eyes, if you belong
to him to see your grevous fall, and glorify the truth of God, which in this
your writing so greatly you have disgraced.

Now I will come to answer the Positions with the reasons thereof, and first
concerning the former which is this. 1. That infants are not to be baptized.
Touching this first position, that Infants are not to be baptized, I read that
Auxentius one of the Arrians sect with his adhe^nts was one of the first that
denied the baptism of infants, and (...) after him Pelagius the heretic,
against whom Augustine and others of the ancient fathers, have opposed and
condemned for heresy, and that according to the scriptures, which by Gods
grace we shall together with them also further manifest, and prove by sound
reasons out of the word the lawfulnes of baptising infants, which first I will
vntertake, and then answer the reasons to the contrary.


Mr Smyth. Now in the next place you make a special preface to the first
point, affirming tha^ baptism of infants was denied by Auxentius the Arrian,
and by Pelagius etc.


Rich: Clifton. I said that Auxentius the Arrian was one of the first that
denied the baptism of infants, and then Pelagius, whom Augustine and others
refuted and condemned for heresy: and you answer thus, that one heretic
condemned another, contrary to the scripture for the truth sake.

That Augustine was an heretic and condemned Auxentius for the truth contrary
to the Scripture rests for you to prove if you can. I have already proved
that the denying of Baptism to Infants, is an error, and you have not in all
this your writing confuted the same as will appear in the answer. And here let
it be observed that you acknowledge Auxe^tius and Pelagius to be heretics, and
so these your errors to have been first broched by men justly condemned for
heresy, for you say, one heretic condemned another.

Further concerning the fathers by me alleged in the 6. page of my writing,
to show the practice of Churches in baptising of Infants, you pass them over
with this answer, saying, I can prove that Augustine, Cyrill, Cyprian, Origin,
Nazianzene, Ambrose and many others were as gross heretics, (if he be an
heretic that holds an heresy) as Auxentius and Pelagius, etc.

That these Fathers and others had their errors we do not deny, but that they
were heretics, and such as did obstinately defend their errors, being
convinced thereof by the word of God, is more I think, then you can prove: we do
not say that the holding of every error makes an heretic: but when he that
holds an error and persisteth obstinately therein after admonition, ^ say that
such a one is to be rejected, Tit. 3. 10. And though you could love those
fathers as gross heretics as Auxentius and Pelagius, as I know ^u can not in
that sense as the Scripture takes this word H^reticke, yet ^is opinion of
those Catabaptists is not thereby iustifed, for as an heretic ^ay hold some
points heretical, so may he some truths. And you are to love that those
fathers did unjustly condemn Auxentius and Pelagius, ^r the denying of the
baptism of Infants, or else you Answer not to the ^urpose.

As for our acknowledging of the Ancient fathers to be Antichristian, ^t is
more the^ you have from me or can show that I have so affirmed: in deed ^n
there times the churches were in declyning, and through ignorance and careless
taking heed to the word, Satan began to prepare way for Antichrist, but
that we account them simply Antichristian as fallen into that deep Apostasy,
we do not; they had some Ceremonies and other observances that we approve not
of, yet retained they many of gods ordinances whereof Paedobaptistry is one: And
where as you say it is no more to be respected (...) the Ancient Churches then
the Prelacy and read prayer in the same: we have learned by the word, to put
difference between the things of God retained in Churches declyning, and the
inventions of men, though you cast out both together and account us
Antichristian for the same: next you proceed to examine my Arguments from the
scripture, alleged to prove that Infants are to be baptized.


1. OF THE FIRST POSITION concerning the Baptising of infants.
Rich: Clifton. Argument I.
Genesis 17. 10. God made his covenant to Abraham and to his seed: from whence I
reason thus.

That covenant which God made with Abraham he commanded to be sealed to him
and to all his seed, yea even to infants.

But the covenant that we under the gospel do receive is the very same that
was made to Abraham, etc.

Therefore that is commanded to be sealed to us and to our seed, yea even to our
infants, for so was that to Abrhams.

The Major can not be denied, see Genesis 17. 10. 11. 12.

The Minor is likewise as true, for the Apostle speaking of this covenant, Act.
2. 39 says, the promise is made to you and to your children, and to all that
are a far off, as many as the Lord our God shall call. In which words it
plainly appears that this is the very same covenant and promise that was made
to Abraham, which they that were a far of, that is the Gentiles believing, do
receive and were baptized into. And therefore is Abraham called the Father of
many nations, Genesis 17. 4. also Gal. 3. 13. 14. Christ is said to redeem us from
the curse of the Law, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, see
verse. 8. 9. Now then if we be partakers of the same covenant, (for otherwise
ABRAHAM'S covenant should not be an everlasting covenant, Genesis 17. 7. seeing his
posterity after the flesh is cut off for a time, Romans 11. 15. 17. 20.) it must
follow that the same must be sealed to us, and to our infants, (else it is not
the same) and that by the commandment of God. For the abolishing of
circu^cisio^, and the bringing in of baptism under the gospel, does not
abrogate or disannul the commandment of sealing the covenant to the
believing parents with their infants, which was once commanded to Abraham, but
only shows a changing of the outward sign. And therefore as the covenant
belo^gs to the Gentiles believing, so does the seal thereof to them and to
their seed, as it did to Abraham and to his seed: The outward ceremony only
changed.


Mr Smyth. To this Argument I make answer thus: first distinguishing the two
cove^nts or testaments (for a covenant and testament is all one in the
originals though ^he English words are two): one covenant was made with Abraham
and his car^al seed and of that covenant was circu^cisio^ a seal: another
covenant made with Abraham and his Spiritual seed, and of that covenant the
holy spirit of promise is the seal: for ^he carnal covenant had a carnal
seal upon the carnal seed: the Spiritual covenant had a Spiritual seal
upon the Spiritual seed. For things must be made proportionable, and
circumcision which was a carnal seal, could not seal up the Spiritual
covenant to the Spiritual seed, for to say so, is to leap over the hedge, and
to make a disproportion betwixt the type and the truth. etc.


Rich: Clifton. Here you say that two covenants were made with Abraham, a
carnal and a spiritual, the one with Abraham and his carnal seed, the other
with him and his spiritual seed: I answer, first, that God made with Abraham
but one covenant of salvation, which is, That God would be his God, and the
God of his seed. Genesis 17. 7. Luke 1. 72. And this covenant was Genesis 17. 10. 11.
R^ 4. 11.
sealed with circumcision, and it is the same covenant that is established by
the 2 Cor. 16 Heb. 8. 10 12.
blood of Christ unto all the faithful seed sealed under the Gospel Mat. 19.
by baptism in stead of circumcision. Other covenant that was given for
salvation to Abraham and his seed, the scripture knows none. In this covenant
is promised through Jesus Christ, remission of sins, justification, life
everlasting with all saving graces to all that Heb. 8. ^ Ier. 31. 34. Act. 13.
38. 39. Heb. 9. 15. 1 Cor. 1 30. Romans 4. 11.
believe. And that this is so, the Apostle does witness, saying, Gal. 3. 17
and this I say that the covenant which was confirmed before of God in respect
of Christ, the law which was 430 year after cannot disannull. Where it is to be
noted, 1. that this covenant that was given to Abraham was but one: 2. that it
was in respect of Christ, and therefore was that spiritual covenant 3. that it
was confirmed unto him, which is more then a bare offer.

Secondly, I deny that God ever made any carnal covenant, either with Abraham,
or with the Israelites, seeing he made but two testament^ all with his people,
and both of them spiritual, the new Testament yo^ grant to be spiritual, and
that the old is so, the Apostle does witness, c^ling the law (which is a part
of the old Testament) both holy and spirit^ Romans 7. ^. 14.
all. This law covenant or old Testament God gave to Israel and they di^ *
promise to keep it, and so were bound to the observation of a spiritua^ Exodus
19. ^.
and not of a carnal covenant. Besides this first Testament was not made with
Abraham, seeing it can not be showed that he or the fathers did undertake the
keeping thereof under penalty of the curse, as Israel did. Deuteronomy. 27. ^5-26.
And as for the promise of Canaan, which Abraham believed that his seed should
inherit, it was annexed unto that covenant made with him in Christ as says
the Apostle. that Godlynes has the promise of the life present, and of ^ Tim.
4.
that which is to come: And therefore can no more be called a carnal covenant,
or be said to be sealed with circumcision then the promise of the life present
unto us, may be called carnal, or to be sealed with baptism And that
circumcision was not given as a seal to confirm unto Abraham and his seed
only the land of Canaan, (as you affirm in your answer to my second
argument, Reason, 1.) but to seal unto him and to his seed the covenant of
salvatio; as may be gathered from that very place of Genesis 17. 8. 9. Where Moses
having set down the sum of the covenant that concerns Abraham and his seed,
ver. 7. in verse. 8. repeates that promise of Canaan before made unto him, Genesis
13. 15. and with all says, I will be their God, which is that spiritual
covenant here again purposely repeated; because he would show that the
commandment of circumcision, which follows in the next verse. was given for a
seal thereof, ver. 11. And that it is so to be understood, the spirit, (who
knows the mind of the Lord) so expounds it; Romans 4. 11. saying, after he
received the sign of circumcision the seal of the righteousness of faith, etc.
by which place it is evident that circumcision was a sign of the spiritual
covenant made with Abraham, and not of an other different from this, called by
you a carnal covenant. The covenant in Christ made to Abraham, was confirmed
unto him: Gal. 3. 17. and there is no mention of any other sign given unto him
but of circumcision. ergo.

Again if God gave circumcision to be a seal to Abraham and his car^ seed, as
you affirm, what had the Proselites to do with this sign? ^y were they to be
circumcised, seeing they were not of Abraham's carnal ^d? this sign could not
seal unto them the land of Canaan, who had ^ promise thereof; yet were they
circumcised, Exodus 12. 48, there^e they were partakers of that covenant whereof
circumcision was a sign: ^t concerning Canaan it was promised only to
Abraham's seed after the ^sh, and so you say, then must it needs follow that the
Proselites were ^artakers of the spiritual covenant, and so received
circumcision as a seal thereof. And thus it is manifest that circumcision was
no sign of any ^carnall covenant made to Abraham as you affirm.

Also that to Abraham was made but one covenant, the very phrase of the holy
Ghost intimates so much, for in speaking thereof the scripture uses the Genesis
17. 4. 7. Gal. 17.
singular number; neither do we read of any more testaments or covenants but
two, the old and the new, the former given unto Israel in the wilderness a long
time after that God had made his covenant with Abraham in the Messiah to come.

Further you say, that circumcision being a carnal seal, could not seal a
spiritual covenant but the seal thereof must be the spirit. etc. I require of
you what you mean by a carnal seal, if you mind that circumcision is carnal,
because of the cutting of the foreskinne, I grant that there was a cutting of
the flesh; or if you mean carnal because it was an external sign, who will deny
it. But what is this to the purpose, for the flesh of Christ was lanched and
persed with nails, yet for all that it was a spiritual sacrifice; and the
sacraments of the new testament, be outward and visible things, yet are they
signs of spiritual things: and so circumcision though it was external and by
incision of the flesh, yet was it a visible sign of an invisible grace, and of
that spiritual covenant made with Abraham. Again, concerning your devised
carnal covenant with circumcision, which you say, is a type of the spiritual
covenant and spirit; I answer, that circumcision and Canaan, typed out
spiritual things promised, but were not a carnal covenant to type out the
spiritual, which was already made with Abraham: neither does the scripture
teach us that God did make a carnal covenant with him and his seed, thereby to
accept them to be his people, for that could not be by any other covenant, then
only by that in Christ, there being no reconci^ation to God 2 Cor. 5. 19.
but in him. And although the spirrit be the Ro^. 8. 15. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 22. and
5 5. Gal. 4. 6 Ephe. 1. 14.
earnest or pledge of Gods promises in our hearts, yet for the further strength^
(...) and confirming of our weak faith, the Lord both before the Law to
A(...)ham, and so under the Law, and likewise under the gospel has to his
(...)venant annexed certain outward signs as seals thereof.

And thus you having set down your distinction of two covena(...) Wish that
they may be remembered and orderly applied, and the argument say y(...) will
appear of no value etc.

There can be no orderly applying of disorderly things, your distin(...) on
brings all out of order, and therefore this double covenant being denied and
not by you proved, my argument stands firm in all the parts thereof. And the
mayor understood of that spiritual covenant of God made with Abraham and his
seed, the Minor is truly assumed out of the Mayor, and so is no sophisme.

Furthermore the cross of Christ has not abolished the covenant made unto
Abraham but confirmed it, nor yet abrogated the sealing thereof save only
changed the outward sign that thereby he might put some difference externally
between the times of Christ promised to come, and his manifestation in the
flesh, and accomplishment of his promise. And as * we have 30. ^. 8. 11 -- ^4.
Ro^. 10. ^. 7. 8. ^er. 4. 4. Esaias 51. 1 - ^. 1 Cor. 10 ^. 4. Gal. 3 4. 16. 22.
^^k. 1. 74.
the spiritual covenant and spirit, so had the faithful under the law, and
therefore it is false to say, that they had the carnal covenant and we the
spiritual, typed by the carnal: for although under the Law the Lord did
train up his people under many ceremonies which were types of things to come,
yet did he never ordeyne any carnal covenant with a seal thereof as you
devise. But let us see your proofs for all these particulars.

First, that there are two Testaments made with Abraham, you allege, Gal. 4 -
24. saying, Agar, that is the old Testament, and Sara that is the new, both
married to Abraham. 2. There are two seeds, Ismael of Abraham and Hagar, who
typed the carnal seed, and Isaac of Abraham and* Sarah who typed the
spiritual seed. ver. 23. 3. There are two seals circumcision a seal of the
carnal covenant, upon the carnal children, Genesis 17. 11. and the holy spirit
of promise a seal of the spiritual covenant upon the spiritual seed, 2 Cor.
1. 22. Ephe. 1. 13. etc. First, for the place of the Gal. 4. whereon you build
your carnal covenant, that nothing fits your purpose; for there the Apostle
had to deal with the false Apostles, who urged the works of the law for
justification and taught the people that unless they were circumcised Christ
could not profit them, whom after he had confuted with diverse reasons, he
infers to the same (...) ^^egorie of Abraham and his two wives, shadowing
out there(...) ^at there can be no agreement between the law and the gospel in
^atter of justification, the law ingendring bondage and requiring strict
^dience, without which is no salvation; but the gospel freeth from * Deuteronomy. 2^
26.
^egall bondage, and requires to Ro^. 10. 6^ 11. Romans ^ 16. 17.
believe and so promises salvation; ^o Paul speaking to them that would be
under the law, does show them ^ foolish they are, which by the gospel are set
Act. 13. 38.
free from the curse of ^w and legal ceremonies; do frustrate that freedom,
by subiecting ^mselves again to the law, which could never make them Act. 13.
39.
righteous; ^d so become like unto Ismael sons of the bond woman; whereas all
^hey that are under the gospel are free from all that bondage of the law and
^eas Isaac sons by promise of Sarah the free woman. Now this being ^he
purpose or scope of the Apostle, this allegory setting down the di^^rs states
of them that be under the law or old testament, and under the gospel or new
testament, concerning justification and salvation, does neither prove that
these two covenaunts or Testaments were made to Abraham, or yet that the Jews
were so under the law, that also they were ^ot free by faith in Christ, for if
we consider the times wherein the law was given, 430 years after the promise;
it will appear that the law or old testament was not given to Abraham, or yet
that it did Gal. 3, 1^
disannull the covenant to dispossess his seed of that estate which they
obtained, by that promise made unto him. And it is to be noted, that as well
under the ^ew testament as under the old, all they are in bondage with Hagars
sonns that seek by the works of the law to be justified.

2. I answer more particularly to your proofs whereof the two former are
drawn from this place of the Galathians chap. 4. 24. the first, because the
Apostle calls Hagar and Sarah the two testaments, verse. 24. and both ^^re
married to Abraham, therefore to Abraham were made two testaments. True it is
that Hagar and Sarah were types of the two testaments, the one of the old, the
other of the new. But the Apostle applies them, to set out thereby the
different estate of them that be under grace from such as be under the law of
works: Now to Abraham was not the law given (whereof Hagar is made a type) and
therefore could not have, that co^nant of the law sealed up unto him by
circumcision, for sure I am more covenaunts or Testaments the scripture s(...)s
not of, but (...) Heb. 8. ^3.
and new; the one abrogated by Christ his coming, the other co(...) And that
the Apostle means of these two testaments, it may be s(...) plainly out of
the text it self, for speaking of the law, he says thu(...) one which is
Hagar of mount Sina which gendereth unto bondage, making (...)tion purposely of
Sinai, because that covenant of works or law was (...) in that mountain,
whereof Hagar was a shadow, ver. 25. And (...) king of the other testament or
covenant of grace, says, but Jerusalem (...) is above, is free. etc. ver. 26.
-- 28. meaning that such as were children (...) of were free after the manner
of Isaac. But here it is well to be minded if these two Testaments be not one
and the same, and be said to be two in respect of the times and diverse
administration thereof, and then your carnal covenant cannot stand.

Certainly the Lord made one eternal and unchangeable covenant to his Church,
instructing and dispensing his benefits otherwise in the time of the Law, then
now he does under the Gospel. And in this respect, the Scripture speaking of
one and the same covenant ot Testament, may well speak in regard of the
dispensation thereof, as of two. And so understand by the old Testament, that
spiritual doctrine of grace delivered by Moses and the Prophets to the Fathers
promising eternal life, openly under condition of perfect obedience of the Law,
and threatening of the curse if they did not perform it; together with that
intolerable burden of legal rites, and yoke of Moses polity: and covertly,
under condition of repentance and faith in the Messiah to come, prefigured
under types, shadows, and ceremonies: that by this means the Jews as by a
Schoolmaster might be lead unto Christ. And by the new Testament understa^d the
same spiritual doctrine of grace now revealed by Christ and his Apostles,
manifestly, without shadows and legal rites, promising righteousness and life
to al, both Jews and Gentiles that shall believe in Christ already come.

And this being the meaning of the Apostle in speaking of two Testaments in
this place, this scripture serves nothing for your carnal covenant, seeing both
these Testame^ts are spiritual; and though some carnal things were commanded in
the old testament: Yet those makes it no more a carnal covenant, then water in
Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords supper, and the receiving of them
(which al are carnal things) do make the new Testament carnal, they being
given to signify unto us spiritual things as were (...) carnal things under
the law ordained to like use, unto the Jews. (...)m this placeis, that there
are two seeds Ismaell of Abra(...) carnal seed: and Isaac of Abraham and
Sarah, (...) seed.

(...) this type th(...) that Hagar and Ismael did shadow (...) law with her
children, (...) bondage, and Sarah and ^, Jerusalem, and her children, which
(...) and sons by promise, ^nding hereby, not only Abraham's (...) seed
(...)e under bondage, (...) through the observation of the law looked for
(...)tion, But all o(...)s whatsoever* that by pretending to observe the law,
^^pe thereby to be instified, as by applying this doctrine to the Galathians
^ppeareth. But you say, Hagar and Ismael typed the carnal seed after the flesh
^ All that the Apostle says is this, that he that was borne of the servant
(...)e after the (...), meaning thereby that he was not born^ by promise (...)
mother that was free, as Isaac was, and so did typ^ ^^t (as before (...) the
state and condition of them that seek justification by the works of (...) what
you affirm more then this you must prove.

3. You say, there are two seals, circumcision a seal of the carnal (...)
(...) carnal children; Genesis 17. 11. and the holy spirit of promise a (...)
spiritual covenant upon the spiritual seed, Ephe. 1. 13.

First, I deny that circumcision is the seal of any other covenant* ^ (...). ^
Gal. ^ Genesis ^
of that one covenant made with Abraham (...) of Christ, w(...) was confirmed
unto * him and to his seed thereby; a(...) spirit calls circumcision a Gal. 4.
seal of the righteousness of faith.

And lastly, because Isaac that was borne by Gal. 4.
promise, was circumcised, who was partaker of the covenant of grace, and of
the righteousness which is by faith, therefore circumcision was a sign and
seal thereof.

But you will object, that Isaac was of Abraham's carnal seed and in that
respect received circumcision, as a seal of the carnal covenant, which he
also had. It is true that Isaac was borne to Abraham after the common course of
nature, and therefore had he thereby this prerogative to be circumcised, which
no other children had but Abraham's, until they or their Parents were by faith
partakers of the same covenant made with Abraham: but it is not true that he
received this sign of circumcision, as the seal of a carnal covenant or of
the promise of Canaan only: or that it was a seal upon the carnal children of
Abraham's only, seeing (...) Exodus 12.
the believing Gentiles (as before was observed) (...) and Ismael also was
circumcised that had no righ(...) And ^ all such as believe and have received
the gospel are sealed (...)rit of promise, is true; but as the spirit does not
only (...) promise of God in the hatte^ of (...), but externally ^^ the (...)
cheth the same. Heb. 8. (...) Mat. 28. 15. so does he both inwardly ^ outwardly
seal the some promise to them unto whom it belongs. T^ * spirit and
circ(...)on are seals of the same covenant of grace and righteousness ^ Gor.
1. ^. 21. 22. ^he. 1. 13. ^erd with ^om. 4. 11.
of faith.

And thus may you see, that your distinction of two seals, of two several
covenants, a carnal, and a spiritual, is but a devise of your own invention
which will fall to the ground, when Poedobaptistry shall stand firm against
(...) strongest reasons, though you hold it to have a sandy foundati^^*

(...) next place you answer to the scriptures by me alleged, to prove (...)
of my argument and first to that of Genesis 17. 10. 11. 12. you say, (...) proves
that circumcision was a seal of the carnal covenant made with (...)all seed,
and not a seal of the spiritual covenant made with the faithful, for (...)it
is the seal thereof.

(...) answered you before, that circumcision was a seal of the spiritual
covenant made with Abraham, and have proved the same by those places of Romans
4. 11. and Genesis 17. 7-12. although you labor to infringe the the testimony of
the Apostle; saying, that it is not the scope of the place, but this, viz. that
circumcision had one specialitie in Abraham differring from all other, that by
circumcision he was sealed up to be the father of all the faithful, as
concerning the matter of their justification, etc.

The words of the Apostle are so plain, as you cannot shift them off, for Paul
proving that Abraham was justified by faith, and that faith was imputed unto
him for righteousness when he was uncircumcised, says, after he received the
sign of circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of faith which he had
when he was uncircumcised, Ram. 4. 9. 10. 11. Does not the Apostle plainly
affirm that circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith? which ^^
Cor. 1. 30. Act. 13. 39. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
righteousness, what is it else, but the matter of Gods spiritual covenant
made to Abraham? for Christ the substance of this covenant, is this
righteousness by which Abraham and all the faithful are justified; And you
confess that by circumcision Abraham was sealed up to be the father of the
faithful (...)ning the matter of their justification. Now if it did seal to
Abraham the ^uall covenant, then is circumcision a seal of the covenannt of
salva^, and not of a carnal covenant, as you affirm. And if circumcisi^ a
(...), Abraham of this heavenly promise, then is it so to all his (...) God put
no difference in commanding him and his seed to ^cumcised, as to say to
Abraham* that this sacrament, should seal vn^ ^im the covenant of grace, and
to his seed a carnal covenant, but ^d thus to Abraham, Genesis 17. 9. 10.
thou also shall keep my co(...) thou and thy seed af^ thee in their
generations. But say you, he was sealed up to^^ the father of the faith^l, that
as he was justified by faith, so should they be, and the (...)ltie had
circumcision in Abraham differing from all other.

That Abraham had this prerogative above others to be ^^e father of the
faithful, is not denied, but to affirm that circumcision ^^s not a seal of
the spiritual covenant, is false: and you answer not the Apostle, but shift it
off with saying, this specialtie had circumcision in Abrahan differing from
^ther, which is no conscionable dealing, seeing you cannot but (...), that Paul
having affirmed that Abraham's faith was imputed to him (...) ^ousnes when he
was uncircumcised, does prevent this objection, (...) Abraham was justified
being uncircumcised, to what end was he then cir(...)cised? to which the
Apostle answers, that his circumcision was not i^ vain, but was given of God,
and by him received as a seal of the righ^ ^ousnes of his faith, so setting
down the use of circumcision, not limitting the same as a specialty to
Abraham's fatherhood, but as the proper end or use of the sacrament it self
belonging to all others that were circumcised, as well as to him.

The next scripture is Act. 2. 39. whereto you answer, that the promise is Act.
2. 3
^ffred to the impenitent Jews, and to their posterity, and to the Gentiles a
far off, and that was exhibited only to so many as yielded obedience to the
faith, charging me with adding to the text, etc.

First, I confess the word ( made) is not in that place, but added by the
translater to make the sense more plain, the text may thus be read, for ^^ you
is the promise, and to your children, yet the word ( made) added in the
translation, is no adding to the sense, as may be proved, Genesis 17. 2. 7. where
in the second verse, the Lord uses this word, ( give) saying, and I will give
my covenant between me and thee, and in the 7. verse, I will make or establish
my covenant, the (...) also in verse. 21. in the giving of the covenant. This
word ((...)) word equivalent unto it, is used in Deuteronomy. 29. 14. I will make or
cut o^ covenant with you, using a borrowed speech which signifies (...)
(...)naunt, because in old times covenants were * confirmed by (...) Genesis 15.
^. Ier. 34.
of living beasts and fowls. The same word is likewise in Genesis 15. ^^. ^. so
Act. 13. 32. the words are, that touching the promise made to the fathers ^
which place the word ( made) is expressed; so is it in Act. 26. 6. and Ac^ 25.
and Gal. 3. 17. And therefore though the Apostle leave it out in rehea^sing the
covena(...) yet finding it in the original grant, and in other places, there
is no ^dding to the word, if we express the same in our own tongue. All which
frees me from your sclaunder, of adding to the text. But if the reader (...)
mind your writing, this imputation of adding will more justly be ^^turned upon
your own head, for you say, the promise is offered to the impenitent Jews. I
desire it may be showed where this word offered, is in the text, and why you
call those Jews impenitent, which the holy Ghost wit(...) to be penitent.

Secondly, you not being able to answer this place of the Acts, post it ^ver
with a distinction of offering and exhibiting, thereby to deceive the sim^le in
putting the thing promised, (which is offered to many by the prea^ing of the
Gospel, but exhibited to the believers) for the covenant or Genesis 17. 7 ^eut.
29. ^ -- 15. Ge^. 17. 1.
promise it self, which was once made to Abraham and his seed; now Peter's
reason was to persuade them to repentance and baptism, because the Lord had
made his promise to them and to their children: and they likewise had entered
covenant with him to walk in his ways, therefore they should amend and be
baptized, and the Lord would pardon their transgressions. And note that
salvation is offered by the preaching of (...) Christ, continually to them that
are within the covenant, as well as to others.

But let me ask you whether that covenant which God made to Abraham was but
only offered, or that Abraham received it also, and so God both entered
covenant with him and he with God? is it not apparent that Abraham received
the covenant, in that he believed, and was circumcised? Romans 4. 3. ^1.
and did he not receive it as well for his * seed, as for himself and believed
that God would be the God of his seed? how can you say then, it was but an
offer only. And if it was not made with the Israelites, how ^l they be blamed
for the Hos. 2. 2^ and 4. 1. 3. 2 Chro 24. 18. 19 and 30. 6-^
breach thereof? they might have been re^ed for refusing to have received Gods
covenant being offered unto ^ but not for their adultery, never being married
unto the Lord. Israel ^he Hos. 2. ^
Lords wife, and he her husband, could this be by an offer, and not ^ring the
contract? read Luke, 1. 68. - 74. but if it please you to read ^. 29. 10-15.
where the covenant was renewed with Israel, that the ^, women, and children and
stranger with them, entered into the cove^t and oath of the Lord, which he made
with them; it will appear that ^is was more then a bare offer, for hereby God
did establish them a people for him self.

But, say you, it was exhibited only to so many as yielded obedience to the
faith. I answer, these Jews whom you call impenitent, many of them did Act.
2. 4^
repent and had received the covenant in Abraham their father, were circumcised
and had right to the Ro^. 9. 4^
promises, were to be esteemed Act. 3. 25.
children of the covenant, until by Act. 13. 45. 46. and 18. 6. Romans 11. 2
infidelity and impenitency they were cut off. And herein you are deceived,
that because many of the Jews through infidelity fell away, that therefore the
covenant was not made with them, it is true, that it did not profit the Heb.
4. ^
unbelievers, and that was their own fault (no more does it now profit
hypocrites in the Church,) yet was it made with the^, and they externally
received it, in that they did partake of the signs thereof, and professed to be
Abraham's sons, Joh. 8. 33. The Lords supper offered, and externally received
of the unworthy, profits them not, yet they partaking but in the outward signs
are held 1 Cor. 1^ 27.
guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Further you say, Whereas you seeming to assume that the covenant was made to
Abraham and his infants, it is therefore made to us and our infants, I deny
that ever the covenant spiritual was made that is conferd to all Abraham's
Infants according to the flesh, etc.

First, you deny that the spiritual covenant was made, that is conferd to all
Abraham's infants. But I ask you whether was it given to any of them or no?
because you say, it was not conferd to all, if to none, I pray you tell me how
any of them, so dying infants were saved? so also you say, neither is it
conferd to all our infants, can you show me which of our infants are except, if
it be not conferred unto all. That it was conferred or made on the Lords
behalf, cannot be denied: but that every one to whom it is conefrred does
effectually receive it, who does so affirm? you run here to the secret
counsel of God, where in, all are not (...) ^om: 9. 7 ^. 8 44.
because they are the seed of Abraham, the which is not denied, but (...) the
posterity of Abraham after the flesh, many were not of the * elec^ ^om: 11.
but this is not to the purpose, for we do not hold that every one of A^hams
natural seed is saved, nor all the posterity of believing paren^ in the
election: but this we believe, that God of his free grace gave his (...)venant
to Abraham and to his seed, and he by faith received the same him self and his
seed indefinitely, as we also do believe that God will ^ our God, and the God
of our seed, because he has so promised, and therefore do we in assurance
hereof cause our Infants to be baptized according to the * commandment of
Christ: if any of them coming to years do manifest Mat: 28.
by their unbelief, that they are reprobate, then are we to take notice that
they were not of us, but till then we are to account them as children Io: 2. 19.
of the Covenant, as well as we do those that being hypocrites, do outwardly
Act. 8. 13.
profess the faith and so are baptized, as Symo^ Magus.

Secondly, you say, The spiritual covenant was offerred to all Abraham's seed
under the carnal etc.

How Gods covenant was geven to Abraham and his seed, and not barely offerred,
I have showed before, so also have I answered to your carnal covenant and
confess, that the Lord under types and figures did teach and shadow forth unto
Israel diverse particulars of the Messiah as of his sacrificing, Heb. 8. 5.
and 9. 8. 9. ^c. and 10. ^ etc. Col. ^ 17. Heb. ^ -- 9. and ^ chap. ^ Cor. 10.
1. -- 6.
death, resurrection, Preisthood and such like, and of good things to come to
his Church under the Gopell, and of the Kingdom of heaven, but that there was
a carnal covenant or Testament made with Abraham over and besides the covenant
of grace, sealed unto him and his carnal seed by circumcision all your learning
can never prove it.

You conclude That as it was offered to Abraha^s seed, so to ours. This I hope
the^ if it be proved that the spiritual covenant was not only offerred, but
geve^ to Abraha^s carnal seed (I mean the Israelites) that the same covenant
is give^ to our children, unless the grace of God be lessened under the
gospel. to prove the former, viz: that the spiritual covenant was give^ to the
Israelites besides that which has been formerly observed I will add some sew
reasons more to confirm the same.

1. Deu: 29. 10-15. Moses speaking unto all Israel, says, ye stand ^y every
one of you before the Lord your God, your heads of your tribes, your ^ and your
officers,* all the men of Israel, your children, your wives etc. that
^houldest pass into the covenant of the Lord thy God, and into his oath ^ he
makes with thee this day, etc. neither make I this covenant with you ^ but
with him that stands here with us this day, as with him that is not here ^ us
this day, etc. Which covenant is the Deuteronomy. 2 13. conf^ with Gen 17. 1. 2. 7
19. and 2^ 3.
same that was made to ^raham, and renewed both on Gods behalf and the peoples.
Now that ^venant that God confirmed to Abraham, with an oath is the covenant ^
grace, as Luke, 1. 72. 75. conferd with Genesis 22. 16. Heb. 6. 13. 14. And his
covenant that was made to Abraham, is the very same that Isra^l renewed with
the Lord, for themselves and their posterity. Deuteronomy. 19. 13. ^4. 15. which was
not barely offered, but confirmed unto Abraham and his ^ed by the Lords oath. Yea
in verse 10. 12. it is said, ye stand this day to pass ^r^ the covenant of the
Lord, and into his oath which he makes with thee this day, for ^ establish thee
this day, a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God as ^e has
said unto thee, and has sworn unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Ia^ob. And
this to be their God, and they to be his people, and their posterity, was no
carnal covenant, but the very 2 Cor. 6. 16.
same that is made with us under the Gospel.

2. That the Lord made with Israel his spiritual covenant, may also be
proved, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. where Moses exhorts them to circumcise the foreskinne of
their heart, and by all these exhortations of the Prophets, to repentance. Ier.
3. 14. and 4. 1. 4. and 7. 3. Hosea 10. 12. and 14. 1-7. Joel 2. 12. 13. Amos
5. 4. 6. Zepha. 2. 1. 2. (which are the conditions of that spiritual covenant
that the Lord requires on our part therein) and the promises of pardon annexed
thereunto. (which is the other part of the covenant on Gods behalf.) Now the
covenant of the law admits of no repentance, nor promises any pardon, only
the covenant of grace, admits thereof. If therefore they had not had the
spiritual covenant given unto them, whereupon could the Prophets have
grounded their exhortations, or with such reasons have persuaded them to
repentance? This was the ground of Peter's exhortation of the Jews to
amendment of life, as before is observed out of Act. 2. 38. 39.

And by the Lords requyring of repentance at the hands of the Is(...) it is
most clear, that God required then the same thing, that now (...) gospel is
required of us: Ergo they were interessed in the same cove(...) Mar. 1. ^ 15.
that we have: And therefore not only the outward observation of ce(...)nies
was required of the Jews, by their covenant, but also the obs(...) of the
conditions of the covenant of grace, as to walk before God an^ be upright:
Gen: 17. 1. to believe and repent: And it is a notable err(...) hold the
contrary.

3. Israel were held to be the people of God, and the Lord to be their God, and
so God did account of them. Now I would know if they could ^r. 23. 2. ^ay 5. 7.
^icah. 2. 8. ^ Hos. 11. ^. Deuteronomy. ^. 8. Genesis ^. 8. Ehe. 2. ^. ^. Cor. 6. ^. 17.
A^ c. 18. 4.
be said to be his people, and not to be within his covenant of grace; does God
accept of any, by a carnal covenant to be his people, and not in Christ? do not
both Jews and Gentiles become Gods people through Christ? and all that are not
within his covenant, are said to be * far of and without God. But the offering
only of the Gospel or covenant, makes not a people to be Gods people, for the
Gospel may be preached to them; that are without, but then are they said to be
Gods people, when they embrace his covenant and not before, and such as do
receive it are commanded to separate themselves from the profane, which will
not have the Lord to be their God: which separation, argues a difference
between a people to whom the promises are offered, and such as have received
them for that Gospel that converted some in a false Church, was offerred to
more yet is it received only of the faithful, in which respect they are said
to be the people and Church of God. This rests then for you to show that God
intituleth any to be his people, which have not either themselves or ^om. 9. 4.
^. 2. 39. ^eut. 29.
their forefathers received the covenant of grace. And as Israel was called the
people of God, because the covenant belonged unto them, and they had passed
into that, and received the seal thereof wherehy they testified themselves and
were acknowledged to be Gods people and sheep of his pasture: so are we become
the people and Church of God, not because ^. Romans 11. ^6.
the gospel is preached unto us, but because we have received the promise of
God, and entered covenant with him for our selves and also for our children, for
if the first fruicts be holy, so is the whole lump, and if the root be holy,
so are the branches.

4. The Apostle says, that the branches; vz. the Jews were Romans 11. ^7. 20.
broken of from the root and fatnes of the olive through unbelief meaning by
the root, Abraham ^saac and Jacob their forefathers who for themselves and
their seed (...) received the covenant: Now it must necessarily follow upon the
Apo(...) words, that they were before, of the olive, or else could they not be
(...)d to be broken of: And this breaking of, was not a ceasing to be their
(...)turall seed, (for so continue they still) but they were broken of from the
(...)enant of grace made to Abraham and his seed, as it is apparent by this,
(...) they were broken of through unbelief, which has relation to that
co^enant, and not to the covenant of works. Yea and they are said to be Romans ^
19. 20.
broken of from that, whereunto we are graffed by faith, and into which they
may also be verse. 23.
graffed in again, if they continue not in unbelief. Now we are graffed into
no other covenant but that of grace: And as for the Jews they cannot again be
graffed into such a carnal covenant as you imagine, seeing by your own doctrine
it is disannulled: And if they be to be graffed into an other covenant and not
the same that they were in before, how can it be called a graffing in again?
for this phrase imports a covenant whereof they had been formerly partakers.

But it will be objected, that they which are once in Christ and holy, can not
be broken of, and therefore such of the Jews as fell away cannot be said to be
holy and of the spiritual covenant.

I Answer first, it is true that they that are graffed in Christ, and
personally holy Joh. 10. ^ 27. 28.
cannot be broken of: secondly, the Apostle speaking of holiness and saying if
the root be holy so are the branches, means not of any personal holiness, but
of that right of the covenant whereby they became Gods people, which he calls
holiness that descends from Abraham to all his seed, as the sap or fatnes of the
olive does from the root ascend to all the branches; And this holiness, or right
to the spiritual covenant had all the Jews, in regard whereof they were
separate from all other nations, and called a holy nation. And in this respect
are the children of those parents (whereof the one of them believes) called
holy. 1. Cor: 7. 14. not that personal holiness descends from the parent to
the child (for that cannot pass from one to an other) but because through the
faith of the father believing that the promise of salvation is made to him and
his seed, the children have now title and right to the same covenant by the
free and large promise of the grace of God, and so many as are elected are
saved (though dying in their infancy,) by the same covenant.

5. The Apostle affirms Act. 15. 11. that both the fathers under the law, as
well as we that are under the gospel, are under the same j(...)ing and
sanctifying grace of Christ, saying, we believe through the grace o^ Lord
Jesus Christ to be saved as they, meaning their fathers, verse. 10. where(...)
on I conclude, that their fathers being under the same grace, were und^ the
same covenant with us, although this grace was not so fully revealed and
fulfilled as it is now * to us; for there is no partitipation of the gra^ Jo.
7. 39.
of justification and regeneration, but in this spiritual covenant; therefore
to them was given this spiritual covenant, and they did receive it as well as
we, though amongst them some particular persons did by their personal unbelief,
cut themselves of from the grace of God, as now some do with us, which neither
then, nor now, can make the covenant given to our Exodus 20. Ps. 89. 28 ^. Genesis
3. 15 ^ 4. 4. 26. ^ 6. 5. and ^eb. 11. 4. etc. Heb. 11. ^. ^ Heb. 11. ^. 14.
15. ^.
forefathers, to be void to their posterity.

6. The spiritual covenant that was given to Abraham and his seed, was before
given to "Adam, and the fathers to the time of Abraham; and they received it by
faith, (for there is but one covenant of salvation both before and after
Christ, and one manner of receiving it, which is by faith:) and Abraham to whom
was promised the land of Canaan, did notwithstanding look for a * city having
a foundation whose builder and maker is God. And of these fathers before
Abraham his time, does the Apostle witness that they all died in faith, '* saw
the promises (that is the things promised) a far off, (though they received
them not as then fulfilled,) and believed and received thankefully and
confessed that they were stangers and pilgrims on the earth, for they that say
such things declare plainly that thoy seek a country, that is an heavenly. And
in the first epistle to the Corinthes chap. 10. 1. etc. the Apostle speaking of
the fathers which were of Abraham's seed, says, I would not have you ignorant,
that all our fathers were under the clowd, were all baptized unto Moses, did
all eat the same spiritual meat and did all drink the same spiritual drink,
for they drunk of the spiritual rock that followed, and the rock was Christ. By
which scriptures it appears that the spiritual covenant was given unto them,
and that they received it by faith. Heb. 11. ^. Mat. 17. ^. 2 Cor. ^. 19. Rev.
1 ^ and 8. 3. Heb. 13. 15 ^ 1 Timothy 2. ^. Heb. 13. ^ Ephesians. 2. ^.


7. If the fathers under the law had not been within the covenant of grace, all
their worship offered unto God could not have been acceptable, seeing out of
Christ, * God is not pleased with any person, or with any worship; therefore is
he said to be the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and the only
"Mediator between God and man, by whom we have access unto the Father, and
through whom all our sacrifices and worship are pleasing unto God.

Lastly, it must needs be that the Jews had the covenant of grace, seeing the
Apostle says ' that the Gentiles shall be coinheritors (meaning with the Jews)
^ of the same body, and partakrrs of the promises in Christ by the Gospel: for
if the ^wes had not formerly been a body and inheritors of the promises in
Christ, ^ow could the Gentiles be said to be coinheritors with them and of the
^ame body, see also Ephesians. 2. 12. 13. 14. Add hereunto that the Jews were
called the Mat. 8* 12.
children of the kingdom, and of of the Act. 3. 25.
covenant, and unto whom the Act. ^ 32.
promise was made.

And now it being proved that this spiritual covenant apperteyned to the
Israelites, and the conditions thereof required at their hands, I hope you will
grant as much to the faithful and their seed under the Gospel, or else show us
where and when the hand of Gods grace was shortened, but that I am sure you
cannot prove God to be less bountiful now, then he was to the Jews: and
therefore as the chidren of Abraham Isaac and Jacob were holy and had right to
the covenant and were sealed with circumcision: so are the children now that
descends from believing parents 1 Cor. 7. 14.
holy, and have right to the covenant Mat. 19* 14.
and kingdom of God, and consequently to baptism the seal thereof.

But you say, Infants wanting actual faith, cannot truly be said the children
of Abraham.

I answer, that actual faith is required of such of Abraham's children, as Here
no^ that actua^ faith in al^ this treatis^ is put for t^ actual us^ faith.
are grown to years. And therefore you must prove that infants wanting actual
faith cannot be the children of Abraham, and then must you prove that they are
not Christ's, for if they be Christ's they are Abraham's seed Gal. 3. 29.

But are that they are, in secret to the Lord; whatsoever they are.

Christ has said plainly, Mar. ^ 14.
that of such is the Kingdom of God. And the promise is Act. 2. 3.
made to the believers and their seed. And you leave them in secret to the
Lord, thus shutting your eyes against the clear light of the truth.

The Scriptures following, (viz: Gal. 3. 13. 4. 8. 9. compared with Ge^. 17. 7.
Romans 11. 15. 17. 20. which serve most plainly to prove that the covenant that
we have is the same that was made to Abraham,) you leave unanswered.

Next follow your reasons against poedobaptistrie, the first whereof is this. As
it was with Abraham the father of the faithful, so must it be with the children
of Abraham, Romans 4. 11. But Abraham first believed actually, and being sealed
with the spirit of promise, afterward received the sign of circumcision: Ergo
the children of Abraham, the believing Gentiles must first believe actually and
be sealed with the spirit of promise, and then receive the baptism of water.

This Argument which you allege against Paedobaptistrie the very (...) serves
to confirm it, for thus we reason for it observing your terms.

As it was with Abraham the father of the faithful, so must it be with the
children of Abraham.

But Abraham first believed and being sealed with the spirit of promise,
afterward received the sign of circumcision, he and his children.

Ergo, the children of Abraham the believing Gentiles must first beleeve^ and
be sealed with the spirit of promise, and then receive baptism of water, they
and their children.

Here let the reader consider, if you by this your own Argument have not
yielded the cause; for this is that which we stand for, viz: that, As it was
with Abraham the father of the faithful so must it be with his children the
believing Gentiles. Now Abraham believed that God would be his God and the God
of his seed. Genesis 17. 7. received circumcision the seal thereof, he himself,
and all his males, yea Isaac of eight days old. ^om. 4. 3 ^ Genesis 17. ^ -- 14.
^ -- 27. ^ 21. 4.
Ergo the children of Abraham the believing Gentiles must first beleeeve, and
then receive the seal thereof which is Baptism, themselves and their
children. But if your meaning be this, that as Abraham believed first and after
was circumcised; so every one of Abraham's seed must first actually believe and
then be baptized, then I must entreat you to show me when and where this
difference was put between the seed of Abraham which descended from him by the
course of nature, and his seed that are of the Gentiles, that the former being
infants, might notwithstanding first receive the seal before they did actually
believe: And that the other, viz: the infants of the Gentiles must first
believe and after receive the sign: surely before the coming of Christ the
Lord put no such difference, but that such of the Gentiles as did turn to the
faith, "their infants were circumcised, as well as ^xod. 12.
the infants of the Jews. After Christ's coming the Apostle witnesses, that
there is no difference between the Gentiles and the Jews, for he says Ephe.
3. 6
* the Gentiles are coinheritors also (meaning with the Jews) and of the same
body and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel. And therefore the
Apostle did not doubt to "baptize the households with the believing parents.
Act. 16. ^. 33. Act. 10. ^.
I will answer you therefore with the words of the Angel unto Peter, * The
things that God has cleansed pollute thou not. God has purifyed the Gentiles,
and our seed in accepting us into the same covenant with Abraham, therefore yt
is an injury offered, to pollute, that is, to reject from the covenant, our
children, whom the Lord has received. Your second ^s this.

As in the old testament the carnal children were carnally circumcised and so
admit^d into the Church of the old testament: so in the new testament, the
spiritual children ^ust be spiritually circumcised, and then be admitted by
baptism into the Church ^f the new testament. But the first was signified by
the type, Ergo the second is ^rified in the truth.

First, If this Argument should hold proportion, then it would follow, that as
circumcision was a seal of the covenant, so should baptism be a ^eale
likewise, for it is brought in here to answer circumcision, as the door into
the Church: But you deny Chara^ page 9
Baptism to be a seal of the covenant.

2. I answer that the carnal children of the Israelites were not admitted to
be members of the Church of the old testament, by circumcision: for they were
borne in the Church and so were of it before the eight day, and Genesis 17
the covenant apperteyned unto them, and therefore were they circumcised, for
none might be circumcised to whom the covenant did not belong.

Also to the Majors consequent, I answer, that they which enter into the Lords
covenant be they believers or their Infants, we are to hold them 1 Cor. 7. 14.
Luk ^ 15. Ier. 1. ^
spiritually circumcised, and therefore to be partakers of baptism.

Concerning your assumption, as Mat. 3. 8. Act. ^ 12. 37.
repentance and profession of faith is required of them that are to be adjoined
to the Church of the new Testament: so was it of Genesis 17 ^ Esra. 6. ^
Abraham, and of them that were Gentiles, and to be adjoined to the Church, of
the old Testament, And therefore this manner of admitting members into the
Church being moral under the law so continues to be under the Gospel. And
the " Deuteronomy. 1^ 4. ^. 6. Ier ^ Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
Circumcision of the heart was commanded and promised then to the Israelites and
their seed as well as now it is to us, and not only to them that adjoined to
the Church but continually to all the members of the same. And therefore it is
no^ true that theirs was the type only and ours the truth: seeing the things
signified by Circumcision were required of the circumcised; as the thing
signified by baptism is also required of us; and a like entrance into the
Church under both Testaments.

The third is this; As in the old Testament carnal infants were carnally
beg^tten and borne by the mortal seed of generation by their carnal parents,
and then ^ere carnally circumcised, and received into the carnal covenant: so
in the new Testament spiritual Infants newborn babes in Christ must be
spiritually begotten and (...) the immortal seed of regeneration by spiritual
parents, and then being spirit(...) circumcised, they shall by baptism with
water be received into the new Testament* But the first was signified by type,
Ergo the second was verified in the truth.

This reason is a like to the former and has answer already. This I add
further that circumcision though it was a cuttyng of the foreskinne of the
flesh, yet was it an holy action sealing unto the believers and their Ro^. 4.
11.
seed, the righteousness of faith.

2 I deny that the seed of Abraham after the flesh was by circumcision received
into a carnal covenant; the covenant is spiritual unto which Genesis 17. 7 ^ Act.
7. 8. ^. 4. 11.
they were sealed * by circumcision, as before I have proved: for had they been
received into a carnal covenant; then should the Church of the old Testament
be also carnal: for according to the nature of the covenant so must the Church
be; and GOD must be a carnal GOD, and delited with carnal things, contrary to
Psalm. 50. 8. 13. Esaias. 1. 13. 14. But the Lord required of his people the
Israelites more then outward or carnal service and that which stood in
ceremonies types and shadows; Lev. 19. 2
even holiness, the circumcision of the heart, * repentance, Deuteronomy. 10.
the service of the heart and soul. And that the Lord did principally require
^6. Jer. 4. 4. ^ Hos. 14. 2 ^el 2. 12. ^3. Ps. 4. 4 ^ Deuteronomy. 10. ^. 6. 4. 5.
^sa. 1. 11* ^ and 58. 2 ^4. 5. Ps. ^0. 8. -- 13.
spiritual worship of them, appears by his rejection of their ceremonial
worship when it was offerred up without the spiritual, and by exhorting to the
spiritual; as Psalm. 50. 14. 15. to offer praise and to call upon him. and Psalm.
4. 5. to offer the sacrifice of righteousness, and in Hoseah. 14. 2. to pray for
pardon, and to render up the calves of their lips, And consequently faith in
Christ; without Heb. 11. 6
which, all their worship was unsavory to God. the Psalm. discribeth the true
members of the Church and dwellers in the Lords Ps. 15. 1. ^2. 3. etc. and Ps.
24. 3. 4. ^.
Tabernacle not by an outward observacion of legal ceremonies, but of their
spiritual obedience. The Lord says Prove. 23 ^. ^ Esa. 29. ^3.
my son give me thy heart, and reproves hypocrisy. By all which testimonies
it is manifest, that the members of the old Church were received into a further
covenant with the Lord, then into a bare carnal covenant which has carnal
conditions only, as before is proved.

The fourth is this, If the carnal infants in the old Testament were
circumcised then the carnal infants in the new Testament must not be baptized,
because that as circumcision is abolished which was the singe or seal; so the
infant is abolished which is the subject of the sign or seal. And a
proportionable infant introduced, which is one regenerate by the spirit and by
the word: But the carnal infa^ts in the old Testament were circumcised: Ergo
the carnal infants are not now in the new Testament to be baptized.

The consequent of the major will not follow, the reason proves it not: For
although circumcision be abolished in that there was somewhat (...) ^t was
typical, as the circumcising of the males only, whereby they were directed
unto Christ by whom our corrupt nature is cleansed: yet was ^t not abolished as
it was a seal of the covenant, but the outward ceremo^ie only changed: no
more is the carnal infant of the believing parents abolished or made vncaple of
the seal of Gods covenant: for the children of Christians Gal. 3. 29
are Abraham's seed, I say, not in respect of the flesh, but by grace of the
covenant comprehending the whole seed of the faithful; and therefore have right
as well to the sign of the covenant as had the carnal sede of Abraham.

Towching your proportionable infant (as you term him) it is to be obser^ed
that in the old Church it was required of all that were to be adjoined thereunto
that they should Exodus 12 48. Ezr. 6 21.
separate from the filthiness of the heathen to seek the Lord as now it is under
the gospel. And therefore it will not follow that circumcision was a type only
of the time to come? the fifth is this.

As in the old Testament when the male appeared the eight day their was a
paynful circumcising and mortifying of the foreskin when the party was received
into the covenant actually: so in the new testament when the Lord Jesus Christ
(typed by the male) appoints that when there is a painful circumcising and
mortifying of the superfluous fore ^kin of the heart, the party so qualifyed
should be received into the new testament actually: But the first was signified
by the type: Ergo, the second is verified in the truth.

First, the covenant to the infants of the Jews was actually sealed by
circu^cisio^, but this cannot properly be said a receiving into the covenant,
(wherein they were before comprehended with their fathers,) but a confirming
thereof to the parties circumcised. And this appears to be so by the Lords
threatening to Genesis 1^ 14.
cut of from his people the uncircumcised malechild. Can he be cut of that was
not of his people, or for the refusing circumcision to be be said to have
broken the Lords covenant?

2. Your simile holds not proportion, for you say, the party circumcised was by
circumcision actually received into the covenant, then by your reason (if you
will make it proportionable) the parties that are to be received into the new
Testament, must be received therein by the mortifying of the superfluous
forskinne of his heart; or else you must show some ceremony following
circumcision, by which the Jewish children were received into the covenant that
must type out baptism by which, say you, the party so qualified should be
received into the new Testament actually, or else show a reason why this
ceremony of baptism is added to the truth (as you expound it) and nothing
added to the type to shadow out baptism? this is not proportioable that there
must be a ceremony added to the truth in receving in of members, into the
Church now since the coming of Christ, and not any to the type in receiving in
of members into the Church before his coming.

Lastly if you will keep proportion, you must compare together circumcision and
baptism, both which do lead to the circumcision of the heart, and are the
seals of one and the same covenant, the one appointed for the old Church
before Christ, the other for the Church under the Gospel, and then will your
Argument fall out against your self. And thus I have showed both the weakness of
your answer, and of your reasons grounded thereupon.


Argument. II.
Col. 2. 11. 12. If circumcision belonged to faithful Abraham and his seed, yea
to such as were but infants, then does baptism also appertain to all
believers and to their seed being infants. But the first is true, Genesis 17. 10.
Ergo the second.

The consequent will follow, seeing baptism comes in place of circumcision
sealing up unto us and to our seed the same promises that circumcision did to
Abraham and to his seed, Col. 2. 11. 12. and that in as large and ample manner
(if not more ample) then to the Israelites, for of them only were the males
circumcised, but by baptism, are both males and females sealed. And this must
follow necessarily, or else the covenant by the coming of Jesus Christ should
be more restreyned, then it was under the law, who came to ratify and confirm
it wholly, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1. 20. The promises of God are in him,
yea and Amen, etc. For God gave it with the seal thereof, to Abraham and his
infants: and if Christ should give it unto us only and not to our infants,
this were to lessen and infringe the covenant, and not to confirm all, but to
take away part of that which God before had given.

Mr Smyth. I answer that this argument is built upon the same false ground with
the former a mere mistaking of the covenant, and seal, and seed: and there is
manifest violence committed upon the scripture by perverting and wresting it to
false consequents: first therefore I deny the consequence, and I give reasons of
my denial. etc.

The former Argument is proved to stand upon a true ground and so ^all it be
manifested that there is no mistaking, either of the covenant, seal or seed in
this reason, nor yet any violence offered to this scripture, by wresting it to
false consequences as you affirm. The consequence you deny, but desprove it
not, to your reasons I will answer particularly, which in number are three.

Your first reason because, that circumcision did not appertain to Abraham and
his infants as a seal of the everlasting covenant but of the external
temporary covenant of Canaan and of obedience to the law of Moses. etc. I have
already proved the contrary, both out of Gen: 17. 7. 9. where it is added as a
sign unto that everlasting covenant, and also out of Romans 4. 11. where it is
called the seal of the righteousness of faith. Furthermore, circumcision did
signify the Deuteronomy. ^ 16. Ier. ^ Act. 7. 5^
inward circumcision of the heart; which was not required of them in respect of
the promise of Canaa^, (the same being required under the Gospel,) nor yet of
the law, (for it admitts of no repentance,) but as a condition of the
everlasting covenant made with Abraham and his seed in Christ: also the
proselites and Ismael were circumcised, that had no promise of Canaan, nor
right to one foot of inheritance in it, for Ios. 14. ^ 16. 17. 18* 19. 21. c*
Canaan was divided by lot to the 12. Tribes, and in every tribe to the several
families: and therefore their circumcision did either seal unto them the
spiritual covenant, or none at all, as before is observed.

Again, if by the male circumcised; Christ was typed, as you have affirmed
before in your fifth reason in your answer to my former Argument, then
circumcision was a sign of the spiritual covenant: (For Christ is that which
was promised). And if the infant circumcised was a type of him, it must needs
follow that circumcision was asigne of that covenant whereof the child
circumcised was the subject, but the infant in becoming a type of Christ,
became in this respect, a subject of the spiritual covenant, and therefore his
circumcision a seal thereof, for the type and truth must have relation to the
same thing or covenant.

Lastly, Christ was a Minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises unto the fathers. Romans 15. 8. Also I deny that
circumcision was first given as a seal of obedience to the law of Moses, seeing
the law was not given when circumcision was ordained, but Gal. 3. 1^
430. years after: the thing to be sealed is to go before the seal, or else it
is preposterous, and the seal without fruit. Neither was it given to be a
seal of a carnal promise: in deed Abraham receiving the covenant of grace,
God together with it promised unto him and his seed the Land of Canaan: but he
never appointed circumcision to be the seal thereof; else when Israel possessed
that land, circumcision should have ceased, as all Sacraments shall do, when
the promises, whereof they be seals, shall be fully accomplished: and
circumcision should have been of no force to them that had no right to Canaan,
which yet were circumcised.

Your second reason, because the believers do not occupy Abraham's place in the
covenant of the new Testament, etc.

I answer, they do thus occupy the place of Abraham, that as he did, so Act. 2.
39
do * they receive the covenant to them, and their children, who through the
free promise of God received by the faith of the parents, have entrance into
the covenant together with them: and in this regard parents are, and so may be
called "fathers of their children, being the means whereby they Act. 2. 39
come to this prerogative, And this is not to supply that particular of
Abraham's fatherhood, which was extraordinary.

Your third reason is, because the infants of the faithful do not possess the
place of the true children of Abraham, but possess the place of the typical
children of Abraham according to the flesh, etc.

First, how the infants of the faithful are the children of Abraham, I have
showed, and here, deny that the children of Abraham according to the flesh
only as you mean, were types of the infants of the faithful; seeing the
children of the Proselytes were the children of the faithful: and they were not
the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, yea some infants circumcised,
should be types, (as the carnal seed of Abraham) and other infants circumcised
as well as they, (to wit) the children of the Proselytes) should be no types:
for you say the infants of the faithful do possess the place of the typical
children of Abraham according to the flesh. And thus your own reason agrees
not with it self, nor you with the truth.

Secondly, I ask you if the children of Abraham according to the flesh were not
the children of the faithful? Paul says, * that all our fathers were under the
clowd, were all baptized unto Moses and did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1
Cor. 10. ^ 5.
and drank the same spiritual drink etc. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
cap. 11. the faith of the fathers is commended, and after the enumeration of
many particulars, the Apostle says, all these through faith obtained good
report. Which scriptures do prove that the infants circumcised were the
children of the faithful, and if infa^ts of the faithful, then were they types
of themselves.

3. These that you call typical children of Abraham, as Isaac, Jacob, etc.
were the true children of Abraham, Heb. 11. 9. all the posterity of Jacob were
children of Abraham after the flesh, and Romans ^ 16. 17. 19* 20. 23. ^ co^ferd
w^ Genesis 17. ^ 9. 13. Jo^ 44.
sons of the promise of life, so to be reputed, as the like we are to esteem
of all the children of belee^ers.

But say you, If you will make true consequents, you must reason from the type
to the truth, and not from the type to the type, neither must you confound the
covenants and seals as you do, etc.

And I answer you, neither must you devise other covenants and seals then the
Lord has appointed. But as for my confounding of the covenants and seals,
that is your bare affirmation, and what you have said for establishing of your
two covenants or Testaments made to Abraham, and for your carnal and spiritual
infants, is answered before.

Next you proceed to examine the reasons of the consequence of my argument, and
of the scriptures produced for the confirmation thereof. And first you deny
baptism to come in place of circumcision as a seal of the same promises to us
and our seed, then you undertake to prove the contrary, saying, That the
circumcision of the heart succeeds in the place of circumcising the flesh,
Romans 2. 29. and circumcision made without hands, comes in place of
circumcision made with hands, Collos. 2. 11. compared with Ephe. 2. 11.

By this reasoning you deny the fathers before Christ to be circumcised in
heart, and yet to them as well as unto us was commanded and promised the Deuteronomy.
1^ 16. and 30.
circumcision of the heart, and the heart of their seed, as before is showed, and
they had the grace together with the outward sign, and therefore your reason
is insufficient, and the scriptures you pervert from their true meaning.

Towching the place of the Romans, 2. 29. the Apostle having convinced Romans 2^
the Jews of syn, verse. 17. -- 24. they might object, what, does our
circumcision nothing profit us, that thou equallest us to the sinners of the
Gentiles? yea says he, if thou keep the law, else thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision: verse. 25. And so prefers uncircumcision keeping the law,
before circumcision transgressing the law, verse. 26, 27. then by distinguishing
between such as are true Jews and hypocrites, and the inward and outward
circumcision, shows who is a true Jew (not before men) but before God, viz:
he that is one within, wherein is no guyle, And that circumcision is avaylable
to salvation, which is not only outward but of the heart: this is the Apostles
meaning, and not to teach, that the circumcision of the heart succeeds in
place of the circumcision of the flesh, etc. as you affirm.

That other place, Col. 2. 11. makes no more to your purpose then the ^2. 11.
former, for the Apostle in that chapter deals against false teachers that
urged the Jewish religion to be joined with the gospel, in this verse he
denies that we have need of the circumcision of the flesh, (which was
specially urged) seeing we are inwardly circumcised by the virtue of Christ's
death, and withal teaches that our baptism is a most effectual pledge, seal,
and witness, of our inward renewing, or regeneration; therefore having baptism
to confirm these graces unto them, need not the use of outward circumcision.
And as for Ephe. 2. 11. the Apostle having before taught ^^e. 2. 11.
that they were saved by grace through faith not of works, verses 8. 9. 10.
applies the same doctrine to the Ephesians, showing that they were not only
as the Jews, by nature corrupt, but also after an especial manner, strangers,
and without God, etc. and therefore ought so much the rather to remember the
same to move them to greater thankfulness. And thus you may see how unfitly you
have alleged these scriptures.

And circumcision the seal of the flesh has the holy spirit of promise, which
is the spiritual seal to succeed in place thereof. Ephe. 1. 13. 14.

Although circumcision was set in the flesh, yet was it not a seal of the
flesh, but of the * spiritual covenant: and the holy spirit of promise
succeedes Ro^. 4. 11.
not in place of circumcision as you understand it: for the believing Jews had
both the spirit inwardly sealing up unto them, that heavenly covenant of
salvation, as they had circumcision sealing the same outwardly: as in Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob and the rest: yea, the spirit in the Proselites went before
circumcision, for they being converted were after circumcised: Abraham before
he had the outward seal was inwardly "assured by the ^om. 4. ^. 21. 22.
spirit and confirmed of the certainty of the promise. But to prove that the
spirit of promise succeeds in place of circumcision, you quote Ephesians. 1. 13.
14. which scripture is misalledged; for the Apostle entendeth to show that the
Ephesians were equal to the Jews, because they were called by the same
gospel, which they embraced by faith, and sealed up by the same spirit, which
is the earnest of our inheritance: And not to teach that the spirit succeeds
circumcision. Again the spirit being invisible, is not given to us for a
visible seal of the covenant.

Further you say, I deny that the baptism of water is the seal of the new
te^stament though I cannot deny that the Baptism of the holy Ghost is a seal.
I say therefore that the seal of the spirit must go before the baptism of
water, and as all the ordinances of the new testament are spiritual and yet
visible, so is the seal of the new Testament, spiritual, and yet visible, and
thereupon men being visibly sealed by the spirit, as Cornelius company was,
Act. 10. 47. may challenge the baptism with water, as Peter there teaches.
This visible seal of the new testament is confession, as in the ^d testament
circumcision was their confession, and baptism is not a seal, but a
manifestation of the seal.

First, you deny a principle of religion, and that which formerly you held, for
in your book of Difference, etc. page 3. you call both breaking of bread and
baptism seals of the covenant: these are your words. The publishing of the
covenant of grace and the putting too of the seals is only one concrete
action etc. for the publishing of the covenant gives being to the seals,
otherwise breaking of bread and baptising are but putting of seals to a blank.
And thus unstable are you in your ways.

2. What if baptism be not called a seal? yet if it can be proved by
scripture that it is a seal, we ought so to receive it. The sacraments given
of God unto the Israelites were called seals, as Romans 4. and 15. 8.
circumcision by the Apostle is called, a seal of the righteousness of faith.
And when God made with Abraham his covenant to be his God and the God of his
seed, he gave him Genesis 17. 10. 11. 1^
circumcision a sign thereof, which did confirm unto him and to his seed that
which God did promise, as before the Lord had done to Noah to who^ he gave the
Genesis 9. 9-17.
rayn-bowe as a sign of his promise, that the world should be no more
destroyed with water: so the Passover is called a sign, Exodus 13. 9. Now if
circumcision be a sign and seal of Gods covenant, as the Apostle testifies,
then it must needs be granted that baptism succeeding circumcision is also a
seal of the Lords covenant, though the very word ( seal) be not expressly
set down in the scripture. And this the Apostle intimates, Act. 2. 39. where
he exhorts the believers to be baptized every one in the name of Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins, for the promise is to you and to your children.
The Lord commanding his Mat. 2. 19.
Gospel to be preached to all nations, commanded them also to be baptized,
confirming by this outward sign, his covenant to all the believing Gentiles
and their seed, as he had done to Abraham and his seed the same covenant by
circumcision. * Paul, Cornelius, "Lydia and the Gaylor, after they believed and
had ^ct. 9. 17
received the covenant were baptized, which confirmed unto them the free *
forgivenes of all their sins by the death of Christ. And this is plainly Act.
10.
taught us by Peter 1. Epistle 3, 21. where he says, that baptism now also
saves us: Baptism cannot be said to save, as any cause thereof, Act. 16. ^
31. ^^k. 3. 3. ^ct. 2. 38. ^^. 6. 3. ^al. 3. 16 ^om. 7. 11 Mar. 16.
but in this respect, that it witnesses and seals unto us from God, our
salvation, that which circumcision did type out to come, the same does baptism
now signify to be fulfilled in Christ the true seed, of Abraham. And as by
"circumcisiion the righteousness of faith was sealed: so by Baptism salvation
is sealed, as Christ says * he that believes and is baptized shall be saved.

Again, Romans 6. 3. Paul says, all we that have been baptized into Jesus
Christ have been baptized into his death. In which words the Apostle gives us
to understand, that by baptism, the benefits of the death of Christ, are on
the Lords behalf confirmed unto us. And if this be not the signification of
baptism, let it be showed out of the word what else is minded by these phrases,
baptized into the death of Christ, and buried with him, by baptism into his
death?

Thus have I showed that baptism is a seal of the new Testament, which you
deny, affirming a new kind of seal thereof, viz: Confession, and say, the
seal of the spirit, must go before baptism. Which two in my understanding
differ far one from another, for confeession, is the act of man, as the
Apostle says, * with the mouth man confesses unto salvation, and proves
sometime to be Romans 10. ^ Act. 8. 13
hypocritical, as that of Simon Magus was: But the baptism of the holy Ghost
is an action of God, and is either an internal work of the spirit, as Mat. 3.
11. or else external, by some visible signs and extraordinary gifts, Act. 1.
8. and 2. 2. 3. 4. and 10. 44. - 47. This latter now ceasseth; being then given
of God, for the further confirming of the Gospel in the Churches newly planted,
until the faith of Christ was fully established amongst the Gentiles, and
therefore is no ordinary seal of the new Testament given by Christ to be
continued unto the end of the world, though I confess those extraordinary
gifts of the spirit, miracles and works done by the Apostles and other of the
servants of Christ, have still their use in the Church to confirm the truth of
God by them published.

And as for men's confession of the faith, that can be no seal of the ^ew
Testament; because it is imperfect, and oftentimes hypocritical, many falling
away from the truth which formerly they professed, as Demas, Nicholas the
Deacon, and those mentioned in the first epistle of John, chap. 2. 19. Now that
which must seal Gods covenant unto us, for the confirmation of our faith must
be certain and perfect, and that from God, because it is he that promises
salvation to all that believe, therefore it is he that only can give assurance
of his own covenant, And as ^or our confession, it is but an outward
testification of the grace of God bestowed upon us, it can no more be a seal
of the new Testament, then the profession of the Jews was of the old. And as
you require of me ^here in all the scripture baptism is called a seal? so
more justly may I demand of you where in all the new Testament that confession
is called a seal. Besides if confession be a seal of the new Testament, then
a man may be par taker of the scale, that is not of the Church, as they that
confess their faith and yet are not admitted members of the communion of
Saints.

3. That the seal of the spirit must go before the baptism of water, etc.
Understanding it as you do (of confession) then I grant, that such as were
never of the Church, ar first to make confession of their faith, and to testify
their repentance before they can be admitted members of the Church and be
baptized. Act. 8. 37. 38. but neither is such confession required of their
infants, neither is it a seal of the new Testament, as before I have proved.
Otherwise understanding the seal of the spirit, as the Apostle does, Romans 8,
15. 16. and Ephe. 1, 13. 14. so goes it before and together with Baptism in
all the elect of God whether infants or of years.

As for that sealing with the spirit, of Cornelius company, which you instance,
Act. 10. 47. whereby you seem to understand, confession, you cannot but know,
that the spirit which came upon Cornelius and his company by the hearing of
Peter's words, was the extraordinary geving of the spirit, wherewith he and the
rest were endued, and not only that ordinary confession of the faith required
of each true believer, as by the text is plainly to be seen, which says, that
they of the circumcision were astonished as many as came with Peter, because on
the Gentiles was powered out the gift of the H. Ghost, For they heard them speak
with tongues. And chapter 11. 15. Peter says, as I began to speak the holy
Ghost fell on them, even as upon us at the beginning. Now Act. 2. 3. 4. it is
written concerning the Apostles how the holy Ghost came upon them, viz: there
appeared unto them cloven tongues like fire, and it sat upon each of them, and
they were filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues as
the spirit gave them utterance. This descending of the spirit upon the Apostles
was extraordinary, (for he came not so upon all that were baptized. Act. 8.
36, 37. and 16. 14. 15. 33,) seeing * the multitude was astonished ^ct. 2. 6. ^.
-- 12.
wondered all and marveyled. Therefore that coming of the spirit upon Cornelius
and his company, was extraordinary: for Peter says, The holy Ghost fell on them
as on us at the beginning: also Peter distinguishes between the holy Ghost
that fell on them, and baptism; for he seeing them partakers of the spirit,
says, can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized that have
received the holy Ghost as well as we?

This visible seal seal of the new Testament, (say you) is confession, as in
the old Testament, circumcision was their confession.

That confession, is not the seal of the new Testament I have already proved.
And as for circumcision to be their confession in the old Testament, thus far
may be granted, that it was a sign separating them from the Gentiles, and
whereby they were known to be Gods peculiar inheritance, and so is baptism now
to us, a sign distinguishing us from Jews and Pagans, but as we do not only
confess the Lord to be our God by our baptism; Act. 19. ^. Romans 10 10. King.
18 ^. Exo. 19. ^. Psa. 107. ^. 21. 31. Esa. 29. 13. ^e Da^. chapter 9 Exo. 12. ^8.
Act. ^. 27. etc. Ezr. 6. 21.
but also by * professing of his name and truth: even so did the Jews confess
the Lord to be their God, and his truth not only by circumcisision, but also
with words to his praise. And I make no question, but the Proselytes before
they were "circumcised made confession of their faith.

Baptism is not a seal, but a manifestation of the seal.

I pray you Sir, of what seal is baptism the manifestation? Confession you
say, is the visible seal of the new testament. Does it manifest our
confession? it needs not, for that is visible. If you mean that it signifies
the inward grace, it is true, but thereby we are assured of Gods promise, and
so is the visible seal thereof.

Next you proceed to answer unto the scriptures which I alleged to confirm
the consequence of my Argument: the first whereof is, Collos. 2. 11. 12. to
prove that baptism comes in the rome of circumcision, this you deny so to be
construed, and say:

That the Apostle teaches the virtue of Christ's circumcision and baptism
which is mortifying and burying of syn and resurrection from sin, and not to
teach that in the new Testament baptism succeeds circumcision, etc.

That baptism succeeds circumcision as a seal to the same covenant of grace
whereof circumcision was the seal, I will further manifest and prove both out of
this place of the Collossians, and also by other reasons. First as Coll. 2. 1
12.
touching Col. 2. 11. The Apostle reasoning against joining of legal ceremonies
with the Gospel, proves that the Church stands no need thereof, seeing they are
fully furnished with all things in Christ: and because the adversaries did
especially urge circumcision as necesarie to salvation, he answers, that
neither needed they to be circumcised, because they were spiritually
circumcised. And whereas the Collossions might have objected, that they that
were under the law were inwardly circumcised, yet had they withal outward
circumcision the seal thereof, which if we want, our state is not so good as
their was: yea says Paul that it is, for in stead of outward circumcision, you
have baptism ordained of God to seal unto you and your children, under the
Gospel, the same things that circumcision did seal unto the Jews and their
seed: this is the meaning of the Apostle, and therefore it is truly gathered
from this place that baptism succeeds circumcision: Now I vvil prove also by
other reasons that Baptism succeeds Circumcision as a seal of the same
covenant.

First, the sacraments of the new Testament have the same end and scope in
respect of the thing signified, with the sacraments under the law. For as Paul
attributed the same virtue, efficacy, and effect of our baptism and the Lords
supper 1 Cor. 1. 2. 3. 4.
to the fathers: so does he ascribe to the believers under the gospel, the
efficacy of the Cor. ^
Pascall lamb, Col. 2. 1^ 12.
and circumcision; therefore in respect of the thing signed, there is no
difference, the same Christ, was the Lamb Rev. 13.
slain from the beginning of the world. Also the same instrument and means of
application, the same Romans 4, 16. etc.
faith, end and effect, one and the same righteousness of faith, the same Gal.
3. 9
blessing with faithful Abraham, the same spiritual circumcision of the heart,
both of the fathers under der the law and of us under the gospel: so that in
all these things there is no difference; which plainly argues, that our
sacraments succeed in place of the former sacraments.

2, This may be further showed by comparing circumcision and baptism together
in their special uses and ends. There is the same principal use and end of
circumcision and baptism, viz: to * be signs of the covenant ^o. 4. 11. ^.
etc. Gal ^6. Mar. ^. 16. con^d with ^om. 4. 11 Deuteronomy. 10. ^. and 30. 6 ^it. 3.
5. ^er. 4. 4. ^l. 2. 11. ^uk. 3. 3. Act. 2. 38 ^. 6. 4. 6. ^om. 2. 29. ^hil. 2.
3. Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 1. Ephe. 5. 6. 1. Joh. 1 ^. Exo. 12. ^. Act. 8. ^. and
16. ^. 33. ^at. 28. 19 Ephe. 2. 11 ^2. 1 Cor. ^2. 13.
of the righteousness of faith in Christ: both of the sacraments of
regeneration, "requiring repentance and mortification, both signifying that we
are corrupt, and by the blood of Christ, to be cleansed, by both of them such as
were * without, were received into the communion of the Church. And by both of
them Gods people were discerned from other profane companies: And neither of
them might be iterated. By which proportion and agreement we may see, that the
one follows the other.

Lastly, as circumcision was given as a sign of the covenant, when the Lord
chose Abraham and his seed to be his people: so baptism was give^ together
with the publishing of this covenant to the Gentiles, when circumcision was to
cease, the partition wall removed, and both Jews and Gentiles were made alike
partakers of the covenant and of baptism the sign thereof. Which argues that
the mind of the Lord was to give to his Church, Baptism, to confirm unto it,
those things which before he had witnessed to Abraham by circumcision. And thus
I have proved Baptism to succeed Circumcision, and so answered your mistaking
of that place of the Collos. 2. 11. 12.

Again you say that I would insinuate a restraint in the new Testament if
baptism be not due to infants; seeing circumcision was due to infants in the
old testament, whereunto you answer many ways, saying,

1. Seeing Baptism does not succeed Circumcision, this allegation is nothing to
the purpose. 2. seeing baptism is both to male and female it is larger then
circumcision which was only upon the male 3. Seeing baptism is both to Jew and
Gentile, therefore more large then circumcision, but these things are almost
nothing to the purpose: but now I say more pertinently, that the covenant made
with Abraham in respect of Christ, is now as large as ever it was, for it was
never made with Abraham and all his carnal children, but only with Abraham
and the faithful, and so that continues in the same tenure still, and it is
enlarged now since Christ's coming only in respect of the clearer and more
universal publication of it, etc.

Concerning the first particular of your answer, I have already proved Baptism
to succeed circumcision, and then my allegation is to purpose you ^nnot deny.
To the second, I answer, that though baptism be both to ^ale and female, and
circumcision only to the male, yet is not the seal^g of the covenant so large
under the gospel as under the law, if infants ^e excluded from it: for though
women were not circumcised, yet were ^hey comprehended in the covenant with the
males, and their state was as ^ they had been circumcised. Genesis 34. 14. And
though baptism be ^o women, yet denying it to children, it makes a restraynt:
for to place ^omen in the stead of children is not an enlarging, but a change.

To the third particular of your answer, that baptism is both of Jew and
^entile, and therefore more large. I answer, so was circumcision to Jew and
Gentile, for all the Gentiles might have been circumcised, if they had pro^ssed
the faith: therefore it will follow that you do restrayn the seal of Gods
covenant by denying it to infants. But these things, you say, are almost ^thing
to the purpose: therefore to your second answer, that you say, is more
^rtinent, viz: that God never made the spiritual covenant with Abraham and al
^is carnal seed, but only with Abraham and the faithful. It is certain that
God made his covenant with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. 7. and to that seed
of his to whom was promised and given the land of Canaan, to that Genesis 17 8.
seed did God promise to be their God: but to Abraham's natural seed was
promised and given the land of Canaan, Ergo to them did God promise to be their
God and so made with them his covenant of grace in Christ then to come. The
same may be seen by the Deuteronomy. ^ 10. -- 15;
renewing of this covenant, as formerly has been showed.

I affirm, that circumcision was never a seal of Gods covenant made with
Abraham in respect of Christ, etc.

I have proved the contrary before, and have also showed that the confession "
page 12.
of believers under the Gospel is not the seal of the new Testament, then is
it not so large as circu^cisio^: for that infants were circumcised, but
Confession is only of them that are grown to years. As for your opposing of
true believers, to the carnal Israelites circumcised, it is not a just and
equal opposition, for actual believers are only of persons grown to years,
but the circumcised were not only of such, but also their infants. And thus
you lessen both the covenant and seal thereof, if things be taken in their due
proportion, though you pretend the contrary, deceived by your own devised
definitions and distinctions.

Lastly, to 2 Cor. 1. 20. you answer, saying, this place is strayned to the
^or. 1. 20
proving thereof; for the meaning of it is that unto the faithful, all the
Lords promises are verified, but his promise was never, that all their carnal
seed should have baptism as a seal of life and salvation, but that all
believers should have the spirit of promise which is the new Testaments seal.

You grant that the meaning of this scripture is that all the Lords promises
are verified to the faithful, and further then this I do not streyne it: but
do affirm, that this promise of life in Christ, I will be thy God, and the God
of thy seed * was made to faithful Abraham and his seed: which promise Genesis 17.
7.
he received that he should be the father of circumcision, and the father of
all that believe, not being circumcised, Romans 4. 12. 11. But where you say the
promise was never that their carnal seed should have baptism as a seal of
life. I answer, that those whom you call carnal seed, being the infants of the
faithful, are a holy seed, in respect of that title and right which they have
Cor. 7. 14 Pet. 2. 9. (...). 11. 16
to the covenant received by their parents, though they be carnal, inasmuch as
they are begotten and born of them after the common course of nature. And
therefore being holy, and children of the covenant, have also a right to
Baptism, as has been, and shall be further proved in the residew of the
arguments following. Here also out of your answer you set down five arguments
against Poedobaptistrie.

1. If all the carnal infants of Abraham were never actually under the
everlasting covenant in respect of the actual possession of it, then they
never had title to the seal of the everlasting covenant. But all the carnal
infants were never actually under the everlasting covenant in respect of the
actual possession of it, seeing Abraham's children according to his actual
faith were only under it. Romans 4. 11. Ergo, etc.

I answer, unto the major, that to be under the everlasting covenant, is to be
considered two ways, 1. according to the Lords external dispensation,
thereof, who of his free grace "makes his everlasting covenant Act. 2. 39
with the faithful and their seed. 2. according to Gods secret election; in the
former sense, all the carnal infants of Abraham were, and all the infants of
the faithful are, under the covenant. * For if the root be holy, so Romans 11. ^.
Genesis 17. 7 ^ 11. 12. ^at. 28. 19
are the branches: And therefore as the infants have right to the covenant,
through the free grace and large promise of God: so have they to the seal
thereof, which is administered by the commandment of God, according to the
outward dispensation of his covenant, and not after his secret election,
according to which election, neither all the carnal infants of Abraham, or all
the seed of the faithful, or yet all that make 1 Io. ^
visible profession of their faith and stand members of true Churches, are
under the covenant, save only the elect. But thus to understand, to be under
the actual possession of it, as it is proper only to the true children of
Abraham, so the certain knowledge thereof 2 Timothy* 19.
belongs only to God. And thus you see the majors consequent, in a right
understanding of the covenant does not follow.

Your second is this, If Baptism does not succeed circumcision, then Baptism
does not perteyne to carnal infants. But Baptism does not succeed
Circumcision, because the seal of the spirit is correspondent to the typical
seal of the flesh, and Baptism with water is only the manifestation of the
seal. Ergo, etc.

The consequent of the major of this argument is not necessarily true, for
though baptism should not succeed circumcision, yet may it pertayne to the
natural children of believers by virtue of the commandment of God. But I deny
the minor, and do affirm that Baptism does succeed circumcision, as I have
formerly proved. The reason of your assumption is also before disproved, for
the spirit as you understand it, for our confession, is not correspondent to
circumcision, seeing infants are excluded.

Your third is this, If circumcision did not seal up the everlasting covenant
to Abraham and all his carnal infants (then by your proportion) baptism does
not seal up the everlasting covenant to the faithful and their carnal infants.
But circumcision did not seal up the everlasting covenant to Abraham and all
his carnal infants. Ergo, etc.

The Assumption is false being rightly understood, viz: in respect of their
outward standing; and the contrary is proved before, to wit, that circumcision
did seal up visibly the everlasting covenant to Abraham and all his seed. Genesis
17. 7. etc.

Your fourth is this, If believing Parents do not stand in Abraham's room to
conveigh the covenant to their infants, then though they be baptized themselves
yet their children shall not. But the believers do not stand in Abraham's rowme
to conveigh the covenant to their infants, for no man is the father of the
faithful, as Abraham was, and he did never conveigh the everlasting covenant
to his carnal infants* Ergo, etc.

For conveighing of the everlasting covenant, this is that which we say, that
it is conveyed to the children, by the free grace and disposing of the Lord,
who gives his covenant both to the believers and to their seed,

And although the believing parents stand not in Abraham's rowme to be the
father of many nations; yet stand they in Abraham's rowme in this, that as * God
did conveigh his everlasting covenant by Abraham believing ^. 17. 7 ^. 2. 39 ^.
7. 14 ^. 11. 9.*
to his seed: so does the Lord conveigh his covenant, to the children of
believers: for this is common to Abraham with all the faithful, To believe God
to be their God and the God of their seed; and thus entered Abraham's carnal
seed, (as you call them) into the everlasting covenat, as before is proved. And
be it that all their seed are not within Gods election, (yet leaving secret
things to the Lord) we are to believe the promise to be established to all our
seed indefinitely, and not to put difference, before the time, that they by
their works do manifest that they are not the true seed of Abraham. Amongst
them that confess Jesus Christ, and "are members ^oh. 2.
of the visible Church many depart away, yet we account them children of the
covenant until their hypocrisy be discovered: and so in like manner are we to
esteem of the infants of the believers as * holy, until the contrary ^or. 7.
appear.

Your fifth argument is this: If infants of the faithful do not occupy the place
of true believers children of Abraham: but only occupy the place of carnal
children, then although the true children of Abraham in the actual believers be
baptized, yet the infants shall not which cannot believe actually.

But the infants of the faithful do not occupy the place of the true children
of Abraham: seeing the children of Abraham do the works of Abraham, Joh. ^. 39.
which infants cannot do. Ergo, etc.

First, it is denied that the infants of the faithful do only occupy the place
of the carnal children as you understand it; for they are also the children
^ct. 3. 32 ^at. ^.
of the covenant, and of the "kingdom. Secondly, the consequent of the major
(according to the true meaning of the terms therein used) is also denied, the
contrary is proved before, viz: that infants are to be baptized though they
have not the actual use of faith. To the minor I answer, that children so far
as we can see do occupy the place of the Act. 2. 29 ^t. 29. ^ 15.
true children of Abraham, for to * them is the promise, and in that respect
children of Abraham, as has been said.

Your reason drawn from John 8. 39. to prove that infants do not occupy the
place of true children, is not truly gathered from that scripture, for Christ
there proves, that the Jews living wickedly were not the children of Abraham
as they pretended to be, seeing they did not the deeds of Abraham: and he
speaks to men of years, of whom the practice of ^^ith is required. Now to
apply this against infants of whom God requires ^o such works, is like as if
one should reason from 2. These. 3. 6. that because children cannot work,
therefore they must not eat. And such is ^our absurd reasoning from this place.
Now when children of believers do come to years to manifest their infidelity
by their works, we are accordingly to judge of them, after the example of
Christ, and not before. Thus much to your five reasons, whereof not one is of
weight to prove that infants ought not to be baptized.


Argument III.
Marc. 10. 13. 14. and Mat. 19. 13. 14.

They that are of the kingdom of God have right and title to all the holy
things thereto belonging, and may participate of so many of them as they are
capable to receive.

But the infants of believing parents are of the kingdom of God. Therefore the
infants of believing parents have right and title to all the holy things
thereto belonging, and may participate of so many of them as they are capable
to receive and consequently of baptism, seeing they are capable of it.

The major Proposition I think will not be denied, it is written, 1 Cor. 3, 21.
22. All things are yours, Romans 9. 4.

The assumption is Mat. 19. 13. -- 17. For of such is the kingdom of God,
meaning that his kingdom stood not only of such as being of years that
believed, but also of their infants. And this he declares not only in this
saying, but also by his displeasure against his Disciples for hindering their
coming unto him: also by commanding to suffer them to come, and by putting
his hands upon them, and blessing them. Mat. 19. 13. 14. 15. For would Christ
have blessed them that were not of his kingdom? or do not the blessings
apperteyne only to the children of the kingdom, even to the seed of Abraham,
Gal. 3. 8. 18.

If it be objected that children are not capable of baptism, I answer, they
are as capable thereof, as the infants of Israel were of circumcision, being
both partakers of the same promises with them, and in all respects as capable
of the outward seals of the covenant as they were. And therefore the infants
of believers are to be baptized.

M. Smyth. To this Argument of yours I make answer diversely: First you have not
proved that the visible Church and all the ordinances thereof perteyne to
infants of the faithful: for the infants of the Jews that were presented to
Christ were not infants of believers etc.


Rich: Clifton. You answer, (you say) diversely, but yet your answer would have
been more direct and plain to my understanding if you had denied either
proposition or distinguished; in stead whereof you demannd diverse questions;
deny the sequel of the conclusion, and pretend absurdities to follow;
notwithstanding I will answer to your particulars.

And first, where you say, I have not proved that the visible Church, and all
the ordinances thereof perteyned to infants, etc. I have proved that which I
undertook, viz: both the parts of my argument, and you deny neither, but say I
have not proved the conclusion, which if the Argument be in mood and figure
must necessarily follow upon true premises,

Next you say, the infants that were presented to Christ, were not infants of
believers for ought that I see, etc.

Neither have you any likelihood to judge the^ to be infa^ts of any others ^at.
10. ^. Mat. ^. 13. 14.
that were not either of the Jews or Proselytes: for would Christ receive the
infants of the unbelieving Gentiles, and to say of them, of such is the
kingdom of God? therefore it cannot be that they were the children of
unbeleevers, unless we shall imagine that Christ did practice contrary to the
course ^ has set down for the receiving of them, into his covenant that are
without, also this was in Mar. ^ 1.
Judah by the far side of Jorden whether the people resorted unto him again
Mar^ 10. Mat* 1.
after he was come out of Gallily, And though the text mention not who they
were that brought the infa^ts to Christ, nor those they were (as it was not
needful for us to know) yet by the circumstance of the place and persons
coming then unto him, it cannot otherwise be thought, but that they were of
the children of the Jews or proselytes; and as for your likelihood to the
contrary, it is no likelihood at all, seeing the Disciples failed in many
things: Luke 9. 54. 55.
they also besought him to send the Cananitish away, yet he received her. Now
the cause why the Disciples would have had the Canaanite sent away, was for
that she cried after * Mat. 1^ 22. 23. 2^
them, and it may be this was the reason why the disciples rebuked them that
brought the infants, because they troubled them, or it may be they thought
infants incapable of knowledge and so could not profit by the word preached,
but this matters not, for by Christ's reproving of them, it is manifest that
they erred in so doing: and that they ought not to have forbidden children to
have been brought unto him.

You say, it may be they were the children of some of the Roman soldiers or
some Ca^anish persons.

So it may be the parents of these infants were proselytes and most likely they
were Jews: but what is this to the purpose; answer to the argugument, for this
is but to seek shifts when you cannot find a sufficient answer. But suppose
(say you) they were children of the Jews how is it prooved that their parents
were believers, seeing the Jews for the most part were stiffenecked and
uncircumcised in heart.

Although some of the Jews were stiffenecked, yet how is it proved that these
were the infants of such? seeing many of the Ioh. 7. ^
people believed in him: nay rather the contrary appears by Mar^ 10. 1. 13.
their coming to hear Christ and the bringing of their infants unto him, that
they were not of those that were stiffenecked, for would they have sought to
Christ to bless their children if they had despised him? And although the
parents of these infants might be such as yet were not fully instructed that
the Messiah was come whom they looked for, (the contrary is more probable) yet
did they profess the Lord to be their God whom they ought to worship, and
therefore were in external account, believers and members of the Church.

If they had been the children of believing Jews that were baptized by John ^^
Christ's disciples* etc

Whether these Infants or their Parents were baptized by John or Chr. disciples
the scripture mentions not, neither is it greatly material for us to know,
else the spirit had reveyled it: that they were blessed of Christ there is no
question. But say you, if they were baptized what need was there to bring them
to Christ, except i^ were for popish confirmation. The Scripture sets down the
end why, viz. that Christ should lay his hands on them, and pray for ^uk. 18.
^. Mat. ^, 13. Genesis 48. ^ -- 20. Mar. 7. ^. Luke 4. ^. Act. 9. 17. Act. 8. ^ --
19. Act. 19. ^6.
them, or bless them. The laying hands on the party blessed, was practiced by
the * fathers, when they would pray for, or bless their children. Christ used
it in "working of miracles, for they that brought the deaf man prayed him to
put his hands upon him: all they that had sick of diverse diseases brought them
unto him, and he laid his hands on every of them and healed them. Also Christ's
disciples practiced this laying on of hands and praying, not only in curing
the diseased, but also * upon them that were baptized. And Paul "laid his
hands upon those twelve at Ephesus who were baptized with John's Baptism.

If the Apostles might lay their hands upon them that were already baptized and
pray for them, (and this I hope was no popish confirmation) might not our
Savior do this to these Infants if they were baptized, but it must be a
needless thing to bring them unto him thus to be blessed? And though you say,
I cannot from hence conclude Baptism, yet from hence I do conclude that Christ
performed that action to Infants, that his disciples did afterward unto such as
were baptized, viz. laying on of hands and prayer: and likewise I can conclude
that Christ admitted of Infants to come to him, and that he prayed for them,
And "he prays not for the world. ^oh. 17. 9. M^r. 10.
And that also he pronounces, that of such is the kingdom of God. And
therefore whether Baptism can be denied to such let the godly reader judge.

I avouch constantly against you that either they were not the children of the
Jews, or they were not the Infants of believing Jews, or if their parents
believed, yet it follows not tha^ those Infants were of the kingdom of God
or to be baptized: for Christ does not say of these, but of such is the
kingdom of God.

Although you do so constantly avouch against me, yet it is but your stout
denial, without any reason or probability to the contrary. That these Infants
which were brought to Christ were of the Jews, I have showed my reasons before.

But not believing (say you) I answer, how dare you deny them to be professors?
(of the heart we are no judge) stood they not members of the visible church? and
are they not so long to be accounted for believers? nay, they came to hear
Christ, and by presenting their children unto him, and desiring him to pray,
testified their faith in him, and 1 Cor. 1^ 7.
charity binds us to esteem of such in the better part.

If their parents believed, yet it follows not that therefore these Infants
were of the kingdom of God, or to be baptized etc.

It does follow that these infants were of the kingdom of God, in that Christ
prayed for them Mar. 10. 16. conferred with Mar. 19. 13. but he Joh. 17, ^
prayed not for them that are not of his kingdom.

Yea, Christ says not of these, (say you) but of such.

And do you not think in your conscience that Christ in these words ( of such)
included those infants? would he include others like to them and exdude them?
As concerning that place of Mat. 18. 3. 6. which you allege to cross my
interpretation of these words, it gaynes you nothing: for the disciples coming
to Christ and asking who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, he teaching
them humblenes, called a little child (not a man of years) and set him in the
midest of them saying, except ye be converted and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, using the same word in this place
for little children, Mat. 18. 3. that is in Mark. 10. 15. In Mat. 18. 6. for (
little ones) is used another word, that will as well agree to men of years, so
they be humble, as to children. And in verse the third Christ does not deny
children to be of the kingdom of God, but teaches his disciples by a simile
to be humble minded as little children, or else they could not enter into the
kingdom of God, Esa, 66. 3^ Jam. 4. 6. 10. 1 Pet. ^. 5. 6.
who regards the lowly, and gives grace to such. And this does rather confirm
my exposition, in teaching none can enter into the kingdom, but such as shall
be like to infants.

Besides, how can you prove that by the kingdom of God Christ understands
the visible Church of the new Testament?

First for answer to this question, I will send you to Mr. Smyth in his printed
A. 1609.
Paralels, Censures and Observations, page 22. who says, That the true visible
Church is CHRIST'S sheepfold, his kingdom, etc. Also page 15. of the same book,
The true Church in the scripture is called the house of God, the Temple of God
the howsehould of faith and the kingdom of heaven, of Christ and of God. And
in 17. page of the same book these are your words they that are not of a
constituted Church are no subjects of Christ's kingdom, and page 16. you say,
that the visible Church is the only kingdom of Christ, and that therefore
they who are not members of Christ's true visible Church are no subjects of
Christ's kingdom, the like is affirmed in page 18. 19. considering therefore
what you have written, I marvel you demand this question, for by your own
words you insinuate that the kingdom of Christ or of God, is the only visible
Church, in that you say, they are not of Christ's kingdom that are not members
of a true constituted Church, and then must it needs follow that by kingdom of
God in this place, is understood the visible Church Rev. 18. 4 Luke 19. ^. 12.
Act. 3. Mat. 5. ^. Genesis 17. ^. Psalm. 73. ^. Psalm. 147 ^. Romans 9. Esa. 28. ^6.
and 51. 3 ^. chap. 54 ^s. 132. 13 ^ -- 17. Ps. 128. 1- ^. Ps. 1-3 ^ 112. 1. 2
and 119. 1 ^. 92. 13 and 4. 4. 5. ^at. 5. 1 -- ^. Ephesians. 5. 25
of the new Testament, seeing you say, it is the only kingdom of Christ. but I
do not consent unto you herein, for there be many of the kingdom of God, that
are no members of a true co^stituted visible Church, as * Gods people in
Babylon, and those seven thousand in Israel that never bowed their knee to
Baall. The kingdom of God extends more largely, (though invisibly) then to the
visible Church.

2. To your question, I answer, that the visible Church of the new Testament is
the kingdom of God: and so to understand it in this place of Ma^k 10. 14. 15.
is nothing repugnant to the circumstance and scope thereof, although the
kingdom of glory is also intended, both which are but one, yet diversely
considered. And he that has right to the one part has right also to the
other: and therefore Christ saying, of such is the kindome of God he means
his whole kingdom of grace and glory.

Or how can you prove that Christ blessed none but members of the visible
Church?

First, I never did affirm that Christ blesses none but the members of the
visible Church, and therefore you have no reason to require the proof thereof
at my hands. 2. If your question be of Gods general blessings, then I answer,
that the Lord causes " the sun to shine upon the just and unjust, and the
rain to fall upon the good and evil; all nations and people are partakers of
many temporal blessings. But if you speak of spiritual blessings and of those
that are purchased by Christ's death then I say, * such blessings apperteyne to
the Church, and to the true members thereof whether visible or invisible,
because "Christ is given only to his Church, (...) 1 Cor. ^ 2 Cor. 1. ^ 21. 22.
whom all the promises of God are yea and in him, Amen.

Or how can you prove that the blessing of Abraham, apperteyneth only to the
members of the visible Church, etc.

And I ask you, why you put me to the proof of it, seeing I never held any such
thing. Nay, I deny that the blessing of God reaches no further then to the
members of the visible Church, for the Churches King. 18. Rev. 4.
members are many invisible, but that the blessing of Abraham perteyneth to the
visible Church, I hope you will not deny, see Ephe. 2. 11-22. and 3. 6- 19. and
4. 8.-14. 2 Cor. 4. 9. Col. 1. 3-6. 1 These. 1. 2. - 10. in all which places and
in diverse others, it does appear that these visible Churches had received the
blessing of Abraham.

Or that from this particular of Christ's praying for infants, Mar. 10. 13.
baptising of infants to follow.

My argument from this place of Mat. 10. 13. 14. to prove that baptism belongs
to the infants of believers, you have already, and have not answered it, why
require you it again. I have proved that infants are of the Kingdom of God,
as also that the holy things of God, as baptism, etc. belong to all the
members of this kingdom: But further to satisfy your desire, thus I prove
baptism to belong to infants, from this particular of Christ's praying for them:

For whom Christ prayed, they were of his everlasting covenant, for he prayed
for them Ioh. 17. 10. 20.
which were given him, and not for the world.

But Christ prayed for these infants, Mat. 19. 13.

Therefore these infants were of his everlasting covenant, and so consequently
baptism the sign thereof belonged unto them, seeing God both in making Genesis 17
7.-10.
this covenant with Abraham, gave to him and to his seed together with it
circumcision the seal thereof. And also in commanding the Mat. 2^ 19.
publishing of the same covenant to all nations did withal command baptism to
be administered.

Again, those whom Christ blesses, he blesses with the blessing of Abraham,
Gal. 3. 14. conferd with verse. 8. 16. 9.

But Christ blesses these infants: Mar. 10. 16.

Therefore Christ blesses them with the blessing of Abraham, and so
consequently these infants were capable of baptism, because the Lord has
joined together the blessing or covenant, and the sign or seal thereof, as
before has been showed.

Or how ca^ you prove that Christ obtained for the^, and prayed for remission
of sins, the holy Ghost, faith, everlasting life, for many were brought to
Christ for releife of bodily infirmities.

And I demand of you again, for what other things should Christ pray for
these Infants, but for spiritual graces; there is no mention that they were
brought for the curing of any bodily infirmity in them, and if they had been
diseased it is like the Apostles would not have hindered their Mat: 19. ^.
coming to Christ, and the end of their bringing of their infants to him was
to put his hands upon them and to pray. The reason that Christ yields why
they should suffer little children to come to him, ( because of such is the
kingdom of God) does argue of what nature the things were he prayed for.
Again, where Christ prayed for the curing of any corporal disease, Mat: 8. 4.
15. and ^. 28. 29. ^. Mat: 8. ^6.
it is recorded with what * infirmity they that he prayed for, were troubled;
that so the miracle might be known, which was the end of his doing of great
works. The "Centurion requiring Christ for his servant, showed his disease: but
those that brought the infants, mention no corporal infirmity, for which they
should desire him to pray for them.

Thus you having made all these questions, you proceed to a second answer
saying,

I deny that it follows because Christ blessed some of the infants of the
Jews or Gentiles upon special entreaty, therefore that it may hence be
concluded, that generally the covenant and the seal of the covenant (as you
call baptism) does apperteyne to them, for there is not the same reason of all
infants as of some specially blessed, as John Baptist, Jeremy, Sampson.

I marvel greatly, that you will thus shift off: does not my reason prove, that
the covenant and seal thereof apperteyneth to the infants of the faithful,
seeing of such is the kingdom of God? Does Christ say these infants are blessed
only, because they alone are of the kingdom of God? Nay, says he not of such
(including other infants also) is the kingdom of God? And does not the reason
which our Savior uses here, why these infants should come to him infer so
much? for they that brought them, being stayed, he reasons thus against his
disciples why they ought not to hinder them, because of such (as these are,) is
the Kingdom of God, meaning, not all infants, but the infants of believers as
these were.

But in that you say, there is not the same reason of all infants, as of some
spe^^lly blessed, etc.

Neither do we reason for such special blessings or callings, as were ^iven
to John Baptist, Jeremy or Sampson, but for the right of the covenant ^o
appertain to all the seed of the faithful: for although God do out of ^he
seed of believers chose some whom he will employ to special service above
others, and therefore does bestow on them more then ordinary ^iftes, yet this
hinders not the rest of the infants of the faithful from their right to Gods
covenant or common salvation.

Neither indeed can you prove, that these infants which were blessed of Christ,
were blessed with any extraordinary blessings or callings, for no ^^ch things
is recorded of them, therefore to compare them and their bles^nge with these
three extraordinary servants of God, John Baptist Jeremy ^d Sampson, is not to
make an equal comparison.

Thirdly, If Baptism does appertain to infants because Christ blesses some
parti^ular infants, and because Christ says the Kingdom of God appertains to
such, then the lords supper also.

I answer, that does not follow; the ordinances of Christ belong to the members
of the Church and they are to partake of them as they are capable.

The infantes of the Jews could receive circumcision at eight days of age,
but could not eat the passover: so likewise the children of Christians are
capable of Baptism the first day of their birth, but not of the Lords ^pper
because the Lord Jesus, of such as participates thereof, requires 1. Cor. 11
26-31.
to examine themselves, to show forth the Lords death etc. which children
cannot perform in regard of their years. And therefore it will not follow that
if infants are to be baptized, therefore to receive the Lords supper. And
though you would prevent this answer, by saying. They must have it (meaning the
Lords supper) as soon as they can eat it; I grant as much, as soon as they can
eat it, as the Lord has 1. Cor. 11 27.
commanded,

They cannot confess their sins and faith, and so cannot be baptized.

To this objection sufficient answer is given already, and further occasion of
answer will follow.

4. I would know, why the Apostles put infants back, and why Christ did not
command them to be baptized, etc.

Why would you know that which is not written? that the Apostles did not well
in putting them back, Christ his rebuking of them, does manifest: What may be
coniectured has been noted before. And as for Christ his not commanding them
to be baptized, I answer, Christ performed that which they required of him, the
text does not mention that they came to desire baptism, and therefore there
was no cause that he should command them to be baptized.

Next you labor to weaken such proves as I brought from the scriptures to
confirm my Argument withal, saying.

You see by that which has been answered, that both your mayor and minor ar
weak, and the scriptures alleged by you do not confirm them, for the place, 1
Cor. 3. 21. 22. declares that all things are yours, that is theirs that
actually believe and are baptized, etc.

My major and minor are so weak, that you can disprove neither of the^. As
touching your answer to this scripture, 1 Cor. 3. 21. 22. you apply it Cor. 3.
21 ^2.
only to them that actually believe, which the text says not, the Apostles
meaning in this place is, that all such helps as the Lord Jesus has appointed
for the benefit of his people are theirs, whether they be men of years, or
infants for he speaks to the whole Church inclusively whereof the children are
members, as has been proved. But you say, I must prove Mat. 8. 12 Act. 13. 32
Genesis 12. 3. Mar. 10. 14 ^
that infants have the use of all. I have answered that they are to have the
use of so many of Gods ordinances, as they in regard of their years and
knowledge are able to partake of. But not satisfied herewith, you demand
further saying,

Do you think that the members of the Churches are not capable of all the means
of salvation, etc.

I answer, that all the members of the Church are capable and partakers Ephesians. 5.
25 ^6. 27. Cor. 1. 30. Heb. 10. 10 Act. 4. 12.
of all the means of their * salvation, which is Jesus Christ, yea children,
else can they not be saved. But as concerning the outward ordinances of the
Church, as the ministry of the word, Sacraments and such like, though they be
necessary in their due place, yet the use of them is not at all times and of
all persons required; the Israelites borne in the wilderness were not
circumcised by the space of fortye years, neither was the Passover commanded
to infantes, to offer sacrifice or the like, (though D^^. 12. Rev. 7. Heb. 2.
Act. 31. Jer. ^. Mar. 10.
these were necessarily required of them that were grown to years;) so that
time and age does priveledge some from the practice of those things which
otherwise they are bound to observe;

The next Scripture is, Romans 9. 4. wherein you except against the Kom. 9.
word ( appertains) and say. It is put into the text and perverteth the
meaning ^f the Apostle. For your excepting against the word, ( appertains)
saying, it is ^ into the text, you seem to contend, before you be provoked, I
only quo^ed that place of Romans 9. 4. and did not set down the words. And
therefore to strive about a word added in the translation, is to strive against
your own shadow, I defend no words added, whereby the text is misconstrued.
But although no verb be expressed in the original, yet gramatical co^struction
requires some verb to be understood* as this verb ( is,) or appertain^th, or
some such like, and if ( is) be understood, it is the same, in sense with (
appertains).

But you say, Paul intends not to prove that the carnal Israelites were
actually within the covenent of grace etc.

Paul intends to set down the dignity and prerogative of the people which he
had chosen to him self to be his inheritance, and to show that Gods word is
true, although Israel be cast of, he performs his promise to so many of them
as he had chosen in his secret counsel. And this is all that the Apostle
intends. To your carnal covenant, and to the offer of the spiritual, I have
answered before.

Lastly, whereas I did affirm that infants under the Gospel were as capable of
baptism, as children under the law, you answer. That baptism is not the
seal of the covenant of the new Testament, as Circumcision was the seal of
the old Testament, and that infantes of the old Testament were capable
absolutely, seeing that to be circumcised, there was nothing required, but a
foreskin apt to be cut of: but to baptism in the new Testament, there is
required actual faith, repentance confessed by the mouth Mat. 5. 6. Act. 8. 37.
and 10. 47.

That page 37.
Baptism is the seal of the new Testament is proved before, and also that
circumcision was page 12.
a seal of the same spiritual covenant to the Israelites, and that our infants
are as capable of baptism, as the Jews were of circumcision, your reasons
alleged to the contrary are of no force for the difference you put between the
two sacraments of circumcision and baptism, is but a flourish, for as the
profession of actual faith, and repentance is ^zra. 6. 21. ^ter 8. 17.
required of all them that are of years to baptism, so was it of the
proselytes, to circumcision. And if you would compare Infants with Infants, and
men of years with such like, then shall you see, that there is no more
required of our infantes that are to be baptized, then of the children of the
Jews and proselites; nor less looked for of men of years under the old
Testament, then now under the new. As for the scriptures that you alledg, they
witness what is required of the elder sort to be received into the visible
Church, and not of infants. Out of this your answer you collect 5 arguments
against Paedobaptistry, the first is this.

They that are not members of the visible Church, have no title to the holy
things of God, and therefore are incapable of them: and so of baptism.

Infantes of the faithful are not actually members of the visible Church: for
these places Marc. 10. 13. 14. Mat. 19. 13. 14. do not prove that the parents
of these infantes were believing Jews, or if they were believers their
infantes were already baptized with their parents according to your doctrine,
and so Christ cannot intend baptism to appertain to them, but the rest of the
ordinances. Ergo etc.

I deny the minor, the reason proves it not, and do affirm, that the infants of
the faithful are members of the same Church with their parents, and have right
to the holy things thereof; as may thus be showed: first Abraha^s house was a
visible Church of God, the infantes of Abraham and of his servantes are Genesis
17. ^2.
said to "be born in his house: whereupon I conclude that they were part of
Abraham's family: for in that very place the holy Ghost distinguishes between
such as were borne in the house and bought with money, as between them that were
by their birth of the family; and of those that being bought, were received
into his house.

Secondly; the children of belevers be either members of the Church Ephe. 2. 12.
and within the covenant, or else without, if without, then are they aliants
from the common wealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants of promise,
without Christ, without hope, and without God in this world: for this the
Apostle sets down to be the state of them that are without: but thus Christ
did not esteem of infantes, (who said " suffer little children to come to me,
for of such is the kingdom Marc. 10 13. 14.
of God, nor Pau, 1 Cor. 7. ^4.
that said, but now are they holy, speaking of the children of belevers.
Concerning the parents of these children that were brought to Christ, which you
say, cannot be proved belevers by these places Marc. 10. 13. 14. Mat. 19. 13.
14. I have showed before what I thought of them. But if they ^re baptized, say
you, Christ cannot intend baptism unto them.

Who labors to prove that Christ in blessing them did intend Baptism unto
them. This I said that such as are of the Kingdom of God, and capable of the
blessing of Christ are not to be denied baptism. And that infantes are such, I
have proved from these scriptures. Marc. 10. 13. 14. Mat. 19. 13. 14. And
therefore baptism not to be denied them.

2. If the Apostles by putting back infantes presented to Christ declare
plainly that infants were not to be brought to be baptized by Christ the
infantes were not to be baptized by Christ nor commanded to be baptized by him.
But the first is true, Ergo etc.

The assumption is denied, for if the children were not brought to be baptized,
how can the Apostles putting them back signify that infants are not to be
baptized? the bringers of them did express their mind wherefore they brought
them. Again if the Apostles by putting the infants back did err, and by
Christ are thereof rebuked, what can you conclude from their example, but this,
not to judge them unworthy of Christ and of his ordinances, whom he approves
and receives. The Scripture speaks not one word, that they did put them back,
as judging them unfit for baptism.

3. If the persons presenting Infants to be blessed and prayed for, do not
desire baptism for them, then they knew no such custom used by Christ to
baptize them. But the first is true, Ergo etc.

Whether they knew any such custom or not, it is not to the purpose, Christ
did as occasion was offerred, he satisfied them according to their desire.

4. If Christ receiving infants, praying for them, bl^ssing them, does neither
baptize them, nor command his disciples to baptize them, then either Christ's
pleasure was they should not be baptized, or else he forgot his duty, in not
teaching baptism of Infants upon so just an occasion. But Christ did neither
baptize them, nor command his disciples to baptize them, neither did he forget
his duty, etc. Ergo.

I answer, the consequent follows not. Christ his pleasure was not against
that Ge^. 17. 1^
general commandment given first to Abraham for the setting of the seal unto
his covenant, to all the faithful and their seed. Also, Christ performed as
much as they entreated for at his hands, and though he taught not all things at
one time, yet was it no forgetting of his duty, ^eing in due time he taught
all things.

5. They that are not actually possessed of the promises or covenant, are not
actually to be invested with baptism. Infants are not actually possessed in
the co^^nant seeing they perform not the condition, viz. confession of their
sins and their faith actually, Ergo, etc.

If you mean (by actually possessed) such a state, right or possession, as the
Lord of his free grace has infeoffed his people withal, by virtue of the ^en.
17. 9. ^1. Act. 39. 1 Cor. 14.
grant of his covenant to Abraham, I deny the minor, and say, that infants of
believers are children of the covenant and of the kingdom, and actually
possessed thereof. As concerning the reason annexed to the minor it is answered
before, that the Lord requires the actual use of faith and repentance of them
that are of years, and not of infants. And thus much for confirmation of my
third reason.


Argument IIII.
1 Cor. 7. 14. If the children of believing parents be holy, then are they
within the covenant of Abraham, and so consequently have right to the seal
thereof.

But the first is true, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Ergo, the second.

Touching the former proposition. I take it, that none will affirm holiness in
any that are not of the covenant, for in that respect Israel was called an holy
nation. Exodus 19. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. and all others unclean, Act. 11. 3. and 10.
15. that were without. If infants be within the covenant, then cannot the seal
be denied to such, seeing the Lord has joined the promise and seal together,
Genesis 17. 10. which no man may or ought to separate, Mat. 19. 6.

What can be objected against the assumption, I see not, seeing the Apostle
plainly affirms; but now are your children holy. Unless it may be said, as of
some I have heard, that as the unbelieving wife is sanctified to the husband,
so are the children viz: to the use of their Father: but this to affirm is a
great abusing of the scripture. For the Apostle in that place answering an
objection that the faithful is defiled by the society of the unfaithful:
proves that the faithful husband may with good conscience use the vessel of
his unfaithful wife, by an Argument from the effects, namely, because their
children, which are borne of them, are accounted holy, or within the promise,
God having said to all the faithful, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed. As for that other strange exposition, that the Children of a believing
father are no otherwise sanctified the^ the unbeleeving wife is unto her
husband, viz: to their fathers use only, that can not stand with the meaning
and purpose of the Apostle. For so much may be said of an unbeleeving servant,
that he is for the use of his master to do him service: if children be no more
holy then so, then have they no prerogative in being the children of a
believing Father, neither is the objectio^ removed by this answer.

If it be further pressed that the unbeleeving wife is said to be holy, as well
as the children, yet is she not within the covenant. I answer that she indeed
is not holy, as be her children, for she being an infidel is without Gods
covenant, and therefore she is said to be sanctified to her husband, the
Apostle respecting their marriage, which though it was contracted before either
party believed, yet stands firm and not desolved when either of them is called
to the faith, so that the believing husband may lawfully use her as his wife,
if she be content to dwell with him, 1 Cor. 7. 12. Now the children cannot be
sanctified or separated to such use to their father, as the wife is to her
husband. And therefore are the children called holy, because they are the seed
of a believing father.

Mr. Smyth. I answer, first denying your majors consequent: Seeing that all the
nation of the Jews were holy, and yet not within the covenant of Abraham. I
mean as you do of the everlasting covenant in respect of Christ: that they
were not all within that covenant is plain, Romans 9. 6. all they are not Israel
which are of Israel: verse, 7. neither are they all children because they are
the seed of Abraham, ver. 12. God revealed, that the elder should serve the
younger, Act. 7. 51. ye have always resisted the holy Ghost, as your
forefathers have done so do you: etc.


Rich: Clifton. This is a strange opinion of yours, that a people of God can be
holy, and be without the covenant in Christ. Is there a people called out and
separated from the world to offer sacrifices and to worship God, which may be
called and are a holy people considered out of Christ? The covenant made with
Abraham, and his seed in Christ to come (which Abraham received) caused that
the Israelites were called * a holy nation or a holy people, Exodus 19. Romans 11.
^. H^b. 4. 2. Romans 11. ^6.
collectiuely, being separate from the nations to be the house and kingdom of
God. And although many of the Jews by unbelief cut of themselves from the
priveledges of Abraham: yet considering the rest of that people as his seed,
and the general face of that Church in the true constitution thereof, they were
holy as the Apostle says, " if the root be holy so ar the branches, and if the
first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump. As it is one thing to consider of
a Church in respect of the whole, as it is one body of Christ; and another
thing, to consider thereof, according to every particular member: so is it one
thing to call a people, holy, respecting their covenant in Christ into which
they have solemnly entered. Deu. 29. 10. - 15. and promised to be Gods people:
and another, to consider thereof according to the personal holiness of every
particular member: the Church has the denominatio^ of holiness, of the former,
and not of the latter, (though this also be required) for the personal holiness
of any particular members, causes not the whole multitude to be called a holy
people, (else might many assemblies be called holy, for that there may be and
are some particular persons in the same endued with personal holiness) but
their joint entering into Gods covenant and fellowship in the same: and
therefore let diverse holy persons come together to serve the Lord entermingled
with an Antichristian assembly, that congregation, shall not be called holy,
because there Philip. 1. 2 Cor. 6. ^6. 17.
is not a separation of the clean from the unclean, and a joining together of
the godly in one body or "fellowship of the Gospel, neither can you ever prove
that any people or congregation is called holy, with whom the Lord has not
made his covenant of salvation. But let us see how you reason.

All the nation of the Jews (say you) were holy, yet not within the covenant
of Abraham etc.

You reason not ad idem, for in saying that all the nation of the Jews were
called holy, here you speak of them, as they were a people separated from other
nations, and had Deuteronomy. 10,-15.
entered covenant with God to be his people, as he with them to be their God, in
which respect they were called, holy, but in saying, that all were not with in
the covenant, you intend it of some particular members of the body of that
people, being considered a part from the whole, and so the Scriptures by you
alleged do import.

For neither Paul to the Romans. cha. 9. 6. nor Steven in the Act. cha. 7. 51.
do speak of the whole nation, but of particular persons who by their
vnbeleiffe and evil works, did manifest themselves to be no true Israelites.

Concerning that place of romans 9. 6. the Apostle speaking of the rejection Romans
9. ^
of the Jews (which might there upon charge God that if he did reject them he
kept not promise with their fathers,) labors to remove all such Calumnies,
saying, it cannot be that the word of God should take none effect and proves
withal, that the promise is not cut of, though the Jews for their unbelief be
rejected, seeing the promise is sure to the elect. The Apostle thus speaking,
not of the body of the people, but of some particulars that sell away, is falsely
alleged, to prove, that all the nation of the Jews were not within the
covenant of salvation. And that some of them that were of Israel, were not true
Israelites, who will deny, but that many of them discovered themselves to be no
true sons of Abraham? yet this proves not that the whole Church in respect of
the visible face of it, was not within the covenant.

But you will reply, that you said, that they were not all within the covenant,
and I answer again, if you reason not concerning the face of that people of
Israel, but of Gods secret election, and reprobation, it is not to the purpose,
for so disputing, you answer not the Argument. And so may you reason against
the visible Church under the Gospel, that not all therein, are within the
covenant, because Luke 1^ 25. 26. 27 1. Ioh. 2. 19
many prove hypocrites. And so by your reasoning neither the Church of the new
Testament nor of the old, in respect of the general face thereof, are under
the covenant of grace which is the thing controverted, and not the state of
particular persons. As towchting that place of Act. 7. 51. Steven spoke to the
Ie^es there present to accuse him, but in so speaking did not accuse the whole
body of the church under the old Testament, but those his persecuters, and
there forefathers who also persecuted the Prophets before them, brake Gods
covenant and * so manifested themselves to be of their father the Divil. ^oh.
8. 44.


Now to reason thus, from the example of those wicked Jews, and to say, many
of the Jews brake the covenant and became rebellious (for all did not)
therefore the body of the people was never within the covenant, is to conclude
upon a false ground.

If it be objected that the place of the Romans is spoken in respect of Gods
secret election and not of man's knowledge, I answer the twelft verse is pl^yne
of that which was reveled unto the church, and yet Esau was holy and
circumcised, being not under the covenant of Abraham in respect of Christ.

The place I have expounded before, and have showed that the Apostle handles
there no such thing as you do gather.

As for the reveyling of this division of the son^s of Isaac which you say was
to the church; indeed thus much was reveiled to Rebecca, Genesis 25. 23. it was
told her that two nations are in thy womb and two manner of people should be
divided out of thy bowels, and the one people should be mightier then the
other, and the Elder shall serve the younger, meaning that they that should
descend of the Elder brother, should serve them that came of the younger* see
the blessing of Isaac to his two sonns. Genesis 27. 27. 28. 29, 39. 40: Abdi. 10.
but that the personal reprobatio^ of Esau was revealed then to Rebecca or to
the church, does not appear in these words before rehearsed: can any say that
none of Esau his posterty was in Gods secret election? and if this scripture
will not warrant any so to judge, then neither would it warrant Rebecca so to
apply it to her son being so generally spoken.

The personal rejection either of Ismael or Esau was not reveled, until by
their evil works they manyfested themselves, and therefore these children
being borne in the church, as Esau was in Jacobs house, were to be reputed
holy, to be circumcised and held of the covenant, until there wickedness threw
them out.

That the whole church of the Jews was not under the possession of the
everlasting covenant in respect of Christ, but only under the offer of it, I
use these reasons, first, the condition or obedience of the matter or members
of the new Testament is not the condition or obedience of the matter or members
of the old Testament. Faith and (...)tance is the condition and obedience of
the matter and members of the new Testa(...): Mar. 1. 15. Ergo, faith and
repentance is not the condition or obedience of (...) matter or members of the
old Testament.

Your proposition is not true, you exclude faith and repentance from ^he
members of the old Testament, as if by their covenant they were not ^ound to
beleev and obey his commandments, which is contrary to these ^criptures. Genesis
17, 1. 6. Romans 4. 3. 13. Heb. 11. 17. Iam. 2. 21. - 23. Deu. 19. 9-20. and 10.
12. 13. 20. That repentance was required of the Jews, not only the prophets
often exhorting of them to repentance, do witness, as before is observed: but
also in that their repetance Iud. 2. ^ 1 Sa^. 7. 3^ Ezr. ca. 1^ Neh. cap. ^
Deuteronomy. 9. 10. Esa. 1^ 16. 17.
turned away Gods anger from them: and the conditional Esa. 1. 1^ Jer. 3. 22.
Hos. 6. 1. ^ 3. and 14 ^ Joel. 2. 13
promises of pardon if they did repent: Also Gods threatening of judgments
against them if they repented not.

And that faith was also required of them, see al these scriptures. Psalm. ^8.
5. 6. 7. 22. 2 Chro. 20. 20. Esa. 53. 1. and 7. 9. Hab. 2. 4. Act. 26. 6. 7.
Heb. 11. 13. 1 Cor. 10. 3. 4.

And thus you see that that condition and obedience of the members of the new
Testament, which you say, is faith and repentance, was also the condition and
obedience of the members of the old Test.

The reason of the mayor is evident etc. seeing that as the ministry, worship
and government of the Church of the old Testament was of another nature, then
the ministry worship and government of the new Testament is: so the condition,
viz. the matter and form of the Church of the old Testament was of an other
nature, then the constitution, that is, the matter and form of the new
Testament, etc. Heb. 7. 16. Gal, 5. 3.

I answer first, that it is not simply true, that the ministry and worship of
the church of the old Test. is of another nature from that of the Gospel. For
although in their worship and ministry were many things typical and
ceremonial: yet vvithal God required of them spiritual worship and obedience,
without which their Esa. 1. 12. - 15. G^ 4. 5
ceremonial was abominable. Also, if preaching of the word and prayer etc. be
of a spiritual nature, then was their ministry and worship more then carnal.
The prophet Esa. 56. 1^
complaynes of neglect of teaching in the Priests, which argues that they were
bound by their calling to instruct the people. Malachy says Mal. 2. ^ 6. 7.
The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge etc. they shall seek the law at his
mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: and this was by office,
for the Lord says, My covenant was with Levi of life and peace, etc. the law
of truth was in his mouth. And in Jeremy the Lord complaynes of the Priests,
saying, they that should minister the law ^ow me not: promising unto the people
if they repent: that he would give them "Pastors according to his own heart,
which should feed them with ^^r. 3. 15. ^eh. 8. ^ Act. 13. ^ ^ Act. 15. ^
knowledge and understanding. And in Nehemiah it is written, that the Priests
and Levites read in the book of the law and gave the sense, and caused the
people to understand the reading, and this by their office. Lev. 10. 11. The
Jews had the * lectures of the law and Prophets in their Synagogues. And
"Moses had them of old time in every city that did preach him.

Thus we see that the opening of the law and preaching of the scriptures Lev.
9. 22 ^. Number. ^ 23. - 27. ^. 9. 4 13 ^ and 10. 1. ^^h. 8. 6. ^l. 1. 14. ^ 2.
16. 17.
was a part of the ministry of the Priests and Levites, and of their public
worship on the sabbath. Also the Priests gave thanks unto God for the people,
blessed them and prayed. The Temple was called the house af prayer, Math. 21.
13. also they had certain hours of meeting at the Temple, which were called
hours of prayer. Act. 3. 1. And they were commanded spiritual sacrifices, as
Ps. 4. 5. and. 50. 14. 15. 23. as formerly is observed.

Concerning the government of the Church of the old Testament: which was by the
Priests and Levites, Elders, I know no great difference in nature of that
church, and of this under the Gospel.

The former was governed ecclesiastically by the Priests and Elders: Mat. 26.
47. Luke 22. 66, Act. 23. 14. and 6. 12. and 13. 15. and 18. 8. 2 Chro. 19. 8.
And so the churches of the New Testament are to be governed by the Mat. 18. ^5.
16. 17. ^ Cor. 5. 3. - 5 ^ Exo. 19, 6. ^ Exodus 22. ^1. Lev. 14 ^. and 11. 44 ^^d
20. 7. ^ Pet. 1. 16. Romans 11. 16 ^ Deu. 4. 20 and 5. 2. Psa. ^0. 3. 4. Deu. 14.
2. Romans 11. ^-19, 23. ^ 27.
ministers and Elders. Act. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. Hebr. 13, 8.
The censures ecclesiastical under the old Testament, were admonition and
casting out of the Synagogue: Lev. 19. 17. Ezr. 10. 8. Ioh. 9. 22. and 22. 42.
and 16. 2. Lev. 22. 3. Number. 9. 13. and 19. 13. Exodus 22. 19. so are these the
censures of the churches under the Gospel. Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 3. 4.
5.

Secondly, for the constitution of the Church of the old Testament, which you
say, was of another nature then that of the new.

I answer, that former church was of an heavenly constitution, a kingdom of
Priests and a "holy nation, the people * saints, as well as the members of the
church of the new Testament. And this people being separate from al other
nations, and called out to be the Lords "peculiar people were united into one
body by covenant between the Lord and them: and so became the people, church
and kingdom of God, as in renewing of their covenant is manifest. Deuteronomy. 29.
9-15. Exodus 14. 8. They were natural branches of that root and olive tree
wherinto we of the Gentiles are graffed grounded by faith on Christ then to
come, in whom they believed, 1 Cor. 10. 3. 4. their covenant leading them to
Christ for salvation. Gal. 3. ^6. Luke 1, 68-75. This old church by their
constitution admitted of no profane person to be a member thereof, but such as
professed holiness. They were for every transgression appointed to offer
sacrifices and to con(...) their syn, Lev. 1. 2. 4. chapter and 5. 5. Nu^. 14. 40.
and to make satisfaction to that man whom they had wronged. Number. 5. 7.

Now let the constitution of the church under the new testament be co^^idered
and compared in the matter and form thereof, with that of the ^d, and there
will be no such difference in substance between them, as you pretend, the matter
of them both being holy and living stones: and the form, an holy uniting
together in the covenant of God, to walk in all his commandments, else could not
the Gentiles be made one body, and co^heriters with the Jews, Ephesians. 2. 14. and
3. 6. and partakers of his promises in Christ, if the constitution of the Jews
church had been carnal and not spiritual.

Therefore faith and repentance was not required to the matter of the old
Testament, (...) only a carnal holiness, viz. the circumcision of the foreskin.
etc.

I have already proved, that of the Israelites God did require spiritual
holiness, Lev. 11. 44. saying, I am the Lord your God be sanctified therefore
and ^e holy, for I am holy. Here it is to be minded that they must be holy
after Gods example, who neither is carnally holy, or yet delites in carnal
holiness without the spiritual. Psalm. 50. 7-23. Esa, 1. 11-20. and chap. 50.

And here M. Smyth I observe how you contradict not only the truth, but your
self: for here you affirm that the form of the Church of the old Testament
was carnal their covenant carnal, and holiness carnal: yet in your Differenc^
page 10.
book of Differences, you say, that the Septuagint Translation was a gree(...)
synn, for the covenant of Grace ought not to have been preached unto the
Gentiles. So by your own confession, Israel had the covenant of grace, else
could they not have profaned it by preaching of it to the Gentiles, what witch
has turned this into a carnal covenant? can not your hearers mind how unstable
a leader they follow.

Well, let us consider those Scriptures which you produce for the proving of
your carnal covenant, the first is Hebr. 7. 16. To which I answer, that the
Apostle, by the law of carnal commandment, intends not thereby to teach that
the co^stitution of the old church was carnal, but shows the diversity of
Christ's priesthood from Aarons, understanding by carnal commandment, those
frayl and transitory things, which the law commanded ^. 24. 1. ^sa. 61. 1. ^.
45. 7.
in the consecration of the Levitical Priests: so called in respect of Christ
his anointing, which was "spiritual.

Touching Gal. 5. 3. the Apostle reasoning against them that would join the
works of the law with faith for justification, exhorts the Galathians chap.
5. 1. etc. to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has mad^ ^. 5. 3.
us free etc. testifying to every man, that if he be circumcised, he is bound
to keep the whole law. Noting circumcision especially, because the false
teachers did urge it by name for justification. And he reasons against it,
not as it was in it self by the ordinance of God: but according to that opinion
that his enemies had of it, which made circumcision a part of their salvation.
And he that so esteems of it as a work to justify, must also (says Paul)
keep all the rest of the commandments. For the law requires of such as seek to
be justified by works and legal ordinances, the whole observation thereof, Deuteronomy.
27. ^6. Gal. 3. ^. Ro^. 3. 20. ^al. 2. 16. Gal. 4. 9.
else does it promise no * life. And because no man can be "justified by the
works of the law, therefore does the Apostle reject circumcision being urged to
that end, And when the ceremonies be thus used the Apostle speaks basely of
them, and calls them beggarly rudiments. And now if a papist or any other
should contend, that a man is justified by Baptism, as by a work wrought, we
might so speak to them, as the Apostle does here to the Galathians, that if you
receive baptism to be made righteous thereby, ex opere operato, you are bound
to keep the whole law: for baptism being made a work to justify, is perverted.

And that Paul means by Circumcision, in this place as a work urged to
justification, the very next verse, viz. ver, 4. shows, wherein he says, ye
are abolished from Christ whosoever are justified by the law.

And thus much for answer to your first Arg. the second follows.

2. The type, shadow, figure, similitude of a thing, is not the truth, the
substance the thing it self: true is nature and reason. The constitution, viz.
the matter and form of the Church of the old Testament is the type etc. the
constitution or the matter and form of the church of the new Test. is the
truth etc. Heb. 10. 1. and 9. 19. 23.

I answer, first, to your Major, that one and the same thing may both be the
type and the truth; for Isaac was a type of the faithful, as your self does
affirm; yet was he also faithful, and so was both the type and the truth.
Secondly to your Minor, the constitution, viz. the matter and form of the old
church is not the type etc. of the church of the new Testament, in that sense
as you take matter and form: for the matter of that former Chapter ^as not to be
ceremonially, but truly holy, as before I have proved, and these Deu. 2^ 9. and
14. ^ Esa. 5. 4. ^ 15. and 24. 3. 4. 5. Es^ 58. 2, - 7. ^ 14. Deu. ^ 12, 16.
scriptures quoted in the margent do further confirm. Their Deu. 2^ 10, - 13.
"Gal. 3. ^
co^enant was to be the Lords people, and is the same that we are entered into,
else could not the " blessing of Abraham come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ that we might receive the promise through faith, if that the covenant
which we receive were not the same that was made to Abraham and his seed. Also
Peter affirms it to be the same, Act. 2. 39.

If then the Lord required of Israel true holiness, and made no other co^enant
with them whereby he would accept them to be his people, but that everlasting
covenant, and that this is the matter and form of the church of the new
Testament, (true holiness of the members, and communion in the covenant and
Gospel) then was not the constitution of the former Chapter a shadow of this, but
even the same with the church under the new Test. I speak of the substance of
this covenant, and not of the outward administration thereof, which was diverse,
and wherein there might be some type or shadow in the former of this latter.

Concerning the scriptures which you quote for the proof of your Assumption,
Heb. 10, ^
In the former, Heb. 10. 1. the Apostle shows that the sacrifices under the
law were imperfect, because they were yearly renewed; and proves also that
Christ's sacrifice is one and perpetual: and here it must be minded, that he
speaks of the administration of the old Testament differing from the new, and
not to teach that the church of the Jews had in regard of their co^stitution
no spiritual promise, but only carnal and typical things. Heb. 9, ^^ 23.
In that other scripture, Heb. 9. 19. 23. Paul sets down the proportion between
the type and the thing typed, between the legal sacrifices and purifyings, and
the purging of sin by the blood of Jesus Christ, between the old Testament
and the new etc, and so showing how the truth answers unto the type,
concludes that Christ has taken away the sins of many, by the sacrifice of
himself. And this is that which the Apostle intends, and not to show that
the constitution of the old church was the tipe of the constitution of the
new.

3. That which was not nor could not be accomplished performed effected* ^
produced by the walking or communion of the church of the old Testament, was
not required or exacted or presupposed to the constitution of the church of the
old Test^^. Justification and faith, and sanctification and repentance, were
not effected, performed accomplished or produced by the walking or communion of
the church of the old Testament. Heb, 9. 9. Gal. 2. 15. 16. Ergo etc. Deuteronomy. 29.
^. Ier. 13. ^. ^ Luke 1. ^ 74. 1 pet ^^. 9. 10. ^. 2. 12. ^ 22. Genesis 17. 7 ^om.
4. 11 ^a. 26. and ^. Heb. 4. 2 ^ 11. 30. - ^. Cor. 10. 3 ^ Ezech. 18 ^. 32.
Joel. ^ 3. ^b. 9. 9. ^ ^. 2. 15


The assumption is denied and the contrary is proved before: for the members of
that church might have and had faith, repentance, justification and
sanctification, seeing the Lord was their God in that standing, and he is God
to none but to them that are his in * Christ: and therefore it must follow, that
they were partakers of faith, justification, etc. in that their communion.
Again, as the covenant was geven to Abraham, so was "it to his seed: but to
Abraham it was geven for justification, therefore to his seed: I mean the
Israelites and people of God that were before and under the old Test. Also, I
have proved * before, that God required of the Israelites, "faith and
repentance, and that they did repent and beleev, and so consequently
justification and sanctification were effected and accomplished in the members
of that church in the communion thereof, and required in the constitution:
Touching Heb. 9. 9. you may be satisfied in my answer to your second Argument,
yet this I will further add, that the Apostle having described the parts of
the Tabernacle etc. in ver. 9. shows the use of those things to be a figure
for the present, preaching unto them spiritual things in Christ, in whom they
believed the same to be fulfilled.

And here it must be observed that these ordinances whereof the Apostle
speaks, were such as by Moses were given to that church, long after the
constitution thereof.

In that other scripture, Gal. 2. 15. 16. Paul reasons not about the
constitution of the Chapter of the Jews whether justification was required
therein, but having to deal against the false teachers that taught, the
Galathians could not be justified without the works of the law, affirms the
contrary in these two verses, saying, we Jews by nature know that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Chapter etc. This
being the purpose of the Apostle to establish justification by faith without
works; does not deny the church before the coming of Christ to be justified by
faith: but teaches that both that church, and this under the Gospel were saved
not by works, but by the free promise of God in Christ received by faith. And
thus you see neither of these scriptures proves your desire.

4 That which brought not perfection and life to the members, presupposed not
^^th and repentance to the members, and so not real or true holiness: But the
old Test. ^e law and obedience of the law brought not perfection and life to
the members of the church of the old Test. Heb, 7. 19. Gal. 3. 21. Erg. etc.

First concerning the major, The old Testament though it brought not
perfection, yet did it require faith in Christ to come. 2. Touching your ^inor,
first I require what you mean by the old Testament, whether the books thereof
or the covenant of works whereof Moses was the Mediator, if the former, then is
your minor false, for those books conteyn as well Gospel as law, the promise
made unto the fathers in Christ, to the receyving whereof was required at al
times faith and repentance, as well before Christ's incarnation as since. But i^
you ^ind it Romans ^ Heb. 10.
of the law only and administration of Moses, it is true, that perfection and
life came not by the law, nor by the obedience or ceremonies of the law: but
withal you must know that the Jews were also partakers of the everlasting
covenant in Christ, as pa. 23. ^ "Genesis 3. ^ and 12. 3. ^ 17. 7. 21. Esa. 1. ^
and 7. 14. ^ 9. 6 Ge^. ^ 10. Num^ 24. 17. G^ 3. 8. 14*
before is proved.

3 For the church of the old Testament, it could bring or publish life to the
members thereof, seeing it had the promises "of the Gospel, and so presupposed
faith, repentance and true holiness as you speak.

To the scriptures, first to Heb. 7. 19. I answer, that the law indeed, makes
nothing perfect, nor could give life, but I have told you again and again,
that the law was not that proper and only form of the Jewish church, but the
covenant in Christ received by Abraham.

Concerning Gal. 3. 21. The Apostle teaches that if the law could have given
life, righteousness should have been by the law, and this who denies: but with all you ought to observe that he says, the law is not against the promises: and
these Luke 1. 69. - 74. Romans 9. Ephe. 2. ^ and 3. 6.
promises were geven to the old church: as well as the law was given, and
thereby they might have and had life under the old Testament.

5 That which was a schoolmaster only to teach Christ did not presuppose that
the scholars had already learned Christ or put on Christ, which is only done
by faith ^d repentance: The law or old testament was a schoolmaster only to
teach Christ Gal. 3. 24. Romans 10. 3. 4. Ergo etc.

The major is not simply true, for a scholar may have learned somethings by
his schoolmaster, and yet continue under him still to be further instructed. And
so the law might lead them to Christ (law being taken in that Place for all
the ordinances of Moses) and they by faith put on Christ to come.

But I answer to the minor, That the law was a schoolmaster to teach Christ,
I say it was, that they might be made righteous by faith: but can a
schoolmaster teach Christ without teaching faith in Christ? and if they were
taught faith, did they not learn faith? The Apostle Gal. 3. 24* setts down
the use ^d. 3. 24.
of the law or legal economy, 1. That the Jews thereby might be kept as it
were by a garrison, shut up unto the faith which after should be revealed.
verse. 23. Secondly, that they might be instructed of righteousness and
salvation by Christ, verse. 24. for during the legal economy their hope was
nourished by the Prophets, which prophesied of Christ's coming.

Also by the ceremonies and sacrifices they were instructed; by circumcision
that Christ should be borne of the seed of Abraham, that by his death and
spirit should circumcise their hearts: by the paschal lamb they were taught ^
Col. 2. 11. ^2. ^ Ioh. 1. 29.
that Christ as * an innocent lamb, should be slain to take away their sins:
and by the other sacrifices, and sprinkling of blood, and washings; was
signified the offering up of Christ to come, and the applycation of his death
to the purging of them from al their syns, whereof they were partakers by
faith. Thirdly, this Argument may thus be returned upon you: That which was a
schoolmaster to teach Christ does presuppose that the scholars should learn
Christ, and put him one by faith and repentance: But the law or old Testament
was a schoolmaster to teach Christ. Therefore the law or old Testament did
presuppose that the scholars should learn Christ, and put him on by faith etc.

Touching the other scripture Romans 10. 3: 4. The Apostle there lays out Ro^.
10. 3. 4.
the blind zeal of the Jews, that being ignorant of the righteousness of God
which is by faith, sought to establish their own righteousness which is of
works, and submitted not to the righteousness of God, this he reproves in them:
and then verse. 4. setts down the reason of their ignorance of the righteousness
of faith, because they did despise the end of the law which is Christ, so
called, because the Mat. 5. ^7. Col 2. ^4. Mat. 3 ^5. 1 Pet. 2 ^2. Heb. 7. 26.
27. Gal. ^. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 19: 22. 23. Tit 3. 5. Ioh. 3. 5.
law is fulfilled only in him.

Thus you may see the Apostle speaks not against the co^stitution of that
former church, but against the corruption of some members of the same.

6. That which was hidden, and kept secret was a mystery and not reveyled, the
^embers of the old testament in their constitution were not endued withal.
Faith or ^bedience to the Gospel was a mystery and not reveyled, but kept
secret from the begin(...)g. Gal. 3. 23. Romans 16. 25. Ergo etc

There is a fallacy in your setting down of this word Faith, you conclude Gal.
2. 23*
that which is not in the propositions, or else your Argument is not to the
purpose. For Faith, in the second proposition according to the meaning of the
Apostle. Gal. 3. 23. which you cite for proof thereof, is not put for the gift
of faith, which is given to al true believers whereby they are justified, as in
Gal. 2. 16. 20. and 3, 6. 8, 9, 11, 12, 14. but for the things believed, or
fulfilling of the promises of God: for in the time of the law was says, else
the former church could not have been saved, seeing the prophet says, Hab. 2. ^
the just shall live by faith, and the Gospel was preached to them, (without
Romans 10* 14-17.
which they could not beleev,) yea to Gal. 3. 8.
Abraham. And though the things promised were not fulfilled during the time of
the old Testament: yet had had Jews Heb. 11. 33. 1 Cor. 4.
faith in Christ promised, and thereby were saved.

If you reply, that the church of the old Testamant was not endued with faith
in her constitution. I answer, that there can be no church to God Ephesians. 2.
20-22. 12* 19. Lev. 2^ 12. 2 Cor. 6^ 16.
founded without the everlasting covenant in Christ, by Genesis 1^. 7*
which Abraham and his seed became the people of God, and therefore endued with
faith in their constitution.

Concerning, Romans 16. 25. By mystery, the Apostle means the calling Ro^. 16.
^^
of the Gentiles which now is opened and published among al nations. And if it
be understood of the Gospel or preaching of Christ, as some do, yet was it
called a mystery: partly in respect of the nations to whom it was not reveyled
before the coming of Christ, as ver. 26. Also to the Jews, in respect of 1
Pet 1. 10-12. Luke 10. 24.
the things promised; but the promise of salvation was preached to Adam, to
Abraham, and to the whole church, and was no mystery kept secret from the
beginning of the world, but in all times and ages revealed to the Lords people,
and by them received

7. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: There is condemnation
to them that are under the law, for it is the ministry of death or
condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 7. Ergo, the law or old Testament does not presuppose
Christ, or they that are under the law are not in Christ, and so the members of
the church of the old testament: are not truly holy.

Surely this reasoning of yours makes me doubt, that you reason against your
own knowledge, for how can you be ignorant that the church of the Jews was not
under the law as it is the ministry of death, I mean in respect of their
constitution? There is indeed condemnation to them that are under the law, that
is, which by the works thereof seek justification; ^l. 3. 10. Luke 18. 12. ^or.
3. 7.
and so were some members of the old church under the law, as the Pharisees
that * sought to justify themselves, as now they are that do the like: but to
hold, that the whole church was under condemnation, and without faith in
Christ, is an error to be abhord.

That scripture, 2 Cor. 3. 7. intends no such thing: for the Apostle speaking
of the ministration of death, co^pareth the ministry of the Gospel with the
ministry of the law, showing that the law was glorious which pronounced death
to them that continued not in all things to fulfill it: then much more the
ministration of righteousness shall exceed in glory, which brings salvation to
them that beleev. This is the meaning of the Apost: and not to show that Israel
was under condemnation, seeing they were partakers of the covenant in Christ.
And as they, so we under the Gospel have the law to accuse and condemn us, if
we transgress it, but as we through repentance and faith in Christ are freed
from the curse of the law; so were the Jews also. Now the law is the
ministration of death not to the chur* either before or since Christ, but to
the "faythlesse and disobedient both ^s 1 Timothy 1. ^. 10.
under the old Testament and under the Gospel.

Finally (you say) the whole disputation of Paul to the Romans and Galathians
concerning justification by faith in Christ without works of the law does
evidently confirm this excellent truth, teaching that the utmost obedience of
the law did not effect justification. Therefore the law or old Testament did
not presuppose it.

That excellent truth which you labor to confirm by the disputation of Paul
concerning justification, is a notable error. For where Paul reasons against
such as mainteyned justification by the works of the law, he does not teach
thereby that the old Testament did not presuppose true holiness, for albeit some
of the Jews fell into this error, to hold justification by works of the law,
yet did the church look unto Christ for justification then, as well as now. And
though the utmost obedience of the law could not effect justification, yet
faith in Christ could effect it, which I have proved that the old church had,
in that they had the pomise of salvation in Christ.

For it had been vanity to have given a law which should not or could ^ot
preserve and produce that which was in them in their first constitution:
wherefore I do defend against all men that the church of the old Testament i^
the matter or constitution of it, was not really holy, but only typically etc.

I have showed already that the law was given to the old Church to teach them
holiness, not to make them holy, and so it did produce or effect that wherefore
it was given, and therefore your bold defense against al men, that the
constitution of the church of the old Testament was not really holy but
typically; has in it more boldness then truth: the contrary is proved page 23.
etc.
before. And therefore your inference is false, fiz. that the members thereof
admitted in by circumcision were not truly holy or in possession of that
everlasting covenant. etc. but only under the offer of it in that typical
testament given to Abraham, and afterward assumed written and ^mplified by
Moses. Ioh. 7. 19-23. with Heb. 8. 8. 9.

That the everlasting covenant was given to Abraham and his seed, see page 20.
etc. concerning these scriptures; in the former, Christ charging John. 7. 19-23.
the Jews with breach of the law who were angry against him for making a man
whole on the sabbath day, proves his fact lawful from their own practice,
reasoning thus, if you may circumcise on the Sabbath and not break the law,
then why may not I as lawfully heal a man: this is that Chapter intends. now
because it is said ver. 22. that Moses gave them circumcision, etc. it seems
you would gather withal that the ordinances of Moses or old Test. were given,
first to Abraham, and afterward assumed and written by Moses, but tha^ cannot
be proved by this place: For circumcision was a sign of the promise in Christ,
not of the law, as before is proved.

In that of Hebr. 8. 8. 9. the Apostle shows that Christ is the Heb. 8. 8.
Mediator of a better covenant then were the Levitical Priests, and there fore
his ministry more excellent then theirs: this first he proves, because this
covenant was established upon better promises, and then he shows the
excellency of it compared with the former: And that God made it with his people
he proves by the Testimony of Jeremy. Now concerning the first Testam. it was
made with the church, when the Lord gave his law in Sinai and the people did
covenant with him, saying, All that the Lord has commanded we will do, of
Abraham we do not find that he did promise the keeping of the law under the
curse, as Israel did, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and therefore the law, the covenant of
works or old Testament, was not first made with him, and after examplified by
Moses, but ^xo. 19. 5 and 24. 3. Lev. 34. ^ D^u. 5. ^. Heb. 9. ^. 23.
it was made with Israel: as further also may be showed by the description
thereof, in Heb. 9. 1-10. which can not be referred to Abraham's time.

Again, the Apostle * says, when Moses had spoken every precept to the people
according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats and sprinkled
all the people, saying, this is the blood of the Testament which God has
appointed unto you etc. Also the confirmation of this Testament was by the
ministry of Moses. And Paul says, that the law was 430. years after the
covenant that was confirmed before of God to Abraham, and his seed in respect of
Christ: Now if the law had been geven to Abraham, the Apostles Argument taken
from the distance of time had been of no force. And thus much for answer to
your Argumenrs.

Next follows your answer to my objections, wherein still you afferme, That the
nation of the Jews was not truly holy, but tipically, and that their holiness
was this, that by that external covenant whereinto they were by circumcision
admitted, they were trained or schooled to Christ, etc.

What is here said, is answered elsewhere, and here I deny that the Jews
holiness was only typical, though I deny not that they were by types and
ceremonies lead unto true holiness in Christ, whereof also they were partakers
by the covenant of grace.

Concerning Exodus 19. 6. alleged to prove that Israel was called a holy ^od,
19. 6
people, you answer thus: I say that either the meaning is, that they were
typically holy treaned up to holiness, or that they by atteyning the end of the
law should attain true holiness in Christ: so that this place is nothing to
your purpose of the holiness of the eternal covenant, which God made with
Abraham.

It seems you are not fully resolved of the meaning of this scripture. Ex. 19.
6. ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. This being minded
Exo. 20. 1. etc. Deuteronomy. ^3. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 5
of the people or nation they could not be called a kingdom of Priests in
respect of a typical preisthood which was proper to Aaron and his sonns, but in
respect of their spiritual priesthood in Christ as the Apostle says, * ye are
made a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices, which place does well
expound this of Exodus 19. 6. that the Lord does intend to call them holy in
regard that he had chosen them for himself, and had received them into his
covenant to be his people. For to be priests to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
must needs be in Christ. therefore truly holy.

Again you say, that they by attayning the end of the law should attain true
holiness in Christ, which if you grant, then must this holiness be in respect of
the eternal covenant, out of which neither Christ nor true holiness can be
attained unto.

Thirdly, ceremonial holiness without true holiness the Esa. 1. 11-16. Ps^ 50.
16. 17.
Lord regardes not: it were to approve of hipocrisy, which he hates: and
therefore in that they are called holy it must be understood of true holiness as
also, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2. Exodus 22. 31. Lev. 11. 44. and 19. 2. And thus you
see this place is to my purpose, unless you can show me that a people can
attain Christ and true holiness and be without the covenant of grace.

So that infants though they be under the offer of the covenant made with
Abrah. i^ respect of Christ, yet shall not baptism be administered upon them,
because that in the old Testament none were circumcised but those that were
actually seized upon the external covenant: and therefore none in the new
Testament shall be baptized but those that ^e actually possessed of the covenant
of the new Testament.

First it is proved pa. 12. 13.
before, that circumcision was a seal of the covenant of salvation. Secondly,
you are to explayn what you mean, by actually seized upon the external
covenant: for actual possession of Canaan, the Israelites had not of a long
time after Abraham's death, otherwise then by faith, whereof you say, Infants
are not capable. If children were circumcised, and were ney there seized upon
Canaan by possessing it, nor by actual faith, how were they seized upon the
external covenant? The law was not then given, what were they seized on, and
how?

Thirdly, the Infants of believers under the Gospel are Act. 2. 39. 1 Cor. 7.
14.
possessed of the covenant of grace, by the virtue of the free giving thereof
to the faithful and their seed, therefore to be baptized.

Fourthly, If Infants be but only under the offer of the covenant, then they
dying in their infancy are without the covenant of salvation, and so perish, so
far as we can judge: for to be under the offer only, you will not say that
thereby they can be saved. Again, if they be not in Christ and so within the
covenant, they are under condemnation. Romans 8. 1.

But actual possession (you say) is by obedience to the faith. This is true
beingrightly applied: But you must know that there is a general giving and
applying of the promise on Gods part to his people, and there is a more special
and particular applying of the same, by the ministry of the word and spirit:
The former was to Abraham when God made his covenant with Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2.
39 Romans 4. ^. 12.
him and his seed: The other is to all that receive the word and keep it whereof
Luke 11. 28. Act. 2. 21. Iam. 1. 21. This actual possession (to use your
phrase) belonges to such as by their years are capable to understand, and it
is a continual applying of that which was given in general to the faithful and
their seed. And of such are those places of Romans 10. 17. Gal. 3. 2. 14. to be
understood. And this the Lord requires according to the dispensation Mat. 13.
^4. 11. Heb. 4. 2. Rev. 2. 7. ^ Romans 11. ^8. ^ Romans 10. 14-17. 21.
of the covenant, both under the old and new Testament, that al they that are
his people capable of understanding should hear his word and yield obedience to
the faith. For although God love the children for the "fathers sake; and
respect his promise, yet will he have them as they come to years, to practice
faith and obedience, unto which end the preaching of the word is given unto us.

Secondly, I answer concerning the consequent of your majors consequent, that
it shall not follow, that because children are under the covenant, that
therefore they shall have the outward sign and seal thereof, for under the law
the females were actually under the covenant of the old Testament, yet were not
signed with the seal. And before the law was given, all that were actually under
the covenant until the time of Abraham had no external sign or seal thereof.

It must follow, that if children be under the covenant that they must have the
outward sign or seal, because the Lord has so commanded, joining Genesis 17.
^-11. Mat. 28. 19. * Mat. 19. ^6. "Genesis 34. 24.
the seal to his covenant which man may not * separate. For your reasons to the
contrary, they are of no weight. First concerning the females under the law,
though they were not circumcised, yet were "they accounted of the circumcised.
And for the ceremony it self they were never capable of it young nor old, the
like you will not say of children under the Gos. 2. For the fathers before the
institution of circumcision, they might be under the covenant and without the
seal, because the L. did so dispe^ce with those times: but you must prove that
the state of children under the new Test. is alike to the condition of those
fathers before Abr. or of the women under the law, and the^ will it follow that
they shall not be sealed at al, for these that you instance were not. It is one
thing when God has commanded the sign and adjoined it to his covenant to be
received: and another when he commanded no such thing. They are to receive the
seal, to whom the covenant with the seal is given; as it was to Abraham and now
is unto us. And therefore the sign may not be denied to whom the covenant
belongs. But to infringe this truth you say, The Lord in chosing the male only
to be circumcised, thereby purposed to teach in a type, that only the male,
(that is one that is in Christ) should be sealed with the spirit of promise
under the new Testament.

That circumcision so signifies as you set down, you are to prove, in that it
was set upon the male, it did type out Christ, that promised seed through whom
our corruption is purged, as before is observed. And if circumcision be such a
type, (as you here afferme) how can you exclude children under the new Test?
they are Christ's and in the covenant, Romans 8. Tit. 3. 5. 7.
capable of the spirit or new berth, and therefore to be sealed.

If it be objected that before the law there was no seal appointed, I say,
hereby it appears that to be under the covenant was not the cause of ^ytle to
the seal: but the express commandment of God. etc.

But to be under the covenant after the seal was thereunto annexed is
sufficient cause of title to the seal, except you vvil disjoyn those things
that God has coupled together:

In the next place you answer to the Assumption of my Argument vvher first you
desire of me to expound unto you what is this holiness which the Apostle
mentions, 1 Cor. 7. 14. If I say under the covenant, then you demand what it
is to be under the covenant, and so you proceed from question to question, as
if you could not find out a direct answer without such interrogatories.

To your first demand, I ansvvered before and showed that this holiness in 1
Cor. 7. 14: is in respect of the covenant, that children of the believing
fathers are called holy, by the Apost. Then what it is to be under the
covenant, happily you will say, to be justified by the imputatio^ of the
righteousness of C. righteousness.

Although thus to answer be true, yet is it not all that we are to answer to
this demand. For to be under the covenant is to be considered 2. manner of
vvayes. 1. according to the L. solemn dispensatio^ of his covenant with his
people, and their admittance thereinto, after which manner it was made with
Abraham and his seed. And thus the covenant was established to Gen, 17. 21.
Act. 39. Deu^ 15.
them that were unborne at the time of the promise making, being then in the
loins of Abraham. Secondly men are said to be under the covenant after a more
special and hidden manner. And so all the elect whether known by the confession
of their faith, or lying hidden (...) ^om. 4. 4. ^at. 8. 12. ^zo. 14. 6. Romans
11. ^-2^. Esa. 29. 13 Luke 13. ^-27. ^at. 8. 12.
in the confused assemblies of the world, are within the cov. of salvation, but
after this hidden manner we cannot judge who is within, who is without, some
we may judge to be within, in respect of their outward standing, which in the
Lords sight are without, and some without whom the Lord accepts: but after
that external and solemn making and receiving of the covenant of life, we are
to repute all that makes profession of their faith, with their seed to be under
the covenant, and * branches of the olive tree until they fall away. And of
these that are thus under the covenant, there be many "hypocrites which are not
partakers of salvation in Christ.

Then I demand which of these three, viz. to be holy, to be under the covenant,
to have Christ's righteousness imputed, is first in nature: happily you will say,
first they are under the covenant, secondly, justified, 3. sanctified or holy.

I perceive you would draw us by your supposed answer, from that general
holiness apperteyning to the whole church of God, by reason of the covenant of
salvation made with them, to the sincere holiness of particular persons, which
is not found to be in all that are visible members of the chapter Heb. 4. 1. ^. Romans
11. ^0.
For this we say, that a people that are entered covenant with God, are in
regard thereof, holy; because they are separate from the world unto God, and so
are to be esteemed of us, as they to whom is promised Christ with all his
blessings, whereof they are partakers, if by unbeleef they hinder not
themselves of that holiness of the olive whereinto they were planted, and in
this sense are we to understand that place of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Then I proceed and demand, when do Infants come under the covenant, when they
are conceyved or when they are born, or when the parents are converted being
born already. It will be answered that Infants begotten of faithful parents come
under the covenant in their conception, and such as are borne come under the
covenant when their parents are regenerate. Hereby it appears, that the
covenant is conveyed to the children by generation and by filial relation.

Thus I answer as formerly I have done, that the covenant belonges to the
parents and their seed, through the free grace and gift of God, the Lord
binding himself by promise to be God to the faithful and to their children,
which though they be borne according to the course of nature and are in the
covenant, yet is their so being within it, not by virtue of their carnal berth
simply considered; but by virtue of Gods promise. Indeed this we say, to be
borne of believing parents is a declaration of the childrens being in Gods
covenant, and that they come under the covenant when their " Act. ^ 14. 15. 33^
parents do * first beleev, whether they be borne already, or to be borne: I
mean such parents as were before strangers to the covenant.

Hereunto add, if it be true that some say, that children under the government
of the faithful also are under the covenant, that the covenant is conveyed
also, by pupilship ^ adoption, and so of servants under believing masters etc.

God making his covenant with believers, includes their families, as in Genesis
17. 7. with verse 9, - 13. where the Lord establishing his covenant with
Abraham, included his whole household, borne in his house or bought with money;
for he commanded al to be circumcised. So Zacheus manifesting his faith and
repentance, Christ said, Luke 1^ 8. 9.
this day is salvation come unto this house: see also Act. 16. 30, 31, 33. and
Ier. 31. 1. And thus do we affirm hereof, according to the scriptures. You say,

Why may not at the infants borne under one king, if his subjects be al his
servants ^d vassals be by that relation brought under the covenant, and so be
accounted justified and sanctified.

God has established his covenant to the believers and their seed, not to a
king and his subjects, and therefore this relation will not stand with the
condition of the covenant.

The relation of a King and a subject is as near as the relation of a master
and a servant or an adopted child.

The relation of a king and subjects, be it never so near, makes not t^ the
purpose: seeing we are to mind with whom God makes his covenant, who tyeth not
himself to civil relations, but freely accepts the believer and his family,
and further then this relation, the scripture does not warrant us to apply Gods
covenant.

And then I demand (say you) seeing the relation of a man and wife is nearer a
great deal, then any relation of adoption or servitude, why the wife shall not
be under the covenant for the relation of marriage? happily it will be said, that
the wife being of years cannot be admitted because of her unbeleef, and I say
that infants cannot be admitted because of their want of faith.

It is true that neither the wife nor servants if they refuse, can be admitted
because of their unbeleef, but the case is not alike of men and women grown to
years, as of infants borne in the church, the former either consent or refuse
actually, infants do not refuse, and therefore being the seed of the saythful
are to be admitted to Baptism.

But it will be said, that the covenant with Abraham was with him and his seed
only, I say, it was made (by your confession) with him and his adopted
infants* etc.

We say as the scripture teaches us, that the everlasting covenant was made
with Abraham and his seed, the faithful and their children: Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2.
39. and that the Lord intended thereby, the whole family of the faithful, if
they refused nor, as before is proved.

And seeing some not of his seed may be admitted into the covenant, and those
that are further off, why shall not these that are nearer as his wife?

I have answered before, her unbeleef hinders her, to be one flesh, makes them
not one in the covenant, which is by grace not by marriage.

But you will say, because infants do not refuse the covenant, they may be
admitted to baptism, etc. but wives refusing, may not. I further insist, that
as infants do not resist, so they do not consent, and that all the children,
servants and wives, that do not resist may be admitted, though they cannot make
declaration of their faith. etc. etc.

We do not make the infants not refusing, the cause of their acceptance to the
seal of the covenant; but the Lords dispensation and commandment: in children
there can be neither actual consent or resisting, the one of which Hub. 2. 4.
Gal. 2. 20. Romans 10. 9 Mat. 3, 1. ^am, 2. 18. ^2. 24.
is found to be in them that are of years: who also are to live by their own
faith: also * confession is of such required, so is it not of infants.

Then I say there is no reason why faith and repentance should be required of
one to make him capable of the covenant of justification etc. more then of an
other, except God be an accepter of persons.

To this I have answered before, and again do answer, that there is one and the
same way of entering into Gods covenant for Abraham and for all other believers,
they receiving the covenant after the same manner that he did, believing that
God is their God and the God of their seed. Also faith and repentance, is
required not only of such as are of years, and to enter into the Lords
covenant, but of all that are in the covenant, (they being the condition thereof
on our part* to be performed) continually: and therefore we must know, that it
is Gods good pleasure that makes men capable of the promise, and not any act of
theirs: faith receives grace, but causes it not, and repentance is the fruit
thereof, required of every one, as they are of understanding.

And further, the covenant is only with Abraham and his seed, not with adopted
children etc. and therefore faith and repentance must necessarily be had, and
so ^y cannot be baptized til they show their faith. etc.

I have proved already, that God in saying, I will establish my covenant be^en
me and thee and thy seed, included Abraham's family; or else show unto ^e,
wherefore they were with him partakers of circumcision, if they ^ere not with
him in the covenant. Again, faith and repentance is required of the elder sort,
not of infants, Ergo etc. As for partaking of the covenant actually, how
children are thereof capable, I have proved often enough: and therefore it needs
no further answer.

And whereas it may be justly objected against you: that if infants be denied
to be within the covenant, they cannot be saved, you labor to remove this
exception, saying: we pronounce nothing of infants dying before they be
^verted, but leave the secret of them to the Lord

Thus you leave a starting hole hereafter to determine as it will prove with or
against your opinions: is the condition of infants such a secret that God has
not manifested his will concerning them? Was not Abraham to take notice of the
state of his infants, when he was to circumcise them? Genesis 17. 12.

And does not Mar. 10. 14.
Christ his receiving of little children and blessing them, manifest unto us,
how we ought to account of the infants of believers? The prophet Malachy says,
Mal. 2. 1.
did not he make one, seeking a seed of God? Act. 2. 39. the promise is to
children, as Peter there witnesses, and Ier. 31, 1. God promises to be the
God of all the families of Israel, and children are a part of the family, 1
Cor. 7. 14. the children of the believers are called holy. Now if God had given
you eyes, these scriptures Genesis 17 etc. Deu^ 29. 10. - 15.
might teach you that the state of the children of the faithful is no such
secret as you pretend. Moses showed the state of children under the old T. and
you say, Caracter, page 6. 3.
the new Testament is as sufficient for direction of al affairs etc. as the
old. How is it then that the state of children is now more secret then,
formerly it was? Thus you might see your speeches contradictory, if your right
eye were not blinded.

Secondly, I desire you to prove unto me by scripture, that in this place, 1
Cor. 7. 14. holiness signifies true sanctification. etc.

And I desire you to prove unto me, that this or that member of a visible
church is truly sanctified? you keep not to the state of the question, that
place is to be understood of the general holiness pertaining to the ^ and every
member thereof in respect of the covenant, and your demand is of (...) Exodus
19. 6. is before expounded, and is to be understood of the general face of that
church, which was called holy, because the Lord had received them by covenant
to be his peculier people. in Exodus 32. 9. and 33. 3. the Lord calls them a
stifnecked people, in regard of personal sins, which he found to be in some
of them, not in all, the which did argue a breach of covenant on their part,
whereof they repenting, the Lord forgave them. The personal sins of some
members do not disposses the face of the church of holiness, ^he laboring to
reform such faulty members. Concerning the holiness of children, and of the
unbeleeving wife, before is showed.

Finally, you say, God has said to all the faithful, I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed. I deny it utterly, God said that only to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7.
and wheth^r you expound it literally or spiritually, I avouch confidently
against you and al men, that the meaning of it is not, that God made his
covenant with the faithful man or faithful woman, and their infoo^^s begotten
of their bodies: but that literally the meaning is, I will be God unto thee
Abraham, and thy seed according to the flesh, to give them the land of Canaan,
Genesis 17. 8. and spiritually the meaning is, I will give unto Abraham the father
of the faithful and all that are his spiritual seed, everlasting life.

You deny a manifest truth, as it is your manner to establish your heresies. I
have proved already that the spiritual covenant is given to the faithful and
their seed, as it was to Abraham and his seed, and further confirm it thus. 1.
That promise that was made to Abraham is the same that belongs Gal. 3. 14.
to all the faithful, and therefore as God did apply it to Abraham, saying* I
will be thy God and the God of thy seed: so is it to be applied to every
believer: as Genesis 17. 19. God speaking of Isaac said of him, as before of
Abraham that he would establish his covenant with him and with his seed. And
Act. 2. 39. the same promise was applied to the Jews that were present Ex. 39.
45 ^ev. 26. 12 Deuteronomy. 29. ^.* 15. Jer. ^1. 1. 33. Ps. 44. 15. Hos ^. 10. and 2.
^3. Heb. 8. ^ - 10. 2 Cor. ^ 16. Rev. ^1. 3. Genesis ^2. 3.
at Peter's preaching, and to their children, and this application are the words
following to have. ( And to as many as the Lord God shall call,) viz. to so
many, and their seed. Secondly, if the covenant was not made to the faithful
and their seed, then are not the faithful partakers of the same covenant with
Abraham, for it was to Abraham and his seed, and so by your* doctrine we have
not the same covenant and gospel that was preached to Abraham, and consequently
no promise of salvation. Thirdly, that this promise, I will be thy God and the
God of thy seed, is made to all the faithful and their seed. see these
scriptures quoted in the margin. Lastly the applying of this promise to
Abraham and his seed, does teach us so to apply it to every faithful man and
his seed: the Apostle thus applies the like promise in Heb. 13. 5. for comfort
to all the faithful, that God in particular had made to Ioshuah* in Josh* 1. 5.
which was this, I will not leave* thee nor forsake thee. And David did so apply
it to himself. Psalm. 118. 6. whose examples teaches how to apply Gods promises.

Concerning your exposition of this promise, I will be thy God etc. applying it
only to Abraham, you pervert thereby the Lords meaning: he made his
everlasting covenant with Abraham and his seed, Gen* 17. ^7. promised also unto
him and his seed the land of Canaan, Genes. 17. 8. adjoining this promise of
Canaan, to that everlasting covenant, with this copulative ( and). the
everlasting covenant being common to Abraham, with all the faithful and their
seed: but this promise of Canaan proper to such of his seed, as according to
the course of nature should proceed out of his loins, and therefore it cannot
be, that this covenant and the promise of Canaan should be one and the same, as
you expound it. Besides God made this promise to Abraham concerning Canaan and
confirmed the same unto him. Genesis 15. 7. - 18. therteen years at the least
before circumcision was commanded. Genesis 15. 14. and 16. 2. 3. 4. 16. compared
with Genesis 17. 1. 10. 23-26. and that solemn establishing of that everlasting
covenant with Abraham: Genesis 17. 7. at which time indeed this promise of Canaan
was again renewed. Also it is further to be noted, that Canaan was to Abraham
and his seed a type, and as it were a sacrament of the promise of the heavenly
country, which they sought after: Heb. 4. 8. - 11. and 11. 9. 10. 13. - 16. 39.
for else had their possessing of it made them in no better estate then the
Canaanites before them, nay not in so good an estate as diverse other peoples,
which enjoyed their countries more quietly, then they did Canaan.

And show me (say you) that God said to every faithful man and woman etc. that
he will be God unto them and their seed. I have showed it before, that so* the
promise is to be applied, and so did Lidia and the gaylor apply it, as by the
sealing of their families with baptism together with themselves appears. And
concerning women the Apostle says, in Chapter Gal. 3. 2^
ye are al one, there is neither* Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor
free, there is neither male nor female, whereby* it appears that God in giving
his cov has no respect of sex, be they male or female, al is one in C. and
therefore P. administered the seal to Lidia, being a woman and to her family, as
well as to Stephanus and the gaylor. You say, It is false doctrine to say that
the covenant does pass unto the infants of the faithful because of their
fathers faith etc. How the covenant passes to the infants of the faithful by
the free gift of God is showed before: page 77. one man's faith cannot conveigh
the covenant of justification to another, nor one (...) sin cut off another
from the covenant, but the soul that sins shall die.

Although that one man's faith cannot by any natural operation or quality (as a
medicine does health to the body) conveigh the covenant to an other, nor
actually apply justification to the sowl of an other in that sense* as the
Apostle speaks thereof Gal. 2. 20. yet according to the Lords dispensation of
his covenant, the promise is received by the faith of the Parents to themselves
and their seed, as it was by Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. 23. Heb. 11. 17. Romans 4. 11.
And this would be no mystery unto you, if you did distinguish between the
outward manner of Gods dispensation of his covenant (under which all the
faithful and their seed are comprehended and accounted Gods people) and the
inward and hidden application of the things promised, whereof none young nor old
are partakers, save the Mat. 3, 11* ^^. 3. 5. 7. 8 ^^. 11. 7.
elect, no not the aged, though they be held for saints in the sight of men.

As for one man's sin to cut off another, we hold it not in that sense as you
mean, yet in some sense it is not altogether untrue; for did not such of Corahs
children as departed not from their fathers sin perish with him, Numb. 16.
27. - 32.? and God says I will visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children of them that hate him, in justice withdrawing his grace from the seed
of the wicked: but that the personal sin of one shall cut off an other, as
the prophet means Ezec. 18. 20. we defend it not.

Neither will it avayle to plead that the covenant made with Abraham, was an
everlasting covenant, for berith gnolam in the original, does not import a
covenant of everlasting continuance, but a covenant that continues his proper
time. etc.

I answer it does import a covenant of everlasting continuance and so does
gnolam an everlasting time, as in these places: Psalm. 136. 1. Eccl. 12. 5.
Psalm. 145. 13. Esa. 45. 17. and so in diverse other places. Also the Lord in
Genesis 17. 7. speaks of that thing which is everlasting vid to be God to
Abraham and his seed after him, and therefore gnolam must needs be understood
for ever, unles you will say that God was God to Abraham and his seed but for a
tym^, for that is the covenant which there he calls everlasting. And Christ
proves the resurrection from these words, I am the God of thy father, the God
of Abraham* etc. Exodus 3. 6. Ergo the covenant made with Abraham is an
everlasting covenant. And though gnolam do sometimes signify a time that has
an end, as it does in the type, ^t it notes time everlasting in the truth of
those types, and therefore ^s Canaan called an everlasting possession. Genesis 17.
8.

But be it granted (say you) that the covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. ^
the everlasting covenant made with Abraham in respect of Christ, what then? ^
it follow because it was with Abraham and the faithful, whether Jews or Gen^
believing actually, as Abraham the father did, therefore it is made with the
faith^ ^an, etc. and with his children begotten of his body, etc. I deny it
utterly.

Yes, it Act. 2. 3^
will and must follow, else are not the faithful partakers of Abra^ms covenant,
for if Ahraham have it to him and his seed, and the belee^ers only to
themselves, then is it not the same neither in the giving nor ^^iving thereof,
as before is proved. And if you grant Abraham's in^^s, as Isaac etc. were to be
esteemed his seed in respect of the covenant ^ade with him in Christ (for to
deny it by any color of scripture you ^an not) then must the same account be
made of al other infants of belee^ers, seeing the faithful are to apply the
covenant to them and their seed, ^^ the same faith that Abraham did to him and
his.

Because the seed is but one, to whom the promises were made, viz. Christ, or
the (...)al believers.

The words of the Apostle are these, Gal. 3. 1^.
but to thy seed, as of one, which is Christ. Some understand by seed, the
church, Christ mistically, as 1 Cor. 12. 12. ga^hered of Jews and Gentiles,
which grow together in one body in Christ, of the seed of Abraham, as ver. 18.
According to which exposition both ^ong and old members of the church are
understood to have the promise ^ade unto them that are partakers of salvation,
yea infants, else are Ephesians. 5. 2^ 26.
they ^ot sanctified by Christ's death. But if by seed, be understood the
redeeming ^eed, which is C. it is he in who^ both the elder people and infants
ar blessed.

But you to prove that by one, only actual believers is to be minded, ^edge
Ephesians. 3. 17. where it is to be noted, that Paul intendes not to show that none
are in Christ, save only actual believers, (for that were to con^mne al
infants) but he speaking to the church, and such of them as were ^apable of
instruction, and having exhorted them not to faint because of ^is troubles,
prays the Lord, that they may be strengthened with his spirit, that Christ
may dwell in their hearts by faith, that is bring forth the fruits of the
spirit, testifiing their faith, and so continue constant. Now it is to be
observed, that Ro^. 8. 9. 11 ^ Joh. 3. 24.
Christ dwells in all his, by his spirit, and thereby joyneth them unto him,
and so in infants, else are they Romans 8. 9.
not Christ's, and this should you have minded as well as the other, and have
known, that actual believing and the practice of other Christian duties, is
the work of the spirit, as the act of reasoning is of the soul, in the elder
sort, required of them, and not of infants, as often enough has been showed. But
not minding the true meaning of the Apostle, you thus object.

1. If the covenant be made with the faithful who actually believe as one seed,
and the infants of the faithfuul carnally begotten, which is an other seed,
etc. then the covenant is made with the seeds which are many, and that is
directly against the Apastle, Gal. 3. 16.

I answer, that the covenant is made with the faithful, and their seed as of
one kind, God of his free grace estating the believers and their seed in one
and the same covenant of life, both of them becoming * spiritual or Romans 7. 4.
^ct. 2. 39. ^zech 16. ^. 21. ^sal. 2. 15 Gal. 3. 28. ^phe. 2. 14 ^
holy seed, and sons of God, by virtue thereof: and not two contrary seeds,
as you would pretend: and therefore the Apostle is not contrary to that we
affirm, for as he says, the seed is one; so say we, whether, Christ our
Savior be thereby understood, or the Churches united into one, or all
believers, who together with their children are after a spiritual manner the
sons of God.

Therefore that one seed is of persons actually believing, etc. Romans 4. 11.
whence this Argument may be framed, Abraham is father of all them that believe
actually: infants do not believe actually: Ergo, etc.

Your conclusion arises from false premises, which are answered before; to
the former Proposition of this argument, I answer, that Abraham is called the
father of all that believe, but in no place of the scripture is added, of them
only that actually believe, which you do insinuate, and therefore there lies
deceit in your proposition. God promised his blessing to Abraham's seed, which
co^prehends his infants "and to bless the house of Israel and not only the
elder sort. That promise of blessing the families, Ge^. 12. 3. and 28. Ps. 115.
^2.
14. Act. 31. 25. Esa. 49. 22. Ier. 31. 1. includes children, for they are of
the family.

Again, Abraham's covenant was only to Abraham's one seed, that is to all
believers: Infants do not actually believe, Ergo, etc.

This Argument is the same in effect with the former, the mayor in your
understanding is false: the faithful and their children in respect of the
covenant, are but of one seed. Children though they cannot actually believe,
yet are they accounted of the believers, and partakers of the promise with
their parents.

Again, They that are the children of Abraham do the works of Abraham: Infants
cannot do the works of Abraham, Ergo, etc.

The Proposition is false in your understanding, Paul says, if any would; not
^^k he should not eat, 2 These. 3. 10. intends not this against children no
^ore does our Savior Christ, when he says, if you were Abraham's chil^ren, ye
would do the works of Abraham. Ioh. 8. 39. but both places are to ^e understood
of such as be of years, not of infants, which are not come ^o that streng^h to
work good or evil.

Again, I reason thus, They that are not under the everlasting covenant made
^^th Abraham shall not be baptized: infants are not under the everlasting
covenant ^ Abraham, Ergo, etc.

The minor is false: Infants are under the everlasting covenant, as before is
proved, and therefore to be baptized. This your reason implies ^e condemnation
of infants, for if they be not under the covenant of Abraham, there is for them
no promise of salvation.


Argument V.
1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. If the infants of the Israelites were baptized in the cloud
and in the sea as well as their parents, what lets the infants of believing
parents under the Gospel to be likewise partakers of baptism as well as they?

The former the Apostle affirms 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2. and therefore good warrant
must be showed that our infants are cut off from this priveledge that the Jews
children had. And if the former baptism of the Jews was a type of our
baptism, the^ must there be an agreement between the type and the thing typed,
which is not, if our children be not baptized as well as theirs.

The depriving of our children of the Sacrament, is to shorten the Lords
bounty toward his people of the new Testament; that being denied to their
children which God gave to his people and to their infants under the law, is to
^eny them (in regard of their seed,) the like assurance and comfort which the
Israelites had of theirs. And so to make our estate worse and more
uncomfortable then theirs was. And yet the Prophets prophesied of the grace
that should come to us, and did inquire and search after the same, 1 Pet. 1. 10.

Glad tidings were preached to Abraham and his seed, to infants of eight days
old. Gal. 3. 8. And this before Christ came in the flesh, and therefore much
more he being come, is joyful tidings, brought unto us and our infants. And so
are we to believe that the grace of God is not lessened either toward us or
our children, but enlarged by his coming.

M. Smyth. To this Argument I make answer, by framing the like Argument. If
their infants did eat the same spiritual meat and drink, which the parents eat:
then why may not our infants being able to eat and drink, eat and drink the
Lords Supper, the former the Apostle affermeth 1 Cor. 1. 2. Therefore good
warrant must be showed that our infants are cut off from that privilege etc.


R. Clyfton. This is not to answer the Arg, for first our infants must come to
such ability as that they can 1 Cor. 11. ^6. 25. 28. ^9.
show forth the Lords death; do it in remembrance of him: and can examine
themselves and discern the Lords body. before they receive the Lords Supper,
which conditions were not required of all that did eat Man, and drink of the
rock.

2. The proportion holds not, for Man, and water, were not only given to
Israel to be to them a sacrament: but also served for their ordinary corporal
food, and so is not the bread and wine in the Lords supper.

3. If things be compared alike, our sacraments to their ordinary sacraments,
no such consequence can be gathered as you intend: for the infants of Israel
were circumcised, but did not eat the passover, until they were able to go to
that place which God had appointed for the eating thereof, and to eat it
according to the Lords ordinance: and so much we will grant for the Lords
supper, that they are to eat it, that can eat it according to Christ's
institution.

4. If infants in partaking of those former Sacraments, were in them partakers
of Chr, why shall not our infants also in the use of the sacrament of baptism
be held partakers of the things signified, seeing (as you say, those sacraments
were types of ours) the truth must be answerable to the type.

Again, I answer more properly thus, that there shall be a proportion between
the type and the truth, that baptism of the cloud and the sea, and our
baptism. viz, that as young and old carnal Israelites were baptized in the
cloud and sea: so young and ^^l spiritual Israelites shall be baptized by the
baptism of repentance etc.

First, I deny that the Israelites considered as they were accounted worthy to
partake of the sacraments were carnal, but Ex. 19. 1. Pet. 2.
spiritual and holy.

2. Under the type you have young and old in years: so if you would keep
Proportion must be the like under the truth. But this you deny, and make two
sorts of believers young and old. Now I ask you whom you call young and old
Israelites, and if any that believes may defer his baptism; until he be old in
faith? And if this be Act. 8. 12. 36. 37 and 9. 18. and 10. 47. 4. and 16. 15.
33.
not lawful, and none but young believers be baptized, how will your proportion
stand between the type, and the thing signified? 3. Their baptism in the cloud
and sea did preach unto them repentance, as well as our baptism does unto us,
and in this there is a similitude between them: but that our outward baptism,
is the truth of that former baptism in the sea and cloud, to the Israelites, I
desire it may be proved.

Lastly, I would know, whom you mean, by spiritual fathers and their spiritual
children? Before you called Abraham the father of the faithful and al believers
his children. But thus to make up a proportion between your type and truth, you
are driven to acknowledge other spiritual fathers, besides Abraham: which being
so, you must grant that they are then so called in respect of their children to
whom the covenant is conveyed by Gods free grace together with them: For if
the children come into the covenant by their own faith, and enter as did their
parents, then are they Abraham's children, not theirs, according as the
scripture speaks. Romans 4. 11. that he shall be the father of them that beleev.

Further I say* that our infants shall have a privilege far greater then the
infants of the Israelites had in that tipical baptism. For they by it were
only baptized into Moses, and the law, that by it they might learn Moses, and
in Moses the truth in Christ as it were under a veil: but our infants under
the Gospel shall have the daily institution and education of faithful parents
etc.

The Apostle says in 1. Cor. 10. 2. that all the Israelites were baptized unto
Moses in the cloud and in the sea. But says not as you say, into the law,
those sacraments were seals unto them of the covenant of salvation, not of the
law, which then was not given. Secondly, to be baptized unto Moses may thus be
understood, viz. that they were baptized, Moses being their guide, or minister
by whom they were instructed in the ways of God. Thirdly, the baptism of the
Israelites howsoever it might be typical in some respect, yet did it signify
unto them true things, whereof they were partakers. Deu. 6. 6. and 11. 18. ^.
Genesis 18.
Lastly, the infants under the law and before, had their daily education by
faithful parents, as well as ours have under the Gospel: so that in this
respect, there is no such material difference, as you pretend.

Moreover I deny that the baptism of the cloud and sea, was a type of the
external baptism of the new Testament in the abstract: but it was a type of
our baptism in the concrete, that is, the baptism of the cloud did type out
our baptism in the three parts thereof, viz. 1. the baptism of the spirit,
2. the declaration of faith and repentance, the antecedent of the baptism with
water, 3. the outward washing with water, a manifestation of the foresaid
particulers etc.

Here you set us down types and things typed, but no proofs thereof, I know
that the Sacraments of the new Testament, did succeed the Sacraments of the
old, confirming to us the same spiritual things that theirs did to them. But
how these did type forth ours in the concrete (as you speak) I conceive not:
our sacraments are external as well as theirs, and administered by * man, who
neither does nor can administer the spirit. 1. For Mat. 3. ^1.
the baptism of the spirit, Deu. 10. ^. and 30. 6. ^ Cor. 10. 4. Heb. 11. ^9.
30. 39. ^sa. 1. 16.
they were partakers thereof, and manifested their faith and repentance as we
do. 2. concerning the declaration of faith and repentance to be a part of the
sacrament of baptism, I see no warrant; seeing it is more general then the
sacrament it self, and is an imperfect work in man, and sometimes hypocritical,
and therefore cannot be a part of the seal of Gods covenant that shall confirm
faith. Also this were to teach, that the assurance and pledge of man's salvation
depends upon himself, if the declaration of his faith and repentance, be held a
part of the sacrament. Again, faith and repentance is that condition of the
covenant that is required on our part, and therefore not a part of the seal
thereof. Besides, that which is often to be repeated cannot be a part of
baptism, confession of sin and faith is so often to be repeated as there
shall be occasion. Ergo etc. 3. The outward washing with water, being
administered to the faithful or their ^ed in the name of the Father etc. is
that sacrament of baptism which was Mat. 3. ^
administered by John, and is administered by the ministers of the Gospel.

Furthermore, whereas I said that to deprive children of baptism ^^ to shorten
the Lords bounty toward his people, you answer.

That Gods bounty is as large every way to our infants as to theirs, for Gods
(...)tie of actual exhibiting and sealing the everlasting covenant to Abraham
and (...) his carnal infants, was never extant in the old Testament: neither
were their parents in circumcising their infants comforted in the assured
conferring of it up(...) their infants.

You confess the Lord to be as bountiful toward our infants as to^ards the
infants of the Jews, indeed, neither comfortable to theirs or ours. Not to
theirs, because (say you) the everlasting covenant was never exhibited and
sealed to Abraham, and al his carnal seed. I have page 12. 13.
before showed that the covenant was sealed up to Abraham and his infants. And
that it was exhibited and sealed to him and to all the faithful: see Genesis 17. 7.
- 13. Romans 4. 11. Hebr. 11. 13. - 39. but not to al, (say you,) externally, it
was given to all and sealed by circumcision, though internally it was not, no
more is it to all that stand members of the visible church of the new
Testament. Secondly, if the parents had ^o comfort in circumcising of their
infants in respect of the promise in Christ to be unto their infants, they had
none at al in that action, for out of Christ is no true comfort: and so you
make circumcision an idle sign, which indeed did preach unto them, (howsoever
you think thereof,) Christ the promised seed, Col. 2. 11.
in whom they were circumcised.

And circumcision did not so plainly preach Christ then, as he is preached ^^w
to infants. Your doctrine casts infants out of Gods everlasting covenant,
both under the old and new Testament, and so Christ to them is not preached at
al. But what is it that now preaches Christ to infants more plainly then
circumcision did to the Jews infants, if not baptism? How be it you make a
question, how the preaching of Christ could profit infants either then in types
or now in truth. And you say, neither do I think that the Lord ever intended to
teach the infants any thing at that instant, but afterward to learn that which
circumcision taught him viz. the circumcision of the heart. And if you say, that
infants baptized are to be instructed. I answer, that in the new Testament by
baptism we manifest what we have, namely, the inward baptism, whereas in the
old Testament by circumcision they learned what they had not, but ought to have
viz. the inward circumcision of the ha^ etc.

First, the preaching of Christ by circumcising and baptising of infants did
then and does now profit their parents by seeing the covenant confirmed to
their seed. And although the infants themselves know not the use thereof, til
afterward, yet it makes not the Lords ordinance, to be any more unlawful, then
Christ's washing Peter's feet, because Peter understood ^oh. 13. 7.
it not. Yt suffices that the Lord commands the thing to be done, and that
children be * taught the use thereof, as they shall be capable. Deu. 6. 20.


Secondly, concerning that difference you make between baptism and
circumcision, afferming that by the former, we manifest what we have etc. and
by the other, they learned what they had not. It is not true that you say of
the circumcised, that they had not inward circumcision, for God did promise it
to them and their children. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. as well as to us. And here let it be
minded, that you confess, that the Israelites ought to have had inward
circumcision, if they ought to have had it, it was by their constitution or
everlasting cov. of God made with them. For otherwise how ought they have had
it? then how will you prove that their covenant was carnal which required inward
circumcision? the truth agrees with it self.


Argument 6.
Math. 28. 19. If Christ gave a commandment for the publishing of his covenant
and administration of baptism the seal thereof to al nations: then are the
believing Gentiles and their infants to receive the same. But the first is
true, Mat. 28. 19. Ergo the latter also is true. Act. 13. 48. and 16. 14. 15.
32. 33.

It will be objected against the Major, that it follows not, that the infants
are any more bound to receive baptism, then they are bound whilst they are
infants to receive the word, but the word they cannot receive. Ergo. I answer
that the commandment is general to al nations, and therefore as Abraham if he
should not have obeyed the Lord commanding him to circumcise him self, and al
his family, yea the infants, he should grevously have rebelled against God: so
whosoever of the Gentiles shall not beleev and be baptized both himself and his
seed, shall have no part nor portion in the inheritance of Christ: seeing he
cutts himself and his seed from the covenant of God. Genes. 17. 4. And though
infants be not capable of the preaching of the covenant (which notwithstanding
they are bound unto, as they shall come to years of discretion) yet are they
capable of the seal, as before is showed, and therefore by virtue of this
general commandment, Mat. 28, 19. are to be baptized.

M. Smyth. The errors of this Argument I will discover in order, first I deny
that baptism is a seal of the covenant of the new Testament. Secondly, I deny
that circumcision was the seal of the everlasting covenant that was made with
Abraham in respect of Christ. Thirdly, Baptism therefore does not succeed in
the place of circumcision, etc. Fourthly, I deny that although Abraham had a
special commandment, did circumcise his male infants, therefore Christians
upon this general commandment Mat. 28. 19. shall baptize their infants.
Fifthly, I say rather the contrary is hence proved, etc.


R. Clyfton. This is a ready course in answering, if it might be admitted of to
deny one thing after another without showing any reason to the contrary. As
for your particulars I do here brand them with the letter E. for errors, of
three of them I have spoken before more particularly, the fourth is now to be
answered unto, concerning the baptising of infants upon the general
commandment of Christ, Mat. 28. 19. which you deny to have warrant from that
scripture: I prove it thus.

If there was a commandment given for the sealing of the everlasting covenant
to Abraham and his children, then is this, Mat. 28. 10. a commandment (...) and
faithfully described in the institution of baptism, as the person, condition
and time of circumcision. But for paedobaptisme there is no express
description of the person, condition or time of their baptism, etc.

I answer to the consequent of the Major, that our Savior has reveled ^. 17.
6. ^14. 26. ^. ^. ^.
to his church the whole will of his father, which is contained in the
Scriptures, not only in the writings of the Apostles, but also of the
prophets, which he has for that end, commanded us to search Ioh. 5. 39. and
Peter to take heed unto, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and Paul commends to be profitable to
teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, etc. 2 Timothy 3.
16. 17. and therefore Gods will must not so be included in the writings of the
Apostles, that the prophets be excluded, but out of them both to learn what
Christ teaches. For as the books of the new Testament do plainly declare the
fulfilling of all the mysteries of our redemption: so do the books of the old
Testament speak of some things more expressly then the writings of the Apostles.
But to come to the point. I answer, that it was not needful for Christ to
describe things in so large manner, which before had been written, and were
still to continue, as example, the sealing of the covenant, the persons young and
old that were to be signed, and such like, what needs a new repetition hereof,
when the Lord purposed not to disa^nul them: so much as was to be altered,
concerning the outward sign, Christ omitted not to declare. And therefore
cannot be accused of any unfaithfulnes, if he in express words had not
commanded infants to be baptized, seeing under the old Testament they had the
sign of the covenant.

Again, the Apostles writings do plainly enough declare unto us that infants
are to be baptized, as both from that commandment of Christ, Mat, 28. 19. and
the practice of the Apostles in baptising of families, and by other reasons
has been showed.

And concerning, the time of baptising, I see no reason why you should cavil
about it, more then about the time of administering the Lords Supper, which
Christ has not so precisely set down neither the day, nor time of the day for
the administering thereof, as Moses did of the passover.

And the scriptures which you cite do show that bap* is to be administered when
men enter into Gods covenant, and children entering in at the same time with
their parents, are to be baptized at the same time with them, as Ismael and al
Abraham's house were circumcised * the same day with Abraham. Deu. 17. ^.
And thus much for answer to the consequent of your major, which ^so serves to
answer your minor. But touching those scriptures which you allege for proof of
your Minor, thus I answer in general to them all: that they speak of such as
came newly to the faith of the Gospel, to believe that Jesus was the Christ,
who were never baptized before. And this rule I confess to be observed to all
such like as are to be received to baptism, that they make confession of their
faith and sins as they did: but they serve not to teach us to deal so
toward their infants or the infants of believers that are borne within the
covenant. For the condition of them that are to be admitted into the church and
of them that are borne in it, is not the same as concerning the administration
of baptism, no more then it was in the Jewish Church towching circumcision;
for the one is declared to come within the covenant by their own profession;
and the other to be within it, by their being borne of believing parents: if
you had instanced an example of one that was borne in the Church of the new
testament, of parents that were members thereof, whose baptising was differd
until he was able to make confession of faith, then had you said more to the
purpose, though in such an example there might have been neglect, as was in
Moses in circumcising his son.


Argument VII.
Act. 16. 15. 33. Lastly, the Apostles practice is our instruction, but they
baptized not only the master of the family which believed: but all his
household, Act. 16. 15. 33. Therefore now also the like is to be done: and so
consequently the infants are to be baptized, for they are a part of the family,
see Genesis 45. 18. where Joseph bad his brethren, take their father and their
househoulds and come to him. Now in chap. 46. 5. 7. it is said they carried
their children and wives in charets, noting hereby, that children were of the
household, else had they no commandment to have carried them into Egypt, see
also verse 27. and Exodus 1. 21. it is said, because the midwives feared God,
therefore he made them howses, in 1 Timothy 5, 8. The Apostle says, he that
provideth not for his own and namely for them of his household he denies the
faith, etc. Now I would ask if children be exempted from the howshold in any of
these places. or in any other where mention is made of a particular howshold.
Therefore, this Argument will prove that children were baptized, unless it can
be showed that they were especially exempted. And if the holy Ghost have not
exempted them, who dare do it, against a general commandment of baptising al
nations.

M. Smyth. I make answer to this Argument confessing it wholly, but yet denying
the consequent of your conclusion: for it does not follow because all the
household of Lidia and the Gaylor were baptized, that therefore infants were
baptized, you shall see what exceptio^s I take.


R. Clyfton. The consequence will follow, for if the Apostle baptized whole
families, then children also if there were any, seeing they are of the family,
and no where excepted, but I will come to your exceptions, the first whereof is
this.

I say though infants are a part of the family etc. yet it does not follow
that whersoever there is mention made of a family, that therefore that family
had infants in it, etc.

Neither does it follow, that the families of Lidia, of the Gaylor and of
Stephanas, were all of them without children, because the scripture does not
mention their children. The general speech of baptising the household,
satisfies you not, except it be proved that there were infants therein: and why
should not you (that stand^ for actual believing before baptism) as well prove
that Lidias family did beleev as the mistress did* of whom only it is said,
that the Lord opened her heart, and she attended unto the things which Paul
spoke. The Acts of Christ and his Apostles are summarily recorded, and not
every thing that was done at large explayned.

Certeynly, if the Apostle had minded that children were not to be baptized, he
would not have spoken so indefinitely of the family: yea hereby he teaches
that in the administration of this sacrament: he followed the common Genesis
17*-13. Exo^ 1^, 4^. 4^*
practice used in circumcising of the whole family when the governor thereof
received the faith.

2. By this reason you might prove that Lydiaes husband and the Gaylors wife
and their children of 40. years old and their servants of 60. years old were
baptized, etc.

First, it is a question whether Lydia had a husband, and more like that she
was a widow, because it is said to be her household. 2. Concerning the Gaylors
wife, their children and servants, what lets that they might not be
baptized, if they refused not the grace of God offered? The Apostle preached
Act. 16. 31. 32.
salvation to the whole family, and the Gaylor believed, and he with all that
belonged unto him were baptized. Dare you now except against any in that
family, seeing the holy Ghost so speaks? from these general speeches I prove
that all in both households were baptized, show the contrary if you can.

3. If it were yielded that there were infants in Lydia^s family and in the
Gaylors, does it follow that they were baptized? no thing les, and that I will
declare thus. 1. You say, to the baptism of the Gaylors wife and children of
years of discretion, there was necessarily required says and repentance, or
else they were not baptized: so say I because infants cannot believe and repent,
though they were in the family, yet they shall not be baptized.

I might ask you where I so said of the Gaylors wife and children, but I will
not contend with you about it. Concerning infa^ts, I have proved that their
baptising is not to stay, until they can themselves make confession of their
faith and sins, and you do not yet say any thing worth answer, to the
contrary.

2. I say, that although it be said, that all that perteyneth to the Gaylor
were baptized yet it is also said, verse, 32. that the word was preached to all
that were in his house. and verse 34. that all his howshold believed, etc.
seeing therefore all that were baptized in the Gaylors house believed by the
preaching of the word. Infants that could not believe were not baptized, etc.

First, all that you here say does not prove that all that were baptized in the
gaylors house believed by the preaching of the word. The word was preached to
al in his house, that were able to understand, and so must both ver. 32. and
34. be und^^stood of such. But Paul speaking of baptising them, says, that he
was baptized and all that belonged unto him. Which speech must needs include his
little children also, if he had any.

And although it be said, that he rejoiced that he with all his howshold
believed in God, yet will it not follow hereupon, that his children were not
baptized, seeing children are to be esteemed in the number of believers. And
those words may have this construction, viz. that he rejoiced, that he with all
his family were received into the faith of Christ, or were accepted into the
number of believers, and so it includes his children.

Concerning the time, being midnight, which you say was a distempered time to
waken young children, it is nothing that you say: were not the infants of Israel
awakened and carried out of Egypt at the like time of the night? Exodus 12. 31.
upon less occasion then either of these, children may be awakened.

^. I say for Lidias family, it is not said that al her house was baptized, or
yet if it had been so said, that every particular person of her family was
baptized, for Mat. 3. ^^. It is said, al Judea went out to John and were
baptized of him, etc. yet hence it cannot be concluded that al and every one
that went out were baptized* etc.

The scripture says, that Lidia was baptized and her household without
excepting of any, the like is said of Stephanas family, 1 Cor. 1. 16. And by
that which is written of the gaylors house, we are taught how to understand
Act. 16. 33
the Apostle. And be it that this word ( al) be used sometimes for many, as in
that of Mat. 3. 5. 6. What then? yet it follows not: therefore, it is so to be
taken in this place of the Apostle, seeing he uses it for every particular of
the whole in all these places, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Hebr. 1. 6. Gal. 3. 27. 28. and 1.
2. 2 Cor. 1. 4. 20. and 4. 15. and 5. 18. and in diverse others.

But you say, As Act. 16. 32. 34. only they that believed were baptized, s^
was it with them of Lidias family.

You are to bold with the text to add unto it. The Apostle says not, that
only they that believed were baptized, but that they preached to all that were
in his house, and wa^ baptized with all that were his. Next, you proceed to
conclude two Arguments against baptising of infants, the former is this.

The Apostles practice is our instruction, but the Apostle in baptising
howsholds, First Preached to all that were in the family, and then they
believing were baptized. Ergo they only that by the preaching of the word were
converted and believed were baptized.

This argument might have been granted, had not the conclusion contained more
then the former propositions, viz. this word, ( only) which ought to have been
placed in the one of them, and if in the assumption, then were it false to say,
that only they that believed were baptized and ^o more: the places whereupon
this argument is grounded are answered before. And it is to be further
observed, that this was the Apostles practice to such as were of years and not
before of the Church. Your other Argument is this.

That which the Apostles practiced in one family, they practiced in all
families that they baptized: But in the Gaylors family according to Christ's
commission, Mat. 28. 19. they first made them Disciples by preaching the word,
Act. 16. 32. 34. Ergo. etc.

This argument also may be granted, and makes nothing against the baptising of
infants, except your heretical collection which I deny. And this may suffice
for reply to your answer to this and the rest of my arguments.


OF THE TESTIMONY OF THE fathers concerning the baptising of infants.
Hereunto I will adioyne some testimonies of the fathers, not to prove that
children ought to be baptized, which is to be done, and is by the scriptures
already proved: but to show the practice hereof in ancient Churches. Augustine
(as I find alleged) writing to Jerome. epist. 28. says, Cyprian not making
any new decree. but firmly observing the faith of the Church judged with his
fellow Bishops, that as soon as one was borne, he might lawfully be baptized.
See Cyprian epist. to Fidus. And writing against the Donatists, lib. 4. cap.
23. and 24. says, that the baptism of infants was not derived from the
authority of man, neither of counsels, but from the tradition or doctrine of
the Apostles. Ciril, upon Lev. Cha: 8. approves the baptism of infants and
condemns the iteration of baptism. Origin upon the Romans says, that the
Church received baptism of infants from the Apostles. Nazianzenus in Orat. in
S. Lavacrum. 3. says, that baptism agrees to every age, to every condition
of life, to all men if thou have an infant, it is sanctified from his infancy,
yea from the finger ends it is consecrated. After he says: some man will say
what say thou of infants which neither know what grace is nor pain, what
shall we baptize those? and he answers, yea verily. Amb. lib. 2. de Abraham cha.
11. Speaking of baptism, says, neither old man nor Proselyte, nor infant is
to be excepted, because every age is guilty of sin and therefore stands need
of the Sacrament. These and many other of the fathers do bear witness
according to the Scriptures of the lawfulnes of the baptising of infants.

Mr. Smyth. And for conclusion you produce the fathers: I say that the
producing of fathers, who all of them held plenty of Antichristian heresies,
shall avail you nothing in your cause, and you that deny the testimony of
fathers contrary to the Scriptures, how can you with any color produce fathers
against us in case contrary to the Scriptures etc.


R. Clifton I plead not for the errors of the fathers, but for the truths
which they held according to the Scriptures; And where you charge them to hold
ple^tie of antichristian heresies, you tax them very deeply, and you that so
censure others, had need to judge your self, otherwise the Lord will find out a
sentence against you. Also I desire you to show where I produce the testimony
of the fathers contrary to the Scriptures? you are grown to be very careless
what you affirm. For my producing of the fathers against you, I do not recall
that I have done, seeing their testimony is the truth, who show the practice
of their times, according to the Scriptures.

I know the device of your producing of fathers, viz. 1. to set a gloss upon
your antichristian heresy of baptisiing infants. 2. to draw the world into
dislike of the Lords truth. But if any should produce testimonies of the
fathers against your separation against you in the case of Prelacy etc. what
would you answer, would you not say they are testimonies of men living in
corrupt times, etc. even so say I to you etc.

Here I charge you with blaspheming the ordinance of Christ in calling the
baptising of infants, antichristian heresy, Esaias. 5.
woe to him that speaks evil of good. 2 with sin, in saying it is my device to
produce the fathers to set a gloss upon my antichristian heresy, etc. for were
it a falseshod that I defend (as I know it is not) yet know you that my soul
is free from such wicked intention to produce the fathers in that behalf. It is
one thing to produce the testimony of the fathers witnessing the truth
according to the scripture, and another, for the defense of errors: the latter
we reject, and you take up, but the former we approve and you condemn. And
although we are not to build our faith upon the fathers; yet for matter of fact
done in their times we may give credit to their report: and so their
testimony serves to prove something, namely to show the practice of their
times to which end I did allege them, and that is not to confess that they
prove nothing as you charge me. And say Remember that, and let al men take
notice, that you produce testimonies, that you say prove nothing. And I pray
you remember with what spirit you writ these words.

But why do you produce testimonies of the fathers, forsooth to show the
practice of ancient Churches. But all these Churches were Antichristian by your
own confession, etc.

Yea Sir, I do produce them to show the practice of Ancient Churches, whose
testimonies is not so lightly rejected, save of you and such like, that
condemn all Churches for antichristian, except such heritical Synagoges as
your own is. As concerning these ancient Churches in the first two hundred
years after Christ, albeit some devises of men crept in, and as they grew
elder so increased, yet that they were Antichristian, where have you my
confession? it is strange that you dare affirm such untruthes. And for
anticihrstia^ antiquity and universality, I could wish you were as free from
Anabaptistical novelitie, as I am from approving of any error or superstito
eyth^ ^o^ the antiquity or universalitie of it, the truth we defend needs no
such Popish propps: but yet antiquity (when the thing is found to be true that
is ancient) is not lightly to be regarded seeing the truth is more ancient then
error. And although you esteem not of the testimony of the fathers witnes^^ng
against you, yet have you summoned togeither such men as you thought would give
any contenance to your error, to batle against both the Scriptures and them:
but their testimony does little pleasure you, as shall appear by the
examination of the particulars. The first you allege is. Henr-Pantal^on ^
Chro. fol. 6. who says, that Victor Apher. anno 193. ordained that a^ Easter
it should be indifferently administered to all, whereupon I gather, that before
his time only such as were catechized in the faith were baptized, for he would
not decree that heathen should be baptized.

This man (I take his words upon your report) does mention Victors decree for
the time of administration of baptism to all young and old, viz at Easter. But
would any but you infer hereupon, that baptism was not administered before
this time to infants? You might as well say that before that time it was not
administered to the elder sort, for he speaks in general of the persons to be
baptized. Victor brings not in baptising of infants, which was then the
Churches practice, but prescribes a certain time for the general
administration of that sacrament: as Gelasius did the like, anno 494. That
infa^ts were baptized before Victors time, appears by that ^eliques (...)e,
p. ^ 96. ^^bius.
* of Higinius, who decreed that children which were to be baptized should have
a Godfather and a Godmother: Anno 143. Higinius lived before Victor, about 50.
years. Your next, Eusebius Hist. lib. 7. cap. 8. says that Novatus rejected
the holy baptism and overthrew the faith and confession which was accustomed
before baptism: whereby it appears that faith and confession were required
before baptism: and therefore the rudiments thereof still remain that in the
baptising of infants, a confession of sin and faith is required of the
surety or parents.

That confession was required before the baptising of men grown to years and
newly come to the faith is not denied, and more then this can not be gathered
from Eusebius words as you set them down. But what is this against the
baptising of infants? Howbeit I find not this of Novatus in Lib. 7. chap. 8.
but in that chapter mention is made of a certain faithful brother that being
present when some were baptized and heard what was demanded and what was
answered, weeping, etc. began to confess that he had otherwise received
baptism of Heretics, etc. Now if he was baptized of Heretics without
confession of his faith, it was contrary to the practice of the Church, and of
the Apostles concerning such as came newly to the faith.

Eusebius ecclesiastical hist. lib. 6. c. 33. thus writes of No^atus, that ^e
being vexed with an unclean spirit in his youth, and having* spent* some (...)
with Exorcists, fell into a great sickness, and lying in his bed, for necessity
he was baptized, neither any of those things which were accustomed to follow
baptism were so(...)nly fulfilled, etc.

As for the rudiments of this confession, which you say still remaynes,
thereunto I answer, that this practice is a kind of imitation of that which was
observed in former times toward them of years: and it may be that the parents
which brought their childten to be baptized did make some short confession of
their faith (for of confessing of syn is no step remaining that I know, only a
promise to forsake sin) which after did grow (as other things) into
corruption.

Again, you allege Eusebius lib. 10. cap. 15. reporting a story of one that
did baptize children in sport, and that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, though
d^ne in sport, yet finding that the children had questioned and answered
according to the manner of the catechumeni in baptism, did approve it, whereby
it appears that then only persons by confession of their faith and sins
were admitted to baptism in Alexandria.

This story I do not find in that chapter before quoted, but such a like in
chap. 14. yet both your written copy and printed book, appoints to cha. 15,

If you mean that of Athanasius baptising of certain Catechumeni, lib. 10. c.
14. I answer that those children so baptized seem not to be any children of
the Church but some of the heathen which with their parents were instructed in
the faith, but not yet in communion or baptized. Again, in that they being
thus baptized were by the Bishop delivered to his Church to Athanas^ vero at^
eos etc. ^ vocatis p^ re^tibus s^ Dei obte^tione trad^ ecclesiae su^ nutrien^^
to be brough up, their parents thereto consenting: which consent the Bishop
needed not to have required, or so committed those children to be educated, if
they and their parents had been already of the Church, for to them then had
this care apperteyned. Besides if none but the elder sort had been baptized
(which by that which is here objected is not proved) yet was this but the
practice of one particular Church which might be tainted with that error about
baptising of infants, as Tertullian and some others were in those times.

Next you allege Hoseus Petricov. Confess. de fide cap. 27. saying, that these
2. Apostolical traditions which the Scripture teaches not, viz, that there are
3. persons and one God, and that Dionysius and Origin do testify baptism of
infants to be an Apostolical tradition. Now you know their Apost. traditions
were antichristian inventio^s.

This witness will do you little pleasure: for as he calls the baptising of
infants a tradition, so does he the Trinity, which the scripture does
manifestly teach in sundry places. Now if you accept not his testimony in
calling the Trinity a tradition, why do you produce him against baptising of
infants? Besides though this man was a Papist, yet is his witness with us, for
calling the baptism of infants an Apostolical tradition, he means as the
Papists do, such doctrines of the Apostles as were not written which they hold
equal with the scriptures. Again, this he says is so called by Dionisius and
Origin, who understood thereby the doctrine of the Apostles: And those
Apostolical traditions (whereof you dream) were not in their times in esse.

Polydore Virgil, you bring in also to testify, that it was the use with the
Ancients, that persons of years (sere) in a manner should be baptized clad
with white garments etc. and this was performed at Easter and Whitsontide, etc.

This witness tells us that it was in use with the Ancients not only to baptize
the elder sort that turned to the faith, but appointed the n^ to be clad in
white, and that they were instructed until Easter, (their time appointed for
baptism): and these it seems were the Catechumeni (for in those former times
many had not embraced the faith) now this autho^^ says not that children borne
in the Church were kept unbaptised until they could make profession of their
own faith, whereof our dispute is.

The words of Lactantius (whom you also cite) are general of young and old,
whose testimony may serve to fill up the number, but proves not your desire,
his words you set down thus Candidu^ egreditur nitidis exer^itus undis: atque
vetus vitium purgat in amne novo, which may be understood of infants as well as
of the elder sort.

Concerning Lodovicus Vives, upon August. de Civit. Dei cap. 27. (if ^dovicus
^ves flo^^ anno ^4^. ^^d in R. (...)r. 8. his ^^, as did ^^ Erasm.
he have words tending to any such purpose for which you allege him,) seeing he
is but a late writer, I would know out of which of the Ancients he proves
that he says, certainly from that place of Augustine he can gather no such
thing as you set down in his name.

Lastly, you cite Erasmus in his annotations upon the fifth of the Romans* to
say, That in Paul's time it was not received, that infants should be baptized.

Erasmus brings no proof for that he says, and therefore being of so late
time, what is his witness against so many fathers, testifying the contrary.
Thus in alleging of him and the rest, you show the weakness of your cause, that
have not one ancient father directly to witness with you, but are driven to
call them to witness that in this thing were of contrary judgment to your
self.


REASONS AGAINST Baptising of infants, answered.
R. Clifton Now let us come to consider of the reasons alleged to the
contrary, the first of them is this.


1. Reason:
Because there is neither precept nor example in the new Testament of any
infants that were baptized by John or Christ's Disciples, only they that did
confess their sins and confess their faith were baptized: Mar. 1. 4. 5.
Act. 8. 37.

Answer

1. This reason being brought into form will bewray the weakness thereof, for
suppose it should be granted that there was neither a special commandment or
example in the practice of John or Christ's Disciples for the baptising of
infants, yet it may not withstanding be lawful to baptize them, namely if by
sound co^seque^ce it may be gathered out of the Scripture. And this may be done
by good warrant from the example of our Savior Christ, Mat. 22. 31. 32 who
reasoning against the Saduces concerning the resurrection, proves it by
Argument necessarily drawn from Exodus 3. 6. where no such thing was expres^ly
mentioned, and thus he taught usually and refuted his adversaries, as the
history of the Gospel witnesses. After the same manner does Paul in his
epistles to the ROMANS and GALATHIANS prove justification by faith only
without works of the law, this he did not prove by alleging any place in all
the old testament in plain terms affirming so much, but by conclusion of
necessary consequence from the scriptures. And to this purpose might diverse
other instances be alleged. So likewise if we prove the baptising of infants
by unanswerable arguments out of the old and new testament, (though we can not
show any plain precept or example) yet may upon warrant thereof, not fear to
baptize them. For the author of this reason himself can not deny, that both he
and we must believe diverse things which we gather out of the Scriptures by
necessary consequence that we shall not find in express words, as that there be
3 persons in one Godhead, that the son is Homousius, that is, of the same
substance with the father; now such express words cannot be showed in the
scripture. And many such like.

2. Also if this Argument be sufficient to bar children from the Sacrament of
Baptism, then is it as sufficient to keep back women from the Lords Supper,
but the lawfulnes thereof is only proved by consequence, because they are
within the covenant and are partakers of the Sacrament of baptism. Thus the
weakness of this reason being manifested, I will thirdly answer unto it.

3. That there is both precept by Christ and example by his Disciples for the
baptising of infants as has been proved by my two last reasons alleged to
prove the lawfulnes of baptising of Infants. Commandment I say, Mat. 28. 19.
Go teach al nations baptising them, where is no exception of the Children of
faithful parents. And therefore there being a law once geven that the
covenant should be sealed to the infants as well as to the beleving parents,
the same law of sealing the covenant, must stand still in force to the parties
(though the outward sign be changed) except the lawemaker do repeal it, or
have set down some ground for the repeal thereof, which must be showed, or
else this commandment does bind us and our infants to receave this feale of the
covenant.

And as for examples, we read that the Apostle baptized Lidia and her
household. Act. 16. 15. and the Gayler and all that belonged unto him verse. 33.
both which seming to be great households, it is not likely that they were
without children though the Evangelist me^tio^ them not. But the exception is,
that only such as did confess their sins and confess their faith were
baptized. Concerning John, he was sent to call the people to repentance and so
to prepare the way of the Lord Mat. 3. 3. and so many as did repent and
confess their sins, he baptized: but did John refuse their children if they
brough^ them to him? but it will be said there is no mention made that he did
baptize them: no more say I, is there that they were offered unto him. There is
no mention that the disciples of Christ were baptized, and yet it were too bold
a part, and no doubt very false, to affirm that they were not baptized. All
things that John did, nor that Christ did in the particulars are written. Ioh.
20. 30. but the sum thereof. And therefore to gather an Argument from hence,
because there is no mention that children were baptized of John, therefore they
ought not to be baptized, is a larger conclusion then the premises will bear.:
and so that reason taken from the baptising of the Eunuch (Philip baptized no
childen when he baptized the Eunuch) is of no weight to prove that therefore
children ought not to be baptized. Was not the Eunuch a stranger far from his
country, now in journey homeward, and therefore not like that he should have
his children with him, specially in such a tedious journey, and not knowing of
this accident.

M. Smyth. Now in the next place you proceed to make answer to my three
arguments against baptising of infants, to the first argument you say, if it be
brought into form, it will bewray the weakness of it, well I will bring it into
form etc.

That which has neither precept nor example is not to be done: Baptising of
infants has neither precept nor example. Ergo. etc. Again another part of my
argument may be brought into form thus. That which has precept and example
must be practiced. Baptising of persons confessing their sins and their says
is commanded and was practiced by Christ John and the Apostles. Ergo. etc.


R. Clyfton First, the Major of your former Sillogisme is not necessarily true,
your self confesses that every consequent necessarily deduced from the
scripture is as well Parallels, ^g. 71.
and as truly the word of truth, as that which is in plain terms expressed,
etc. and therefore you ought to have added ( nor ground of the scripture) or
such like.

2. The minor I deny, and have proved that there is both precept and example
for baptising of infants. Your second Syllogism may be granted, save that the
conclusion seems to entend more then the propositions, viz, in these words, (
are the persons to be baptized) as if only such (and not infants) as can
confess their faith, are to be baptized, which I deny.

Before you proceed to confirm your argument: you labor first to remove my
answer saying. Although a necessary consequence in all cases shall prevail,
yet I say, the Lord can not leave us in this particular to necessary
consequence, he dealing plainly and faithfully with us etc.

You grant a necessary consequence in all cases shall prevail, why not in
this particular. Your reason is, seeing the new Testament is more manifest then
the old, etc. and Moses has set down distinctly and plainly the persons with
their qualifications to be circumcised, etc. either Christ has as plainly and
fully set down these particulars or else the new testament, is not so plain as
the old.

1. By this your reason you iniure God and his word, who leaft the Jews in the
books of Moses only to consequences towching that great point of the
resurrection, which yet Christ accounted sufficient, and against the Sadduces,
drew his Argument to prove the resurrection out of Exodus, 3. 6. where no such
thing is expressly mentioned, and so by your doctrine he dealt not plainly
and faithfully. Also every other argument, that he or the Apostles used upon a
necessary consequence can not stand with the open face of the gospel, thus far
does your reason exte^d: but I will come to your particular whereof you would
have it understood, viz, that Christ can not deal faithfully, if for the
baptising of infants he has not as plainly described the ordinance of
baptism, the persons with all other circumstances, etc.

Do you think that if Christ have not set down every circumstance about
baptism, that he is therefore unfaythful? what think you of his describing of
the other Sacrament, where is it set down so plainly, that women shall be
partakers thereof? there is no mention that any woman was present at Christ's
administration of his last supper: where is the time so described for the
administration thereof, as was for the Passover? must Christ for this be
accused to have dealt not so faithfully as Moses? had our Savior any need to
teach or write otherwise then he has done about the sacraments? seeing it is
the same covenant under the Gospel that was sealed to the old Church, and a
commandment given for the sealing thereof unrepealed: that which was to be
changed concerning the outward ceremony, Christ has plainly set it down
with direction for for the administration thereof. And that which was needful
for Moses in describing circumcision, was not so necessary for Christ in
describing of baptism: because circumcision was to be administered only to the
males, but baptism to both sexes, circumcision on the 8. day: baptism is tied
to no strict time, and therefore the particular description of these
circumstances might well be omitted, and no unfaithful dealing in Christ.

As for the minding of it to be administered to infants, there was no use of any
such particular direction, seeing the Lord had once ordained to seal his
covenant to the faithful and their seed, and renueth the same in a general
manner under the Gospel, which may suffice to all that are sober minded.

For it had been easily said, go teach etc. baptize them, and if they have any
infants baptize them, etc.

It is not for man to prescribe wisdom how to speak, things are taught
plainly enough, if God give men ears to hear.

But say that Christ John and the Apostles leaves direction for this mean
matter only by dark far fetched probable conjectures and consequence from the
old testament, which was only typical, etc. and has not left evident grounds
for it expressly in all the foresaid p^rticulars, etc. is to say that Christ is
not so faithful in his office prophetical as Moses was* etc.

For these things which we defend are plain enough and no dark or farfetched
conjectures, except to such, whose eyes the Lord has blinded. Concerning our
Reasons drawn from the writings of the old Testament we do herein follow the
example of Christ and his Apostles, who did confirm, and prove that doctrine
which they preached by the Scriptures of the Prophets. Paul says, that he
witnessed to small and great, saying no other things then Act. 26.
those which M^ses and the Prophets did say should come: notwithstanding I have
also confirmed, this doctrine of baptisiing of infa^ts from the new Testament.

In that you say, the old Testament was only typical, you must explain your
meaning, for although some things were * typical under the old Testament Heb.
10. and 8. 13. ^ 9. 1-9 ^l, 2. 16. 17 Gal 4. 24. ^5.
yet other things were Moral, as the Moral law which was a part of it:
preaching, prayer and other spiritual parts of worship, which were commanded
under the old Testament. Again, That Christ has left undeniable grounds in
the Scriptures for the baptising of infants, before is showed.

Moreover seeing that the new Testament was wrapped up and preached obscurely in
the old Testament and types thereof, it was necessary that Christ should out of
the old Testament, prove the resurrection etc. but now that the new Testament
being written etc. why should we be sent to obscurities and coniectural
cons^quentes etc.

Because the books of the new Testament were not written, Christ and the
Apostle might reason from obscurities and coniecturall co^sequents out of the
old Testament: do you thus argue indeed? was Christ's reasoning obscure for the
resurrection? do you think the Saduces would have been sooner persuaded if the
new Testament had been written and Christ had reasoned from it? no more then
you will be persuaded to believe the baptising of infants for all the reasons we
bring from the same. He that will not believe Moses and the prophets, will not
believe the Apostles. Again, I deny that to reason from the Scriptures of the
old Testament is to reason from obscurities: the Apostles have made all things
clear and manifest, Ephe. 3. 5-9 whose writings do further us to the
understanding of the prophets, and Christ himself sends us to search those
Scriptures. Ioh. 5. 39. and Peter ^ Pet. 1. ^.
says ye do well if you take heed to the word of the Prophets as before is
observed.

Besides, the Trinity of persons and unity of essence in the Godhead is
proved by plain words 1. John 5. 7. etc.

That the Trinity is proved by this scripture and by diverse other places, I
deny not, yet in these express words, That there be 3. persons in one Godhead,
is not so set down in this place or in any other. Nether is found to be in
those plain words, though the same thing may be concluded out of the
Scriptures. But I did instance these, to show that every thing is not set down
in so plain and express words as you would bear us in hand.

Finally, I say, show me any necessary consequence for baptising of Infants
out of the old Test. or the new, and I yield.

This I have done already, but for your yielding it is not in your own power,
but in Phi. 2. ^
God that must show mercy, and give grace, which I pray the Lord to give you,
Amen.

Yet a reason or two I will here add unto my former, to prove that infants of
believers are within the covenant: from Gal. 3. 29. thus I reason.

Whosoever are Christ's are Abraham's seed and within the covenant.

The children of believers are Christ's: Therefore Abraham's seed and with in the
covenant: and so consequently have right to baptism the seal thereof. The
Assumption is thus proved. Children be either Christ's or else they Act. 4.
cannot be saved: But they Mar. ^ 13. 14.
may be saved. Ergo etc.

2. The infants of believers are either of the church, Ephesians. 1. 2. 23.
which is the body of Christ, or without: If within, then are they of the
covenant, and Christ is theirs, for he Esa. Ephesians. ^ 25, -27. 2. 18. 22.
is given for and to his Church, and is the savior of it: and so being of the
church, baptism must belong unto them. But if children be without the
covenant, then are they Ephesians. 2. 1
without God, without hope, and without promise of salvation, and so their
estate as hethen, and the children of believers no more holy then the children
of infidels, though Paul witnesses the contrary.

But I desire it may well be observed that you are driven to consequents for
this matter, and secondly, that the Gospel of Christ is for babes. Matthew. 11.
25. etc.

What except you against a necessary consequence, is not that manner of
reasoning lawful? did not Christ so reason, as before is showed? and you your
self do Parale^^ page 71. Caract. p. 33.
justify it. I know if you had such consequents for the baptising of your
self, you would make them go for current, as indeed they ought. But I do not
only reason a consequentibus, but set down the express commandment of God,
for the sealing of young and old, and the example (...). 17. ^ 13.
of the Apostle baptising whole families.

2. That the Gospel is for babes, I grant, and that in Mat. 11. 25. is applied
to men of years, which are lowly and meek, but you must know that the most
simple persons (as you speak) are capable of the mysteries Cor. 13. 12. Heb 11.
- 14. 6, 13. 2 Pet. 4.
of the Gospel but in * part, and every man has his time of grows therein,
and needs to be instructed, that he "may increase in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? And though the Gospel be plain, yet we attayn
to the knowledge of it by degrees, your self will confess this, at least your
many alterations do testify thus much against your self, and therefore the
most simple is not so capable thereof as you pretend.

Lastly, for my consequences which you call mere hallucinations and Sophismes. I
justify them against your best arguments, how well you have disproved them,
let the good Reader judge.

Your second Answer and exception is, that if want of special precept and
example bar children from baptism, it shall also bar women from the Lords
supper. I deny it, for in plain terms it is said, 1 Cor. 11. 28. let Anthropos
viz. either man or woman eat after examination. and Gal. 3. 28. there is
neither male nor female in Christ etc. 1 Cor. 12. 13. we have been all made to
drink into one spirit, and Dorcas is a disciple. Act. 9. 36. and the disciples
met together together to break bread. Act. 20. 7. etc.

That women are to be partakers of the Lords supper is no question, but whether
there be commandment or example, expressly nameing women, that you have not
showed from these scriptures. Concerning 1 Cor. 11. 28. there is a word of the
common gender, but the Apostle says not in plain terms thus, let every woman
examine her self and so eat: seeing the word anthropos, may be applied to the
man, and is sometimes restrained to man only, as in Matthew. 19. 3. is it
lawful for Anthropos to put away his wife? and Hebr. 5. 1. and every high
Priest is taken ex anthropon. And in reproving of their abuse the Apostle uses
words of the masculine gender: also the words joined with Anthropos, 1 Cor. 11.
28. are of the masculine gender, let a man examine himself, cauton for he that
eats esthion, etc this compared with Christ's institution where only men were
present, though women were in the city, sh^weth this testimony not to be so
plain as you pretend. Neither do the rest of your scriptures prove your desire.
As for Dorcas being a disciple, is no express example, the women of the Jews
were Moses disciples, yet were it not true to reason, that therefore they were
circumcised. As for Gal. 3. 28. and 1 Cor. 12. 13. they speak of the spiritual
union in Christ, and spiritual grassing into his body by the spirit and
baptism, but neither of them says, let women partake of the Lords supper. I
reason for the plain terms, otherwise I deny not, that arguments may be drawn
from these scriptures to prove that women are to receive the Lords Supper.

Your 3. Answer and exception follows, wherein you do affirm that there is
both precept and example for baptising of infants etc. to these I have already
answered in the sixth and seventh reasons going before.

And there also may you receve satisfaction to that you have answered: but yet
to one objection concerning the commandment once given, of the sealing of
infants. I answer (say you) besides that baptism is not the seal of the new
Testament but the spirit, and that circumcision was not the seal of the
everlasting covenant etc. So though it were granted that infants of the old
Testament were by circumcision sealed to the covenant made in Christ, which I
peremptorily deny, yet seeing the time of circumcision is expired, therefore
infants are not to be sealed by baptism.

To all this it is answered page 12, 37. 38.
before that circumcision as also baptism are seals of the covenant of
salvation, and though the time of circu^cising be expired, yet is not the
co^ma^dement of sealing of the covenant expired, and therefore infants are still
to be sealed with baptism which succedeth circumcision.

In the last place you require prose that only persons that confessed their
sins and their faith were baptized, I prove it thus: They only were to be
baptized that Christ commanded to be baptized, persons made disciples by
teaching, were only commanded to be baptized by Christ. Mat. 28. 29. Ergo etc.

I deny your Assumption, the affirmative is not to baptize them only that are
made disciples by teaching, but also their seed, as formerly has been proved:
and you feighne a false negative to that affirmative, in Mat. 28. 19.

2. Again, considering that in every affirmative there is included a negative,
therefore wheresoever example is, that persons confessing their sins and their
faith were baptized, there is signified that those that did not confess their
sinues etc. were not baptized.

This is granted of such as were of years and to be added to the Church; and
so now to be practiced toward any of the Turks or such like that should come
to the faith. But this is false, that because persons confessing their faith
were baptized, therefore the infants of the faithful, not able to make
confession of their faith shall not be baptized. Willing confessing must be
opposed to actual refusing, if the argument according to the mind of the holy
Ghost stand good.

For we must know that the body is one etc. and the seed one and not two, for
in the new Testament they know God from the least to the greatest. Heb. 8. 11.
and they are al taught of God. Mat 11. 11. and this I take to be a plain
proof of the point which you desire.

This serves rather to prove that children are to be baptized because they are
of the same body of Christ. To affirm infants to be baptized is not to hold
two seeds of contrary natures as you charge us, for as the father, so are his
children partakers of the covenant, and both are a holy seed and children of
God in respect thereof, though the father profess his faith and the child
cannot, in respect of age. the father can reason, so cannot his infant, yet
both of them are of the same nature, and reasonable creatures. And be it that
some of the children whose parents profess the faith are not elected, so may
it be also that the father that confesses his faith is not elected, but this
belongs not to us: we are to hold them as children of the covenant as the word
teaches. ^. 8. 11.


Concerning, Heb. 8. 11. all shall know me, etc. it must be understood of all
that are capable of knowledge: God promised a more singular grace of
illumination under the gospel of those things which the Church had more
obsurely before Christ's coming: so does he promise remission of sins, whereof
children are partakers, and shall be of this heavenly knowledge also, as by years
they shall be able to learn, the want whereof does no more hinder them from
being partakers of Gods promise in Christ, then the want of knowledge, hinders
an infant to be heir to his fathers inheritance.

But if this be an argument of force against the baptising of infants, because
the Lord says, I will put my laws in their hearts: then will this be as
forceable against them that are of years that they need not be taught, because
the same Lord says, they shall not teach every man his neighbor, etc. and so
teaching shall be overthrowen also. The true sense is to be sought after, ^ not
thus to pervert scriptures a^s you do to your own destruction.

Touching that of Ioh. 6. 45. they shall be al taught of God, it must be
understood Ioh. ^
of al, as they are capable of instruction, the promise is made to the church
Esa. 54. 13. and so to children, as also that in Hebr. 8, 11. and shall be
fulfilled to every one, as they shall be able to understand.

Next upon my speeches affirming, that of John it is not said that he refused
to baptize infants. you say, that John his preaching was such as peremptorily
excluded infants, for it was the baptism of repentance etc.

John's preaching of repentance, is the preaching of the Gospel which excludes
not children: your reason is not good, for baptism of repentance respects the
time to come, and not only sins past, and byndeth the baptized to continual
mortification. And both John and Christ* preached to the Jews which Act. 2. ^
and 3. 25
were of the covenant, and therefore called them to repentance and taught them
to believe that Christ was come, whom they looked for.

For being not regenerate etc. yet they could not enter into the kingdom of
God. Joh. 3. 5.

Christ in John 3. 5. speaks of true members in his sight: we are to hold the
professors with their seed to be regenerate, because they are of the covenant,
until the contrary appear by their deeds.

And here it would be considered unto whom Christ and John spoke, unto the
Jews etc. and yet he said repent and believe. Now if the Jews had been truly
regenerate in their communion, John needed not to have required such conditions
of them, but in few words might have said, come you faithful and al your
infants and be baptized.

1. John spoke to them that were of years and had sinned, and therefore
repentance was necessarily required, not so of Infants that have not committed
actual sin. 2. The preaching of the Gospel belongs to the regenerate, I mean
the preaching of repentance and faith, seeing we are but regenerate in part,
and "daily sin. The primitive churches I hope *Mat. 6, 1^
you w^ll grant were regenerate in their communion (I use your terms) and yet
to them was preached Rev. 2. 5. 16. 21. and 3. 3. 20.
repentance. Ergo your reason fayles you.

3. The members of al true churches whether under the old or new Testament are
holy, in regard of Gods covenant, and so we are to walk toward them: but
that every particular person is truly regenerate, is not our faith; because in
visible Churches Joh. 2. 19
there may be hypocrites, and man often fails on his part * and breaks of.
Notwithstanding, charity binds ^om. 11. 20. 1 Cor. 13.
us to hope the best, until the contrary appear.

Lastly where you say* That the Jews were not faithful in their communion
because John says the Lord will purge his store, and Christ says, they are of
your father the Divil.

1. This may fall out to any true Church to have unfaythfull members that may
pollute their communion, see the Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. 4. 5: 14. 15. 20.
21. and 3. 1. 2. 16. and of Galatia. Gal. 3. 1. but what is this to the purpose
that the Jews became unfaithful? (but by the way remember that they ought to
have been faithful, which you deny to that Church) did not Gods covenant stand
still in force to the faithful and their seed? Romans 9. 6. 8. 15. and 11, 1. 2-5.

2. Christ speaks to such of the Jews as by their works did show themselves
to be of the Divil, he intends not to teach, that this was the constitution
and state of the whole Church under the old Testament: as much as Christ said to
these Jews may be said to us under the Gospel, as of those Antichristians,
whereof John speaks: 1. John 2. 19. and therefore all that you have said,
proves nothing for the question in hand.

Again to prove the Disciples to be baptized, you cite Ioh. 4. 1. and 1. 35.
40. I answer, in the latter place is no mention of baptism and in the former,
it is said that Jesus baptized more disciples then John, which in verse, 2. is
explaned, that he did not baptize, but his disciples, showing that Christ
baptized disciples by the hands of his disciples: So I think they were baptized
of John as Christ was, but I will not contend there about. And for that you
answer concerning the Eunuch, that some mention should have been made either of
Philip or of the Eunuch towching his children.

It is nothing that you say, for what occasion was there to speak of his
children? And it is for you to prove that the Eunuch had children, seeing he was
one (as it is like) that was made chaste by man: Mat. 19. 12. and the rather
because in regard of his honor and authority he was called Cheiffe governor
as also in respect of his country, an Ethiopian: Act. 8. 27. see Esa. 56. 3. 4.
5. Now to your second reason.


The 2. reason against baptising of infants answered.
R. Clifton. But having thus discovered the weakness of this first reason let us
come to the next which is this:

Reason, 2.

Because Christ commands to make Disciples by teaching them and then to
baptize them. Mat. 28. 19. Ioh. 4. 1. But infants can not by doctrine become
Christ's disciples, and so can not by the rule of Christ be baptized.

Answer.

1. The Apostles were indede commanded to make Disciples and to call unto the
faith and fellowship of the Gospel not only the Jews, but the Gentiles
throughout the world and gave them power to preach the Gospel, which before had
been preached to Abraham: Gal. 3. 8. And to baptize all that did receive it.
And this we grant that faith must go before baptism, in all such as are to be
made Disciples and brought into the covenant of God. So went faith before
circumcision: Abraham first believed and after was circumcised. And likewise
must al they which with Abraham enter into Gods covenant, first believe and
then be baptized, as the Eunuch, Act. 8. 37. Lydia Act. 16. 15. and the Keeper
of the prison, verse. 33. but when such have receved the faith, then are their
infants and household capable also of baptism, as Abraham's family was of
circumcision, he believed the promises Genesis 17. and therefore it is written
that when God opened the heart of Lidia that she did attend to the word that
Paul preached and beleved; not only she herself, but all her household were
baptized, and yet is there no mention of the faith of any of them, save of
Lidias only. And so the Keeper believing, all that appertayned unto him were
baptized. And this is proportionable to the example of Abraham, whose faith we
find sufficient to interest all his in the covenant, and make them capable of
the seal.

2. Christ takes the same course in giving out his commission to his
Disciples, Mat. 28. 19. to bring the Gentiles into Gods covenant, that the
Lord took with Abraham for making his covenant with him that he should be the
father of many nations etc. he did not first command him to be circumcised, but
preached to him the Gospel or covenant, and he believing was circumcised and
his household: So here is a commandment, first for the publishing of the Gospel
to them that were not in Christ: and for baptising such as believed with their
families (for it is included in this commandment, else had not the Apostle
baptized the families of Lidia and of the Keeper, as before is observed.) And it
is well to be minded that there is no mention made of the faith of any in the
family of Lidia, save of Lidias only, for it is not said all in the house
that believed were baptized, which had been necessary if this commandment of
Christ should be expounded after the mind of the Anabaptists.

3. If children shall be excluded from baptism because they can not be made
Disciples by teaching and so believe, then by as good reason may they be
excluded from salvation, for he that says he that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, says also, he that believes not, shall be damned Mar. 16. 16. if
therefore want of faith be sufficient to exclude infants from baptism, then
likewise the want of faith is sufficient to exclude them from salvation. If the
former be held to be the meaning of Christ, then must also the latter be
granted, a thought whereof is to be abhord.

Lastly, general rules must be taken with their sense and meaning. It is a
general rule given by the Apostle. 2 These. 3 10. that if any would not work,
he should not eat. Yet if any should gather from hence, that the impotent and
infants should not eat, because they do not work, this were to offer violence,
and to wrest the Apostles doctrine: So Christ giving a general rule for the
making of Disciples and baptising them: now to deprive the infants of believing
parents of baptism, because they cannot receive instruction (which is intended
only of them that are capable thereof) is to diminish the commandment of
Christ: alike as he that should say, infants can not believe, and therefore
cannot be saved. Again, it can never be the true meaning of a scripture, when
it is so expounded, that the exposition contradicts other scriptures, or any
sound conclusion gathered out of the Scriptures, as this exposition of the
Anabaptists does upon this place of Mat. 28. 19. as my former reasons for the
baptising of infants, do plainly manifest.


Mr Smyth. Next follows, your answer to my 2. Reason, which reason of mine is
framed thus: They that can not by teaching be made Christ's disciples ought not
to be baptized. Infants by teaching can not be made disciples: Ergo, etc.

Your answer to this Argument of mine, consists in 4. particulars, etc. to
the first particular of your answer, I say that you err mistaking the
Scripture, for Abraha^s faith did not go before his circumcision as a
necessary antecedent to establish him a member of the Church of the old
Testament but as a necessary president, example type or pattern of
iust^fication. And circumcision in Abraham was not a seal of his justification
or of the everlasting covenant of God etc.


R. Clifton I answer 1. to the former proposition of your argument that it is
false, for infants of believers may and ought to be baptized, though they can
not by teaching be made disciples. 2. to that you answer to my first
particular, thus I reply; That of Abraham and his circumcision, and of the
Church of the old Testament I have spoken before: this now I will add further,
that Abraham was an Josh. 2^ 3.
idolater when the Lord took him from beyond the flood and brought him into the
Land of Canaan, and that it was the great mercy of God that made him a member
of the Church. As for his faith it was not only a president or example to
others, but was also necessary for him self, as the scripture teaches, he
believed the Lord and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. And being thus
justified, he afterward received circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of
faith, by which he and his seed had sealed unto them this solemn covenant of
the Lord, to become his peculiar people and to have him to be their God, which
at that time the Lord made with him, and so became the members of the Church of
the new Testament being rightly understood.

And where you say, that Circumcision was not a seal of Abraham's justification,
etc. you give the holy Ghost the lie, which testifies the contrary, Romans 4.
11. As for your reason, that he was sealed by the spirit long before, it is
nothing to the purpose, for the spirit was no external seal, as circumcision
was. The spirit seals inwardly, and is proper only to the elect; yea to all
Gods people in Babylon, and so is no visible sign of of Gods promises given to
the Church visible, whereof our dispute is.

And here remember by the way, that Abraham before he was circumcised had the
seal of the spirit, and so was under the new Testament, as also others had.
Esa. 63. 11. Psa. 51. 11. Hebr. 11. 4, - 39. that being the pledge and earnest
of the sowles of all the faithful in all ages of the love of God in Christ.

But Abraham's justification in uncircumcision was a type of the justification
of the Gentiles who are uncircumcised. And Abraham's circumcision after his
justification sealed him up to be the father of all the believers circumcised.

That Abraham's justification was an example to all that should be justified both
of the Jews and Gentiles, I grant, viz. that as he was justified by faith so
should al others that believe be likewise justified. But as concerning Abraham's
circumcision that it should seal him up to be the father Romans 4. 11 ^. 13.
of al believers circumcised: the Apostle says thus. * Abraham received the
sign of circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had when
he was uncircumcised etc. that he should be the father of all that believe not
being circumcised etc. and the father of circumcision etc. In which words I
observe, 1. that circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, yea of
Abraham's. 2, that Abraham was made the father of the uncircumcised believing.
And the father of all the circumcised, his posterity the Israelites, and so was
father of both sorts of people, and of the parents and children. 3. In calling
Abraham father of the circumcised and uncircumcised, he means Mat. 15. ^.
Act. 25. Romans ^, 4, 5.
of his spiritual fatherhood, in regard of the "covenant. 4. He is called the
father of circumcision, not only of believers circumcised, (as you say,) but
of their infants also, seeing they were circumcised: and in this you deceive
your hearers, by persuading them that Abraham was the father only of believers
circumcised, and not of their seed, whereas Paul says, he was father of the
circumcision.

And so circumcision had a triple use; one general, two special ^. Circumcision
sealed up Abraham's form of justification to be a pattern of all the believers
in uncircumcision etc. 2. Circumcision sealed up Abraham's form of
justification to be a pattern to al believers in circumcision etc. The general
use of Abraham's circum^cumcision was common with him to Ismael, and all the
persons of his family, and all the carnal Israelites, viz. to seal him up to
the old Testament, and to the observation of the whole law, etc.

You labor by your new devised distinctions to obscure the truth and to shut
out of the covenant of grace the infants of the faithful, otherwise ^e affirm
that both believing Jews and Gentiles are justified and Hab. 2. 4 Gal. 2. 20.
live by their faith, and that the one and the other have but Rom-4. and 3. 24.
2
one way of justification, as they have but one Christ, and one covenant of
salvation. And as circumcision was a seal hereof to Abraham, so was it given to
have the same use to all that were circumcised, viz. to seal up unto them the
everlasting covenant. And this did circumcision even to their infants whom we
are to account as the justified of God by Romans 3. 2^
his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,

Concerning that general use of circumcision (as you term it) to be common
with Abraham and to Ismael, and to all the persons of his family, etc. is true,
but the use viz. to seal him up to the old Testament, and to the observation of
the whole law etc. you must prove, (for God had not then given the law or old
Testament) It was the covenant in Christ that was sealed by circumcision, and
not the law or covenant of works. And whereas it was the Apostles purpose to
show that Romans 4^ etc.
Abraham was not justified by works, he has not proved it, but confirmed it by
this your distinction of circumcision, if Abraham received it to seal him up to
the old Testament, and to the observation of the law.

Now for the place of Romans 4. 11. which I am assured you will ground your
assertion upon, I say it is both falsely translated and expounded: for (tes en
acr^bustia) is usually translated, which Abraham had when he was uncircumcised,
and this I say is a false translation: for this is the true translation, viz.
which (is or was or shall be) in the uncircumcision, meaning that circumcision
upon Abraham etc. was a seal of justification to all the uncircumcision that
believe, and the end of his circumcision is the fatherhood of the faithful.

Here you pick a quarrel against the translation before it was alleged, and
so it pleases you to set down an other with your own exposition, to this
scripture. Romans 4. 11. and by your gloss corrupts the text. You (...) 4. 11.
fault the Translator for saying ( which he had etc.) and you put in ( which is
or was or shall be,) The text is, ( which in the uncircumcision), the verb
being omitted. Now I ask you what warrant you have more for your addition then
the Translator had for his? the scope of the Apostles words makes it plain,
that the Translator saw his meaning better then you do. For Paul speaks of
Abraham's justification by faith. Romans 4. 3. - 11. asks how faith was imputed
unto him, when he was circumcised or uncircumcised ver. 10. answers, when he
was uncircumcised. Then preventing a double objection that might be made thus.
1. If Abraham received the righteousn^s of faith when he was uncircumcised,
then his example seems to belong to them that are uncircumcised. No (says the
Apostle) for he received circumcision. 2. It might be objected, yet it seems
that he received circumcision in vayn, seeing he had received the righteousness
of faith before: no (says Paul) for he received it as a seal for the
confirmation of his faith which he had in his uncircumcision. Then he
expresses the cause both of Abraham's justification by faith, when he was
uncircumcised, and also that being justified by faith he received circumcision,
viz. that he might be the father of all that believe being uncircumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also, And the father of circumcision,
not unto them only which are of the circumcision, but also unto them that walk
in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham: etc. this is the Apostles
meaning.

Now whereas you affirm, that circumcision upon Abraham was a seal of
justification to all the uncircumcised that believe, I desire this may be proved
according as you mean. For the Apostle says it not, but thus, he received the
sign of circumcision the seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had:
for how could Abraham's circumcision that was applied to his particular person
seal up justification to us and not to himself? seeing a seal is a particular
applying of the covenant to the party that is partaker thereof. By this your
exposition, you make Abraham's circumcision to differ from the circumcision of
his seed, of which difference, the Lord spoke not a word in the institution
thereof, nor in any other place. Yet you say, the righteousness of faith is not
sealed up to Abraham's particular person, but to the uncircumcised that believe.
Which doctrine is very strange, that Abraham's circumcision shall seal that to
others and those uncircumcised, and not to himself being circumcised, you must
therefore bring better proof hereof, else your confident affirmation will be
accepted as the facing out of an error. As for the common acceptatio^ and
translation of Romans 4. 11. which you say, is the mother of this heresy, it is
confirmed in these words: but unto them also that walk in the stepps of the
faith of our father Abraham when he was uncircumcised; which makes it plain,
that the Apostle understood by the righteousness of faith, Abraham's righteousness
which he by faith apprehended, and which was sealed up unto him by circumcision.

Again, all the persons of Abraham's family were not circumcised, because of
Abraham's faith, but the males only, the males being assumed as types for to
teach them figuratively the male Christ.

So many of Abraham's family were circumcised as the Lord commanded: to the
women it was not enjoined, and though Christ was typed out in the circumcision
of the male, yet as it was a sacrament, it sealed unto them the righteousness of
faith, and therefore in Genes. 17. 10. it is called the covenant, because it
was a sign thereof, sealing unto them remission of sins and regeneration by
faith in Christ to come.

And the femal^s were uncircumcised etc. to signify that those that had not
the male Christ in them, were not fit to be members of the Church of the new
Testamentment.

1. The females were not accounted as uncircumcised, seeing they were
comprehended under the males, and so distinguished from the uncircumcised
Gentiles Genes. 34. 14. Deuteronomy. 7, 3. Esa. 3, 16. 2, I confess that such as are
not in Christ, are no fit members of the church, but this seems not the reason
why women were not partakers of this sacrament, but rather to teach that
salvation should come by the male: but this alegorising proves nothing.

Further you say, as it was with Abraham and his family in Circumcision, so
was it with Lidia etc. it is not so, I show the difference in diverse
particulers. 1, They of Abraham's family were circumcised upon particular
precept, etc. 2. They that ^ere males only were circumcised etc. 3. They that
were circumcised of Abraham's family were all the males being of years though
never so lewd etc. 4. As faith did not entitle the female to circumcision, and
as infidelity did not deprive the male of circumcision so faith did entitle
the female to baptism in the family of the Gaylor and ^f Lidia. etc.

To these pretended differences I answer, 1. that the precept of sealing the
covenant to Abraham is not reapealed, (only the ceremony is changed) and that
Christ has given * a commandment for the administering (...). 28.
of the sign as the preaching of the covenant to all nations, and by virtue
hereof were the families of the Gaylor and Lydia baptized, and so it was with
Lydia and her family, as it was with Abraham and his household, else was she not
the daughter of Abra. entering into Gods covenant, she and hers, as Abraham and
his entered in and seeing the holy Ghost says that the housholdes were baptized
without limitation, it belongs to you to prove, that the children in these
families were exempted, or else that children are not of the family, or else we
may not restreyne the Apostles words contrary to the tenure of the first giving
of the covenant which was sealed to young and old. For your first difference, I
deny that commandment to be a particular precept to Abraham and his house
alone, it was also to all believers of the Gentiles and their children, and so
was it a general precept to the whole Church for the sealing of the covenant,
(though circumcision was proper to the former Church, as baptism is to the
church of the new testament) and so there needed no particular precept for
baptising of infants, they being comprehended under the general. For the 2.
difference, that the ^males only were to be circumcised. I answer, this was
according to the Lords dispensation, then to set his sign on the males, now on
both sexes, but neither then nor now to restrain it from infants. Concerning
your 3. difference, I ask you, where the scripture says that any wicked
persons were circumcised in Abraham's family? Dare you condemn that house
which the Lord does justify? see Genesis 18. 19. where the Lord says, I know
that he will command his sons and his household after him that they keep the
way of the Lord, etc. and that infants being males, in Abraham's house were
circumcised you can not deny, for the commandment is that every man child be
circumcised, and Abraham did so, Genesis 17. 12 23. And therefore you must prove
that the children in Lydiaes and the Gaylors families were not baptized, else
you show no difference. For your 4. difference, it stands upon an unequal
comparison, and touches not the thing in question, you might know that faith,
could not entitle the females to circumcision, when they had no commandment
for it. In the Gaylors and Lydias families the women were capable of the seal
by the ordinance of God. Again, concerning the males, infidelity might and
did hinder from circumcision, as it did the Gentiles which received not the
faith: and so infidelity excludes from baptism both males and females. As for
infants they can not be said to be infidels or unbelievers for they are
partakers of the promise, which is the ground of faith, else Rev. 2^
were they under condemnation.

To the second particular of my answer, you reply thus.

I answer, that in this particular there are differences betwixt the one act
of Abraham, and the other of Lydia and the Gaylor according to the commission
of Christ, Mat. 28. 19. 1. Abraham and all his family by the Lords
commandment came under the covenant of the old Testament actually, and the
males only were circumcised: but Christ does not command all persons of a
family in the new testament to be baptized, but only such as are made
disciples. 2. the Gospel was only preached to Abraham's own person, but in the
Gaylors case Paul preached to all that were in his house, etc. 3. The gospel
was not preached to Abraham thereby to prepare him to circumcision, as if
thereby it should follow, that circumcision was a seal of the Gospel, for it is
not so, etc. but Christ in the new testament commands the gospel to be
preached to every parricular person, that is to be admitted into the Church by
baptism, and so Paul did to the Gaylors family.

To your first difference I answer as formerly I have done, that Abraham and
his family came not under the old testament or covenant of works, seeing it was
not made with him but with Israel afterward by the Ministry of Moses. 2. Your
comparison should thus be propounded: as Abraham and all his family, came under
the covenant of God: so likewise do the faithful of the Gentiles and their
families: and therefore as Abraham and his family were circumcised: so ought
the faithful and their families to be baptized, thus holds the comparison, and
thus it is against you: and you do but beg the question, in saying, that Christ
commands not all the persons of of a family in the new Testament to be
baptized: for this is defended against you; that Christ's commandment of
baptising, extends to the infants of the believers as well as to themselves.

To your 2. difference I answer, that the Gospel which was by the Lord preached
to Abraham, was by Genesis 11. 1^ 19. and 12. 1-5. Gal. 8.
him preached to his family. To your third difference I answer, that the
gospel was preached to Abr: to be the means and ground of his faith, and
circumcision was given to him to be a seal of the righteousness of faith, and
therefore a seal of the Gospel which was preached unto him, and so the Gospel
was preached to Lydia and the Gaylor, and baptism given for the same use as
circumcision was to Abraham. And where you say, Christ commands the gospel to
be preached to every particular person that is to be admitted into the Church
by baptism, and so Paul did to the Gaylors family. Why said you not (according
to the point in hand) And so Paul did ^^ Lydias family, and the Gaylors? Did
your self perceave that you could not show it so in Lydias family? Did you
therefore pass by that example? Act. 16. 14. 15. Let the reader well observe
these things and this dealing of yours. And to this your standing so strictly,
that the gospel or covenant was preached^^ every creature. I answer, that as it
was preached to such as were received into the Christian Church so was it to
Abraham and all the Gentiles, which entered into the old Church: and therefore
in this is no difference.

To my 3. exception thus you answer: Christ speaks only of such as to whom
the gospel may be preached that are of a docible age and nature.

I grant that Christ intends by his commandment that they should be
taught, that are of a docible age, but with all intends it so to be preached
to them, as it was before to Abraham, which was not to exclude their infants
from the covenant or seal thereof. To this objection, how infants not being in
the covenant can be saved, you answer: Either they are all saved though they
can not come to faith by hearing, or that they are one of the Lords secrets.

Can you speak of faith, to say they are all saved and not within the covenant
of grace? but it is not your faith, for you hold it doubtingly, and being
driven to a non plus, you answer as the Priests and Elders did to Christ
concerning John's baptism, who said, we can not tell whether it be from heaven
or of men: and so you make the state of children, one of Gods secrets, but the
contrary I have before proved. And here you might see (if your erroneous
opinion had not blinded your eyes,) that you cannot beleev that any infants
shall be saved, seeing by your doctrine you have no word to ground your faith upon
for their salvation.

To the last particular of my answer, you reply, saying:

First, you confess that this place of Mat. 28. 19. is not uttered of Christ
in respect of infants that they should be taught, and then I say, he never
intended by this place that they should be baptized, etc.

I will confess as much as I have spoken: In this scripture: Mat. 28. 19.
Christ commanded to make disciples and to baptize them, the former I said,
Christ intended to such as were unconverted, but yet so, as they receiving the
gospel, their infants came also under the covenant: the latter, I did, and still
do affirm to be understood of the believers and their seed, and so I have not
contradicted my self, as you untruly speak.

Next I say, that general rules shall be expounded with their senses, and as
impotent persons and infants shall eat, though they can not work: so infants
shall be saved, though they cannot be baptized, seeing they cannot by teaching
be made Disciples etc.

Now you affirm infants shall be saved, a little before you doubted whether it
were not a secret, thus unstable men are when they err from the truth. But if
infants can be saved as now you affirm, then tell me whether you hold them to
be saved in the covenant or out of the covenant? if within, you cross your
self, and if without, show me what warrant out of the word you have so to
believe? certainly Act. 4. ^
there is no salvation out of Christ. And if children can be saved by the
covenant, why is the sign thereof denied them? You separate those things that
Christ has joined together, (and yet you charge me therewith) and so you
pronounce a woto your self in saying, woe be to them that so do without
repentance, seeing you deny baptism to infants, that are the children of the
covenant which joins the parents and the children together.

Your conclusion of this argument, is shut up with some bitter and reproachful
speeches: saying: You blaspheme the truth with your title of Anabaptistry. You
are driven to most miserable shifts for your Paedobaptistrye, which you see can
not stand without scraping together all the wrestings and pervertings of the
Scriptures.

These speeches and diverse others of like sort, which you use in your writings,
take and apply to your self, for the mainteyning of your heresy against
Paedobaptistrie; also they serve to testify the corruption of your heart, and
therefore I will answer them with silence, praying the Lord to give you a sight
of his truth and a better heart.


The 3. Reason against baptising of infants, answered.
R. Clifton Now follows the 3. reason.

3. Reason.

3. Because if infants be baptized, the carnal seed is baptized and so, the
seal of the covenant is administered to them unto whom the covenant
appertayneeth not. Romans 9. 8. which is a profanation.

Answer.

1. This reason seems to imply, that the seed of the faithful, is part carnal
and part spiritual, (for I can not imagine that the author holds all the seed
of the faithful to be carnal, and that the covenant appertains not to any of
them, seeing so to affirm co^tradicts, Act. 2. 39.) And therefore because the
spiritual seed is not discerned until it manifest it self by outward
profession, therefore may not be baptized, least in baptising them, the seal
should be set also upon the carnal seed unto whom belongs not the covenant. To
affirm this, first is to deny that which is done to the seed to whom the
promise belongs for the wicked sake, and so to iniure them. 2. this reason also
serves as well against the circu^cisio^ of the infa^ts of the Israelites;
seeing at 8. days of age, they could not be discerned, whether they were of the
carnal or spiritual seed, and so the seal of the covenant be administered to
them to who^ the covenant did not belong: But as then the not discerning
hereof, did nothing hinder circumcision to be administered to all the infa^ts of
the Israelites; no more now, can the not knowing of the spiritual seed from the
carnal, hinder baptism.

2. Touching the seed of the faithful thus I conceive thereof, that it is
carnal and spiritual in diverse respects; carnal, as they naturally descend of
their parents: so are they all alike borne in sin Psa. 51. 5. Spiritual, in
respect of the covenant wherein they are comprehended with their parents. Genesis
17. 7. Act. 2. 39. in which regard also, all the children of the faithful, are
said to be holy, 1. Cor. 7. 14. And thus considered, I deny the children of the
faithful to be carnal seed, and do affirm that to such belonges the covenant
and the seal thereof. Act. 2. 39. And though some of them in the sight of God
be known for none of his, yet to us it suffices for the administration of
baptism, that they be the seed of the faithful. And therefore as the Israelites
circumcised al there children (though some of them proved to be carnal
afterward, as Ismael, Esau etc.) so are we to baptize al our infants leaving
the secreet things to God. Deuteronomy: 29. 29.

3. If this be sufficient to clear us from the profaning of the Sacrament if
we baptize them that make confession of their faith, because they so do, though
they be not the children of God: as S. Magus. Act. 8. 13. then is it not simply
a profaning of baptism to administer it to the^ to who^ belongs not the
covenant, but to do it to them which plainly appear to us to be without.
Therefore if no man dare take upon him to say this or that infant is carnal
and without the covenant of grace, it shall be no profanation of the sacrament,
if it be administered unto such, seeing we ought to hold the seed of the
faithful, holy. 1. Cor. 7. 14. If it be objected (as some have done to me)
that all the seed of the faithful are carnal and so to be held until they
believe and make confession of their faith. I Answer, 1. If they take carnal,
as it is opposed to the children of the promise: Romans 9. 8. 13. these two seeds
are made so opposite by the Apostle as that the one can never be the other. 2.
If by carnal they mean nothing else but that natural corruption wherein we are
borne, that hinders infants no more from baptism, then it does those that can
give an account of their faith: seeing natural corruption remains still in the
purest professor. Romans 7. 23.

And if it be replied, that their natural corruption is not imputed to them
that believe: no more (say I) is it to infants, else Christ dyed not for the^,
neither could they be saved dying whyst they be young.

Lastly, if Abraham knowing that God would establish his covenant to Isaac, Gen
17. 19. yet circumcised Ismael verse. 25. and Isaac knowing that God had chosen
his younger son: Genesis 25. 23. with 27. 33. yet circumcised Esau as well as Jacob,
and in so doing neither of them profaned the sacrament: muchles is baptism
profaned when it is administered to the seed of the faithful to whom belongs
the promise. Act. 2. 39. and thus having showed the weakness of your reasons
against baptising of infants, let us come to the 2. position.


M. Smyth. In the next place follows your answer to my third Argument, which
may be framed into this form^ ^eyther do ^ey the ^rks of the ^ivil: and
^erefore if ^ey be not Abraham's ^nes for de ^ct of the ^e, they ar^ ^ot the
Di^els because ^hey do not ^^e other.


The carnal seed is not to be baptized: for the covenant parteyneth not to
them.

Infants are the carnal seed. Romans 9. 8. Ergo Infants are not to be baptized.

To this Argument you make answer in 4. particulars, 1, You expound my meaning,
but I can expound mine own words best, and therefore by the carnal seed I
understand children borne by carnal generation what soever though they
afterward believe, for they are carnal visible to me, whosoever they be that do
not show then faith by their works, that do not the works of Abraham. Romans 7.
14. 1 Cor. 3. 1. 2. Romans 9. 8. and 4, 23. Heb. 7. 16.


R. Clyfton. In the last part of your reply to my answer to your former reason,
you said, that infants shall be saved, and now they are al carnal visibly unto
you: can you say that they that are carnal to you, shall be saved? If the word
teach you that they are carnal, how can you call them spiritual? Your reason
seems to be grounded upon Iam. 2. 18. John. 8. 39. in both which scriptures,
application is made to them that, are of years and capable of instruction, and
you applying them to infantes do pervert the meaning thereof and purpose of the
holy Ghost, who intends to discover the hypocrisy of vain professors, and
to show who are true sons of God, viz. such as by a godly conversation
declare their faith to be unfeighned. I deny that infants are carnal, because
they show not their faith by their works. Those whom the scripture so calls,
are they that ^om. 8. ^. 8.
walk after the flesh and do the deeds thereof, which Infants nether do, nor
can do, wanting actual power of doing good or evil.

The former scripture that you allege to prove infants carnal, is Romans 7. 14.
The Apostle says of himself, I am carnal, and so you conclude ^^m. 7. 14.
thence that all that naturally descended of Abraham, and so of the faithful
are carnal, and so to be reputed of us, and cons^quently without the covenant.
Paul when he thus said of himself, I am carnal, was regenerate. And if you call
children carnal, in that sense, it hinders not but they may be spiritual seed
as he was. The Apostle calls himself carnal, in respect of his natural
corruption and carnal infirmities wherewith he was compassed: neither was he
wholly carnal, but in part Romans 7.
spiritual. And here is to be noted that carnal, is opposed to spiritual, in
one and the same person, and is found to be in all that profess faith and are
regenerate, and yet does it not debar them either of the covenant or of
baptism.

A like Answer may be given concerning, 1 Cor. 3. 1. 2. The Corinthians 1 Cor.
3^
are called carnal, because of their infirmities and carnal works, as enrying,
strife etc. verse 3. etc. Infants cannot in this sense be called carnal, and
therefore this scripture also is unfitly applied unto them. And here it is to
be noted, that a people which were a true church and within the covenant and
baptized, are called carnal, whereby we may see how impertinently this
scripture is alleged.

You say also, that you call children carnal as in opposition to the spiritual
seed, that one seed of Abraham. Gal. 3. 16.

I have said that carnal, as the Apostle opposes yt to spiritual, is our
corrupt nature that * lusts against the spirit, and is found in the
faithful. Gal. 5. 17 Romans 7. 2
Now to oppose the infants of believers to spiritual seed is no opposition: for
such infants in regard of the covenant are spiritual, though by nature they are
carnal.

Concerning, Romans 9, 8. see page 63. The Apostle proving God to be Romans 9, 8
faithful, shows withal, that though the promise was made indefinitely to all the Israelites, yet all that were carnally begotten of Israel, were not true
Israelites, save only such as were the children of the promise, verse 7. - 9.
but he intends not to oppose all the seed of Abraham naturally begotten, to
the children of the promise; for then should Isaac be opposed against himself,
for he was both the natural seed of Abraham, and a child of the promise: but
this he teaches, that although many be reputed the sonns of God in regard of
the promise which is made indefinitely to all the seed of Abraham, and to all that are called to be members of the visible church; yet al of those in the
account of God, are not children of the promise, seeing many hypocrites are
found to be in the outward visibilitie of the Church, to whom the Lord shall
say, Luke 13. 25. 27.
I know you not whence ye are, etc.

Touching Gal. 4. 23. it has been handled before page 14. Thus I will here
answer to your objection out of it. viz. that Paul does not intend Gal. 3. 2^
to make an opposition between the natural seed of Abraham and the heirs of
promise: but opposes against the false doctrine of such as urges circumcision
and the works of the law to be necessary to justification: and after diverse
reasons against this error, he illustrateth his purpose by an allegory which
shadoweth forth two sorts of children borne of two Testaments as Ismael and
Isaac were of two mothers, the one sort that should seek after righteousness by
the law, but they were no better the^ Ismael, no heirs of the promise, but in
bondage under the law: The other, should seek after righteousness by Christ,
and these are of the covenant of grace; as Isaak was of the freewoman, which
are heirs and free indeed, and this appears to be the Apostles meaning by
that which follows in the Allegory; as also by verse. 21. And so it is to be
noted, that to be borne after the flesh, (typed out by Ismael,) is to be
without the covenant under the bondage of the law which was given in Sinai,
signifying that all such as seek for justification by the law, are as they that
take up their habitation in the wilderness, and never enter into the land of
promise. ^eb. 7. 16.


The next Scripture, is Heb. 7. 16. where the commandment is called carnal,
so children borne of their parents (say you) naturally are carnal, etc. see
this place expounded page 68. by carnal commandment the Apostle means that
law that commanded the ordinatio^ of the Priests under the old testament which
stood in frail and transitory things, as in Aarons consecration, etc. Also
this commandment or ordination of the Leviticall Priests may be called carnal
compared with the ordination of Christ, ^sa. 61. 1. (...) 45. 7.
(which was without all * external ceremonies) and not simply: for in other
respects it may be counted spiritual as all Gods ordinances are, whether under
the old or new testament, and so this scripture rightly understood, makes
nothing to your purpose. And towching children you should observe, that as it
is true, that naturally children are carnal: so is it true also, that the
children of the faithful borne under the covenant, are by grace, spiritual,
Genesis 17. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

The covenant made with Abraham in respect of Christ did not actually sease
upon any infant of the Jews in deed and in truth, and the place, Act. 2. 39.
does not prove that it did; for the place is to be understood of the offer of
Christ and the new testament to all the carnal Jews, and their children, etc.
and therefore I say, to baptize infants, is to baptize the carnal seed.

For this point, and for the exposition of this scriptur, see p. 19. where also
is answer to that which is here objected, for by this scripture it is plain
that the promise apperteyned to the Jews and their infants into which they and
their child^e^ had entered when God made his covenant with Abra: and his seed
for the^ were they in his loins. And upon this ground the Apostle exhorts the^
to be baptized: not saying, the promise is now offered, but thus, the promise is
to you, that is, made or given to you and your children, (as the Apostle
explayneth the same, Gal. 3, 16. 17. 18. and Act. 26. 6.) And to as many as the
Lord God should call; meaning to the Gentiles which should believe and to their
seed.

Therefore, I say, to baptize infants is to baptize the carnal seed, etc. To
this I have answered, that children of believers, though carnal by nature, yet
are they spiritual in regard of the covenant, and in this respect to hold them
the children of Abraham, though they can not show forth the fruits of faith,
which are required of the elder sort.

Why then, they are damned will you say? God forbid, do you cendemne all the men
that are not of our says: and yet they are nearer to condemnation in the
judgment of the scripture to you then infants: for Christ says, he that
believes not shall be condemned. etc.

It is well that you detest the conde^natio^ of infants: and if they be not
condemned then are they saved, and if they saved, then are they under the
covenant of grace in Jesus Christ. Towching others of years, according as the
scripture shows their estate to be unto us, so must we judge, but secret
things belong not unto us, the salvation or condemnation of this or that
particular person is a secret, nay we are not able certainly to determine
thereof amongst such as be external members of the Church, because many that
have not on their Man 11-1^
marriage garment, may thrust in with the guests, and the Man 1. etc.
five foolish virgins had lamps as well as the wise. But this is not the
question, we reason concerning the dispensation of Gods covenant in respect of
us, which we affirm according to the Genesis 17^ Act. 2. 3^
scripture to be given to the children as well as to the parents: And you deny
it; and therefore by your opinion in respect of us no hope can in deed be had
of the salvation of any infant: nay the infants of Turks and infidels will be in
as good estate as the children of believers: for if infants be without the
covenant (as you affirm) if we will speak according to the scripture, we must
hold the^ Ephesians. 2. ^
without Christ, and alianes from the common wealth of Israel, without hope and
without God in the world; and standing and dying in this estate, to be as Turks
and infidels dying in the state of condemnation.

But you not able to shift of this Arg. and loath to confess the truth, do say,
that the Scripture teaches nothing concerning their final estate, except it be
the salvation of them al.

If it teach the salvation of them al, then I hope it teaches that they are in
Christ, and within the covenant. Christ teaches that the kingdom of heaven is
of such. The final estate of many professors of the faith being of years, is a
secret to us, the scripture does not open unto us the particular election of
this or that man, but teaches with whom God has made his covenant, to esteem
them as of his covenant, until the contrary appear by their falling away.
Romans 11. 20. And thus having explayned your own meaning of your former
Argument, you proceed to examine my Answer, saying.

Now according to your exposition I should intend, because it is not discerned
which children are the spiritual seed, which the carnal, therefore both of them
must be deprived of baptism, least by giving baptism (which you falsely call
a seal) to al, it should be profaned to the carnal seed. Well suppose this were
my meaning, what then?

If this were your meaning, then my collection must follow: for my calling
baptism a seal, I have proved that which I affirm of baptism, p. 37. 38.

You except against this exposition two things, one that the spiritual seed
should be injured by denying baptism unto it, for the carnal seeds sake. And I
reply by giving baptism to al indifferently we should iniure baptism, it is
to be administered only upon them that confess their faith and sins and are
made disciples etc.

Your Answer stands in begging the question, I say it is no more an injury to
baptism to be indifferently administered to al them to whom the covenant is
indefinitely given, as it is to the seed of the faithful; then it was before
for circumcision, or is now, when hypocrites are baptized. For we can not be
said to profane the sacrament by administering it to them that appear to us to
be within the Lords covenant, as both hypocrites and infants, until they break
off.

An other thing you except is, that this reason should avail against
circumcision, seeing the males of eight days old could not be discerned to be
the spiritual seed. And I insist that it was not then needful, that then they
should be discerned to be the spiritual seed, for that carnal seal of that
carnal covenant, it was enough for investing of them with that carnal and
typical seal that they were the carnal and typical seed, and that they were
Israelites or proselyts etc.

Your answer stands upon a false ground, confuted before, I have proved page
12. 13. that circumcision is a holy seal of the covenant in Christ, and that
your carnal covenant is a devise of your own. And where you call the Isralites
the carnal and typical seed, I have answered and do again say, that though
they may be called carnal in respect of their natural generation, or in regard
of the infirmities hanging upon them, or some of them termed carnal, in respect
of their evil works: yet the body of the Israelites considered as they were a
body and children of the covenant, were a spiritual seed and holy; And it was
needful that they should be so, else had not Romans 9* 5. Psalm. ^ 16. - 21.
the holy things of God belonged unto them, or they pleased God in their
slanding.

And show me that the Lord required anything of any person to be circumcised,
but to be a male. But in the new Testament it is taught, 1. that Christ the
male must be in us. and 2. that there must be circumcision of the heart. and 3.
that we must attayn to and learn all that the schoolmaster of the old Testament
could teach us, before we can be baptized.

I answer, that the Lord required as much of them that were to be circumcised
as of them that are to be baptized, of the infants both of the Jews and
Christians, God requires only that they be the seed of the faithful: but for
such as were of years and without the church, as under the Gospel they are to
turn from sin and profess their faith in Jesus Christ, that require
baptism: so likewise before Christ, was the case of Abraham himself, and such
of the Gentiles as would be circumcised, were to Exo. 1^ 48. Este^ 17. Esra. ^
21. Ac^ 27.
renounce their hethenish and idolatrous worship, and to profess the true God
of Israel and his religion. In Ester it is said many became Jews, that is,
addicted themselves to the religion of the Jews, which is to celebrate or
confess the Lord, these were called Ac^
proselytes, which signifies a stranger coming and converted to their manner of
religion, as the Eunuch and such like. And it is not to be doubted, that the
Jews would ever admit into their communion, and to administer circumcision
unto a Gentile, that did not renounce his heathnishnes and profess their
faith: seeing Ex. 12*
one law was to them that were borne in the land, and to the stranger that
dwelled amongst them, and therefore as much required of them that were to join
to the Church of the old Testament, as is now of the^ that will join to the
Church of the new. And so I have showed you that more was required of the^ that
were circumcised, then to be a male: for every one must be a professor, or the
child of a professor: and so much is required concerning baptism and no more.
And to your particulers, I answer that these things were also required of the
Israelites. Concerning the two former; infants both have Chapter and were and are
circumcised in heart, in that they are partakers of the covenant of grace^ and
we are to hold them partakers of Christ's benefits. Mat. 19. 13. 14. For the
third point, that we must learn what the schoolmaster of the old Testament
does teach. It is for such as are of years, and was required of the
Israelites, and not of us only, as the writings of Moses and the Prophets do
show. And where you say, this must be done of al before they can be baptized,
it is your addition which you can never prove.

Moreover if you by old Testament, do mean the writings of Moses and the
Prophets then can not we learn all that they can teach us whylest we live Cor.
13. ^.
(unless you dream of perfection with the Familists) and so by your doctrine
shall not be baptized. But if by old Testament you mean Moses administration,
Heb. 8. 9. ^3. Gal. 3, 25.
it is * abrogated; and seeing "faith is come, we are not under that
schoolmaster to be taught by such legal types and ceremonies, as were the
Jews. And so your doctrine is false howsoever it be understood.

And whereas you wonder at me and at your self that we could not see so evident
a truth all this time: for mine own part I saw (I thank God) long since, and
still do see your evident truth, (as you call it) to be a manifest Act. 13. 10
error. And further I see that God has given you over to p^rvert the right
ways of the Lord, and to be the leader of others into heresy, and so for just
cause, known to himself, blinded your eyes, and hardened your heart. This is
that great comfortable state that now you stand in, God in his mercy deliver
you forth of it.

To the 2. particular of my Answer to your reason, you thus reply.

1. Your distinction is without warrant, and I deny that Infants of the
faithful* are to be considered in these two respects. And whereas you bring,
Genesis 17. 7 and 1 C^r. 7. 14. to prove the latter part of your distinction, I
have answered these two places already, showing your false exposition of them
etc.

And these two places of scripture I have likewise formerly proved to stand
with my exposition, where it will appear that this is but a calumniatio^ of
yours, and that my exception is not frivilou^. For first you will not deny that
the children of the faithful, are carnal in respect of their natural berth,
and then being proved within the covenant, in that regard they must ^ Cor. 7. 14
needs be spiritual, and as the Apostl^ calls them * holy.

To the third particular of my Answer you reply saying:

The sacrament of baptism is profaned when it is administered upon a wrong
subi^ct, as to give the Lords supper to an infant of two years old, so to
baptize an infant is ^^phanation, etc.

That to baptize an infant is a profanation of baptism, I deny, and by sundry
reasons I have proved the contrary, showing that infants are not a wrong
subject, but a right subject for baptism. As for the Lords supper, the
institution and use of it and the actions and duties required of them, that eat
and drink at that table show it to be otherwise for the not giving of it to
infants. But you say,

As profession of faith shall entitle any man to all the ordinances of the
Church, and f^rst to baptism. So absence of confession of faith shall debar
every one from all the ordinances of the church in communion. And afterward,
you say, Although I dare not say this or that infant is not under the election
of God, yet I dare say, that never an infant in the earth is actually seized of
the new Testament which is only attained by confession of sin and of faith,
etc. Mar. 1. 15 Ioh. 3. 3. Ephesians. 3. 17. etc.

To this I have answered before and have showed that profession of faith is
required of such as were never of the church, and that with them, their seed
enters in also: but that absence of confession shall debar every one from the
orrdinances of the church, can never be proved, seeing there is not a like
reason of persons without, and of infants borne in the church. Also, I have
showed that infants are actually seized of the new Testament according to the
^enure of the covenant made with Abraham and his seed, I mean so actually
seized, as we are to repute them children of the covenant. And here also, I
mind, that al infants to you stand in the state of condemnation, this is your
Gospel, contrary to Gen: 17. 7. Act. 2, 39. and 3, 25. Gal. 3. 8. Genesis 12. 3. 1
Cor. 7. 14.

Concerning the Scriptures, which you allege, I answer, first, that all Mar. ^
three places are applied to them of years. secondly, in Mar. 1. 15. the
Evangelist setts down in brief the sum of Christ's doctrine, the unfolding
thereof does reach to the faithful and their seed, as by his own action John.
3. ^
appears. Mat. 19. 13. 13. Mar, 10. 14. In Ioh. 3. 3. Christ speaks of
regeneration: without which none can enter into the kingdom of God and he
speaks to Nicodemus that was a member of the Jewish church, into which, as
also into the visible Churches under the new Testament, many did and may enter
into, with outward confession only, as did Simon Magus, though their hearts be
not regenerate. And therefore this scripture speaking of that grace of God
which is imvisible, is not fitly alleged for this purpose, where we are to
judge of members of the church, not as they stand so before God in his secret
counsel, but as they externally appear to us within Gods covenant, by their
confession, or otherwise.

That of Ephesians. 3, 17. is also spoken to them that were of years, who ^h. 3,
17.
being believers, they and theirs were Christ's, of whom is named the whol^
family in heaven and in earth. Esa. 3. 14. 15. and of this scripture also is
spoken before.

Though infants could hear and believe, it is nothing to me, except they can
show me their faith, I say therefore that al infants are carnal to me. Romans 9.
8.

If you be not carnal to your self also, it is well. But thus you confess that
you have no word of God that children can be saved. The scripture requires
confession, (as I have said) of persons grown to years which are to enter
into the Church, not of their Infants. It was required of the Gaylor himself
that he should believe, and the promise was that he and all Act. 16. ^1. ^^ck.
19, ^. 8. 9.
his house should be saved. And Zacheus receiving Christ, and professing his
repentance, Jesus said to him, * this day is salvation come to this house*
Note, he says not only salvation is come to him but to his house. And he adds
a reason thereof, forasmuch as he is also become the son of Abraham. And
therefore as want of confession in Zacheus Family, in Lidias, Stephanas etc.
hindered not salvation to come to their howses, no more shall it hinder any
other families of the faithful.

Touching that of Romans 9. 8. which you allege to prove that infants ^m. 9. 8.
are carnal, I have expounded before page 63. and have showed that it makes not
for your purpose. And where you tell me that I said, that every infant of
Abraham, and so of the faithful was borne spiritual as well as carnal, and that
here the Apostle is contrary to my aser^ion: Although being well understood it
may so be said, yet this was that I said: that I did thus conceive of the seed
of the faithful, that it is carnal and spiritual in diverse respects. And so I
say still, nether does this scripture contradict it: for those that the Apostle
calls children of the flesh, he means not thereby all the circumcised, but such
of them as became carnal by their works, as those in Ioh. 8. 44. and such as
for their unbeleif were rejected and "broken off from the olive tree, until
^o^. 11. 20
which time they are to be held the children of the covenant, so was Judas
accounted of, and by his fellow disciples to be one of them, although God in
his secret counsel know them for none of his. And so Paul does not deny the
natural sons of Abraham to be accounted his spiritual seed in respect of Gods
covenant, but that of Ioh. ^ 41. 37.
these so externally esteemed, there were of them carnal sons, manifesting
themselves in time through unbeleef to have been in show that they were not in
deed, as John speaks 1 Ioh. ^
of the hypocrites of his time. And thus these impossible contra^ictions as you
call them, are easily reconciled.

And where I said, that children of the flesh can never be the children of the
promise, in that sense as the Apostle opposes the one to the other* Romans ^, 8.
13. You answer, that all the children of the Jews were borne according to the
flesh, Gal. 4. 23, 24, 25. and so were carnal, and so are the children of the
faithful, and yet as many of the Jews were afterward regenerate, so many of
the infants of the faithful may prove children of the promise, but I confess
that Esau can never be Jacob, etc.

If you will thus understand, being borne according to the flesh, and so being
carnal, you speak not to the Apostles meaning. And Abraham Isaac and Iaacob and
all the faithful are so borne, as you intend, of which point I have spoken
before. And I have already answered to page 14. Gal. 4. 2^ 24. 25.
that place of Gal, 4. 23, - 25. that by that allegory is described two sorts
of children, whereof the one seeks by the works of the law to be justified,
the other by the covenant in Christ, seek after salvation through faith in him,
typed out by the two mothers and their two sons. Now take this scripture in
his true sense, and it can not be gathered from hence, that either all the
children of the Jews were thus borne after the flesh, and in this sense to be
called carnal as the Apostle means, nor yet that the children of the faithful
are thus to be held of us, to be carnal: For they seek not by works,
justification, and therefore makes not themselves children of the bondwoman, I
mean of the covenant of works, or of the law: for this falls ^ut by an action
of the parties themselves, that refuse the doctrine of free justification by
faith, and seek salvation by the law. And this is that the Apostle reproves the
Galathians for, because Gal. 3. 3^
after they had begun in the spirit, they would be made perfect by the flesh.

Carnal corruption does hinder infants from baptism, more then men of years,
because men of years make confession of their sins and their ^ayth, and so
declare their mortification and regeneration, but infants can not, or do not so
at al to us, and so with them we have nothing to do.

But the covenant of God has to do with them, and therefore we also, if we
will walk according to it. Also your comparison is not equ^l, for infants need
not to make such confession of their sins and faith, as men of years are to
do, seeing they are already to us within the covenant of God.

2. The Scripture gives nether precept not example to require an actual
confession of their faith of all that are baptized, except of such as are of
years and to be added to the Church: but examples of the contrary. ^ Cor. 1*
^. Act. 16. ^. 31. 33.
And therefore to make a general rule of such particulers: thereby to exclude
the seed of the faithful, is contrary to the meaning of the Scripture.

But where as I did affirm, that natural corruption is not imputed to infants
no more then to men believing, you answer, That I cannot defend that without
the opinion of universal redemption; And then if all infants of the faithful
being delivered from their natural corruption, may therefore be baptized, then
all infants partakers of the same benefit shall be baptized, even the infants of
the Turks.

As concerning that opinion of general redemption, I reject as an error: but as
touching the imputing of natural corruption to infants; thus I mean* that as
the children of the faithful are to us within Gods covenant, as well as their
parents, because of the promise made to the faithful and their seed: So of us
they are to be esteemed of, as pertakers of the promise, whereof * Heb. 10 17
the not imputing of sin is one. But whereas you would infer hereupon that
infants of the Turks partakers of the same benifit, may therefore be baptized
as well as the infants of believers, I deny that either they are partakers of
the same benyfite (I mean the covenant in Christ) or may be baptized, if their
parents come not to the faith; because they are not visibly known to us to be
of the covenant, as the infants of the faithful are. And the Church is not to
administer baptism but to those that are children of the covenant visibly
apparent. As for condemning or not condemning, I leave to God. That which I
speak of, is touching our question about the administration of baptism, that
it appertains only to members of the Church and to such as come out of the
world to be joined unto it. And seeing the infants of unbelievers to us appear
not to be of the kingdom of Christ, because their parents remain still in
infidelity, we cannot acknowledge them, nether have we any rule to admit them,
unless some believer make them his children by adoption, or the like. And we
refuse them as not belonging to the visible communion of the faithful as yet,
and there ^e rest, without further searching into Gods secreet counsel. And
thus I hope the scruple which you say remains is removed.

To the 4. particular of my answer, you reply: That the external scale of that
external covenant was perticulerly enjoined by God, and the knowledge of the
reprobation of Esau and Ismael did not hinder it. But now seeing we have ^o
express commandment for baptising of infants, but etc.

Circumcision the seal of the covenant of grace was Genesis 17. ^ 12. Mat. 2^. 19.
commanded to every member of the Church, and so is baptism now as before is
proved.

Concerning Ismael and Esau, that their parents had knowledge of their
^eprobation and yet did circumcise them. 1. I do not find that that secreete
was reveiled unto them.

2. Christ knew that Judas was reproved, yet eat he the passover with him.
The administration of the Sacraments is according to men's outward standing, and
not according to election: and therefore the parents ought to circumcise them
of their household, according as the Lord had commanded. And as Abraham did
know that God would establishe his covenant to Isaac; so he knew also, that it
should be in Christ that should descend of Gal. 3. 1^
Isaacks line and not of Ismaels, in whom not only Isaac and his posterity,
but all the Gal. 3. 8.
nations of the earth should be blessed: yea Ismael, if he believed, and so
many of his stock as should believe. And so the promise concerning Christ to
come was to be fulfilled in the seed of Isaac and not of Ismael or Esau. As
touching Ismaels and Esaus state, is before spoken of. And thus much concerning
this first Position. For where you say, we have no express commandment for
baptising of infants, and all that follows to the end of this question, is
answered before, yet I will note this here, that you end this point with a
notable untruth saying. That we have an express commandment and many
examples to the contrary of baptising of infants. For there is neither any
co^maund*ment to forbid it, nor any example to the contrary, against it, as I
have showed before.


OF THE SECOND POSITION concerning the rebaptising of Elder People.
(...) 2. That Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church
by baptism.

Answer.

AS the former Position denies the baptisig of infants: so does this
adnihilate that Baptism which we have received in the Apostate Church, and
establishes rebaptization. And this also I will show to be an error by proving
the contrary, and then answer the Reasons hereunto annexed.

That baptism administered in the apostate Churches of Antichrist is baptism
not to be iterated, thus I prove it.


I. Argument.
If the Apostacy of Israel did not so pollute circumcision that that it ceased
to be the seal of Gods covenant to so many of the^ as repented: no more does
the Apostasy of our fore-Elders so polute baptism, that it cease to be a
sacrament to so many of them that turn unto God from their sins.

But the first is true. 2 Chronicles. 30. 11. 18. 21. else could not so many of
Israel as came to Jerusalem have eaten the Passover, seeing no uncircumcised
might eat thereof. Ergo the second.

If it be objected that the apostasy is not alike the^ let it be showed that
the apostasy under Antichrist did make a nullitie of baptism, and not the
apostasy of Israel of circumcision: for Israel played the harlot so deeply,
that the Lord denied her to be his wife, or himself to be her husband. Hose. 2.
2.

Mr Smyth. And thus having showed the vanity of your answers to my reasons
against ^swer.
paedobaptistrie, let us come to your answer made to my 2. Position.

2. That Antichristians converted, etc. Your first Argument is framed thus. If
the apostasy of Israel, etc. I answer that the apostasy of Antichrist is
deeper then the apostasy of Israel, for first Antichristians are not called
Israelites, but Babylonias, Egyptians, Sodomites, Gentiles, in the Revelation,
whereby the holy spirit of wisdom gives us to conceive, that he does account
the apostasy of Antichrist equ^^ to Paganism it self, etc.


Rich: Clifton. Whether my answers be vain, or your reasons haeretical, let
the reader ^ply.
judge. For your answer to this my first Argument against your second Position,
if it be granted that the Apostasy of Antichrist be worse then of Israel, yet
this difference is but according to the less and the greater, both are
Apostasy. But as concerning these names of Sodomites, etc. they do not prove
that Antichristianisme is equalled to Paganism: rather they show that the
Antichristians were in some things like to the Sodomites, Egyptians, etc. Was
Judah her circumcision void because the Prophet calls ^a. 1. 10.
their Princes, * the Princes of Sodom, and the people the people of Gomorah?
If this had been so, they must have been new circumcised. Know you not that the
holy Ghost by these similitudes would manifest some abominable sin that he
saw in his people wherein they became like unto the profane Gentiles? And the
more to cause them to detest their sin, likeneth them to such notorious
sinners, as had tasted of the hand of God against them for their sins.
Wherefore as Judah for her unjust shedding of blood and other filthy sins is
called Sodom and Gomorah: So the Antichristians are called Sodom, for their
filthy sin of Sodomitrie, and such like, wherein they become like to the
Sodomites: and Egypt and Babylon, because they keep Gods people under a
spiritual servitude, as formerly Egypt and Babylon had done the Israelites and
Jews under a corporal bondage. And the Antichristians, if they be compared to
the Gentiles (which I do not remember) it is in respect of their profanenes and
strange Gods: for as the Gentiles had many Gods, to whom they gave spiritual
worship: so the Antichristians have their Gods, Saints of both sexes, and the
Angels to whom they do worship and service. Notwithstanding all this their
profanesse, yet did they confess God and Jesus Christ to be their savior, and
worshipped him (though corruptly) professed also many of his truths, which
neither the Sodomites, Egyptians, Babylonians or Gentiles did: And therefore
are not comparable with the heathen in all respects, much less to be held the
worst kind of Paganism. For in Paganism, it was never heard that God had his
people, yet in Antichristian Babylon, the spirit witnesses that he has his
people amongst them, and so many truths of God are therein taught, as thereby
Gods elect do come to some knowledge of God, and to faith: so can none do in
Paganism, by any doctrine there taught

2. I declare plainly the difference between the Apostasy of Antichrist and
Israel A^^.
in this, that Isreal's apostasy did not destroy the true constitution of the
Church; but Antichrists apostasy did raze the true Apostolic constitution.
For the true constitution of the Church of the old Testament was of carnal
Israelites or proselytes circumcised, and so long as they retained circumcision
in the Land of Canaan, they reieyned a true constitution though there apostasy
was never so great, etc.

This which you say, is a plain difference, is none at all, it is your false
Re.
ground that deceaves you. The reason of your difference will not hold, for if
reteyning of circumcision preserved the constitution of the Church of the old
Testament, though their apostasy was never so great, as you say it did: then
should the reteyning of baptism in the greatest apostasy, preserve the
Churches constitution under the new testament: but this you deny, ergo the
other can not stand: Seeing baptism by your own confession Char(...) in the
pr^f^
is the constition of the Church under the Gospel, as circumcision was of the
old Church: Now if this be true doctrine which you teach, I pray you show us
some reason why Apostasy more raseth the constitution of the Church now, then
it did under the law: for circumcision was as corruptly administered by the
apostate Israelites, as baptism is by the Antichristians. But your judgment
of the Churches constitution fayles you, in holding the Sacraments to be the
constitution thereof, (...) them appertain unto it, yet can they not be
counted the whole constitution of the Church. And if this should be granted
you, it would follow, that if Isreal's constitution was carnal (for circumcision
you say was carnal) so should the constitution of the Church of the new
testament be carnal also: seeing baptism is an external ordinance as well as
circumcision was, and both alike carnal in that respect. And therefore you must
either renounce this opinion, or else grant that the constitution of the Church
of the old Testament was spiritual, and then all your building is overthrown.

But to prove that Israel retained a true constitution in their apostacy, you
allege Hosea the fourth, saying; Though their apostasy was never so great the
their worship ministry and government, as it is to be seen in Hosea, 4. 6. 8.
12. yet they retained a true constitution so long as they retained circumcision
in the land of Canaan.

I answer, although the Lord call Israel his people, he does it in regard of
his covenant formerly made to their forefathers, and not in respect of their
present outward estate. The Prophet says, There shall be like people like
Priest. And in verse 12. they are charged to go a whoring from under their God.
How can this people be said to stand in a true constitution or covenant with
God, that went a whoring from under their God? Has Rome done any more then
this? the people * perished for want of knowledge, Hose. 4. 6
and the Lord rejected their Ministers from being his; because they refused
Hose. 4. 12
knowledge. The Israelites did ask counsel at their stocks, and the spirit of
fornication caused them to err, and they sacrificed to strange Gods, etc.
^hro^. 13 ^ King. ^ 31. ^hr. 11. 14 ^ Chron. ^^. ^ers. 8. and ^rse 9.
"Jeroboam drove away the true Prophets, and placed Priests after his own
devise. Israel set up an other government and * refused the government of the
Lord, had a false ministry and worship. What more can be said of Rome, then
is here said of Apostate Israel? And what though the Prophet Abijah did not
charge Israel with a false co^stitutio^, but with the other particulars before
mentioned: yet that suffices to declare that they had broken covenant with
God, which, what is it else, but to depart from their primitive constitution.
Needs a man to say any more to prove that a wise has violated the bond of
marriage, but that she has played the whore, and follows other lovers? and so
much have the Prophets testified of Israel. ^ Chro. 15
Azariah bears witness against Israel thus; now for a long season Israel has
been without the true God, and without Priest to teach, and without law. And
this was ^n the time of Asa king of Judah. Also Eliah complayneth ^ (...) 10.
that the children of Israel have forsaken the covenant of the Lord: and this
was in the days of Ahab, now it cannot be that they that had forsaken Gods
covenant could be a true constituted Church, so continuing, and also, which
were without God and without his Law etc.

C^n you say more against the Antichristians? and them you deny to be a true
Church, and yet you justify Israel withal her abominations: but let us
consider further of the difference you make between Israel and
Antichristianisme: you say.

That Antichrist has not only set up a false government etc. but also a false
constitution Ans.
of the Church, for whereas the true Apostolic constitution was of baptized
Disciples that confessed their sins and their faith, he has foysted in a
false matter of ^ Church, viz. infants and persons unbaptized, and so a false
form, etc.

I answer, 1. that the Apostolic constitution did not shut out the children
Re.
of believers, as I have formerly proved. 2. I justify neither the matter nor
form of Antichrists Church, neither their ministry worship nor government,
they have in all these corrupted the ways of God. But the falsehood you tax
them of in their matter and form, is the baptising of infants, otherwise if
they had baptized persons confessing their sins, etc. their constitution had
been with you Apostolic: such a deadly feud have you against infants, that to
admit them to baptism makes a false Church. For the lawfulnes of baptising
children you may be satisfied before, if the eye sight of your soul be not
quite put out.

Your saying that infants are no more capable of baptism, then is a fool or
madman or pagan, Argues in you the want of spiritual wisdom, but that which
you drive at, in this your bitterness against infants is to prove, That the
Church of Antichrist is constituted of a false matter, viz, infants incapable
of baptism, and a false form, viz. infants unable to enter into the new
Testament etc. And therefore to be as Pagans or Gentiles in the Lords account;
and to justify Apostate Israel reteyning circumcision to be a true Church. For
your pleading against the adulteries of Rome I dislike not: but by these your
Arguments, and manner of pleading, you shall never convince her, or ever be
able to justify that adulterous Church of Israel: neither will this your reason
stand good. That circumcision in the Israelites Apostasy was true, because it
was performed upon carnal Israelites or proselytes the 8. day. And that
baptism in Popery is false and in the Lords account no better then Pagan
washing, etc. for as much may be said for baptism administered to the apostate
Church of Antichrist, as yo^ can say for circumcision in the Apostasy of
Israel. And all that can be said is this, that neither of them both is in deed
capable, in that standing: For the sacraments belong to the members of a true
Church, not to apostates. But if to be circumcised the 8. day prove that
Isreal's circumcision was true in her Apostasy; what lets the circumcision of
the Edomites and Ismaelites to be true also, they keeping the 8. day, seeing
they were of the seed of Abraham. The right of circumcision belonged to the
children of the promise which was made to Abraham in Christ: And therefore when
any of Romans 2. 5. 2 Chro. 30 ^-11.
Abraha^s seed did cut off themselves by infidelity, their circu^cisio^ became
uncircumcision: on the contrary, circumcision, though administered in Apostasy
unto infants, yea * those coming to years and seeking the Lord, their
circumcision was then profitable to them. And so is baptism in like manner to
them that receive it in apostate Churches, when they by repentance shall
return to God. But you drive all to this issue, that not the profanes of the
apostasy, but the fittines of the subject makes the sacrament true or false.
That infants are as fit subjects for baptism, as the infants under the law,
for circumcision, I have proved in the former part of this writing.

Your third answer. 3. I declare that Israel was the true church of God, or a
member Answ.
of a true Church, though infinitely corrupt as well as Judah in the days of her
apostasy, etc. and therefore if Judah retained true circumcision in her
apostasy etc. surely the circumcision of Israel was also true.

This is strange that Israel can be a true Church, and yet infinitely corrupt,
ca^ ^^l.
a wife be a true wife and also a harlot? thus you may as well justify Rome and
all Antichristian assemblies. The holy ghost calls both * Aholah and Aholibah
Ezech. 23
harlots: and you in their infinite corruptions instifye them to be true
Churches, and particularly of Israel the Lord says, plead with your Hose. 2. 2.
mother for she is not my wife. And you say, she was a true Church, that is, a
true wife, directly contradicting the holy Ghost. But you reason, If Judah
retained true circumcision in her apostasy, then Israel, etc.

Then if either Judah her circumcision was false, or that your comparison is not
equal, your argument is of no forse. The sacraments seal up Gods covenant to
his people walking in his ways, and not to them when they fall from the faith.
That of Hosea. 2. 2. alleged by some is you say, to Prove Israel a false
Church you thus answer unto. Hosea. ^


I say it was after the Passover of Ezechias which was in the first year of
his reign. 2 Chronicles. 29. 3. 14. and 30. 2. and the bill of divorce was given
the sixth ^re of his reign, 2 King. 17. 23. compared with 2 King. 18. 10. yet
notwithstanding Hosea calls Israel the Lords people after he had prophesied
of the bill of divorce ^^ be given her. Hose. 4. 6. 8. 12. etc.

Concerning the time of Hosea his prophecy, when he said, plead with (...)
mother, etc. I take it was in the days of Vzziah king of Judah and about the
Perki^ Specimen ^ etc. page 3 2. Kin^ 17. 23.
23. year of his reign, which was almost 60. years before Ezechias began to
reign, and before the Lord put Israel out of his sight. Now so long before the
prophet was bidden to tell Israel that she was not the Lords wife. This being
so, I would know how you or any can justify Israel to be a true church, when
the Lord denies her? she had broken covenant, and her divorcement (as you call
it) argues as much: for men put from them wives that had broken the band of
marriage, and not true wives.

To that of Hosea, 4. 6. 8. 12. I have answered, page 152. Furthermore you say,
when the bil of divorce was given, diverse of Is^ael kept themselves pure from
Samaritanisme and went yearly to Jerusalem.

I doubt thereof no more then you, according to these scriptures, 2. Chron. 34.
6. 7. 31. 32. 33. and 35. 18. and 30. 11. but we reason of the face of that
Church, as it stood in apostasy and so continued, and not of particular
persons. In Babylon god has his; yet the face of that Church of ANTICHRIST is
apostate and false to the LORD. And so we say of Israel, that if we respect the
outward face of it, it was a false Church to God long before Samaritanisme
began* And here I observe that you agree not with your self, for here you say,
no manner of sin made the Church of the old testament, a false Church: and
yet you call it apostate, as also you do the like in your Paralels. page 14.
and 26. And it is as much as we say of it: for that people that are fallen
into* apostasy have broken faith and covenant with God. And if in any place we
call Israel or Antichrists, a false Church, we mean no other, but a Church
that has unfaithfully departed from the LORD, and so continues in Apostasy.


II. Argument.
BAbylon in Chaldea (which was a type of spiritual Babylon, Reve. 18. 2.)
though she did abuse and profane the vessels of the Lord, Dan. 5. 3. yet did
not that make a nullitie of them, that they ceased any more to be the vessels
of the house of the Lord, but were brought with them of the captivity that
came up from Babylon, to Jerusalem. Ezra. 1. 11. Even so although spiritual
Babylon have profaned the holy things of God, as baptism and the rest, yet
remain they still Gods ordinances to all them that come out of her, Rev. 18.
4. and return to the celestial Jerusalem. And as these vessels of the house
of the Lord need not to be new cast, because of Babels polluting them: no more
is baptism to be iterated to the people of God, because it passed through the
polluted hands of the Papists.

If it be objected, that they that administered baptism in Babylon were
Idolaters and had no calling thereunto: I answer, that they which circumcised
in the Apostasy of Israel were Idolaters, and so standing in that estate could
not be fit Ministers of Gods holy ordinances. And that the wanting of a lawful
calling to administer the Sacrament, makes not a nullitie thereof, the
circumcising of Moses son by his mother Zippora, Exo. 4. 25. does plainly
teach: For as the Lord makes effectual his word to his people though coming
unto them by the hands of a false Ministry: so does he baptism to all that be
his, though administered by them that have not a lawful calling thereunto. The
sin of the Minister makes not a nullitie either of the word or Sacraments, else
should the efficacy of the word an^ ^acraments depend upon him that
administreth them; which is no^ so: for both have their effect from the Lord
Esaias. 55. 11:

If again it be objected that baptis^e was not administered in the Apostate
Church of Antichrist to a fit subject. I answer, that the children in the
Apostasy were as fit subjects to receive baptism, as the infants of Israel in
the time of Jeroboam and Ahab were to receave circumcision: seeing the covenant
of Abraham (after the coming of Christ) belonged as properly to the Gentiles
Gal. 3. 14. as before it did to the Israelites.

Mr Smyth. I answer many things. 1. this Argument is an excellent argument for
the retayning Ans.
of idol Temples, the worship, government, ministry of the ecclesiastical
assemblies of England, etc.


Rich: Clifton This Argument is not so excellent for idol Temples, etc. as you
pretend. Re.
For how can you reason from the ordinances of God to justify the devises of
men? will it follow, that because the vessels of the Lord, his sacraments and
ordinances (though polluted in apostaticall Churches, or by the profane
Babylonians) may be restored to the right use, for which God ordained them,
therefore so to reason, justifies the inventions of men devised to religious
uses? you may show your wit in composing of your Argument. But with all you
answer. That baptism of theirs was never appointed by God but is the devise of
Antichrist.

Antichrist devised no new baptism, but polluted the Lords ordinance ordained
by God.

2. I answer that the vessels of the Lords house were his own ordinances, and
therefore An.
need not to be new cast. But the baptism of Antichrist is not the Lords own
ordinance etc.

Baptism retained in the Churches of Antichrist is as much the Lords Re.
ordinance, as the vessels of the Temple were in Babylon, and therefore needs
no more to be new cast, then they. But you distinguishe between the vessels of
the Lords house and baptism, thus. That they were substances framed by art
into particular shapes at the Lords appointment: but the baptism of the Lord
is a compound or concreete ordinance limited in certain essential p(...)lars,
not being a substance, but an accident in definition. Now if Antichrist h^^
retained the essential parts of baptism I confess it needed not to be
repeated, etc but ^ is salse, ^ neither ^tter nor ^^e ^ inven^ by An^rist, but
^ng the or ^anc^ of ^d were ^uted.
seeing baptism in Popery is not the Lords ordinance but Antichrists
invention, * the matter and form being invented by Antichrist, the matter
being a carnal infant, the form washing one into the covenant and cannot
consent to the covenant or baptising, without a contract, and sealing to the
covenant etc.

Here you confess that if the essential parts of baptism be retained in
Popery, it is not to be repeated. But you make question about the parts,
affirming that both matter and form of baptism in Popery is invented by
Antichrist: you say so, but proves it not. Concerning the matter, it is before
showed, that infants are capable of baptism, not as they be natural and borne
in sin, but as they are the seed of the faithful, and therefore being the
children of God, and of the "covenant, are not in that respect carnal matter,
but spiritual. As for the form, which you say, is the washing of one into the
covenant which cannot consent. I answer, that the form ^zech. 16 ^. 21. Act.
2. 39 ^3. 25.
of baptism does not any more stand in the Actual consent of the parties
baptized, then the form of circumcision did consist in the assenting of the
party circumcised: for there is alike reason of the form of these two
sacraments, and therefore as infants of the Jews were circumcised,
notwithstanding by reason of their age they could not consent to that action:
So infants of believers may be baptized, especially seeing they are but patients
in this Mat. 2^
Action. This is the Lords ordinance, to baptize the believer and his seed with
water, into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
And of this are infants capable.

As for sealing to the covenant, it is already proved that the Lord seals his
covenant to infants. And for their sealing to the Lord, they do as much, as at
that age is required, or was required of the infants of the Jews circumcised.
Nether is there baptism without a contract, for the Lord has made his
covenant with the faithful and their seed. For the Scripture describes true
baptism thus: The matter must be one, that confesses his faith and his sins
one that is regenerate and borne again. The form must be a voluntary
delivera^ce up of the party baptized into the name of the Father, Son and
holy Ghost, by washing with water. Mat. 28. 19. and 3. 6. Joh. 4. 1. Act. 2.
14. and 8. 36. 27. with Romans 6. ^-6. where there must be a mutual confent of
both persons contracting together. And that this is so, the form of baptism
retained in Popery, yet teaches etc.

That the matter of baptism (as you term it) or subject, must necessarily be
one always that confesses his faith and sins, all that you have said Re.
hitherto, has not proved it: the scripture says it not: and the contrary is
confirmed before, viz. that infants are to be baptized, although they can not
make actual profession of their faith, and to us they are partakers of
remission of synns and regeneration: seeing they are in the covenant.

2. Concerning the form of baptism, I confess it is the sprinkling of a fit
subject with water into the name of the Father etc. but your voluntary
deliverance up of the party baptized, to make that action a part of the form
of baptism, all the scriptures you cite, proves it not. we confess that such
as are of years must voluntarily offer up themselves to be baptized, and so
were they that were to be circumcised: notwithstanding the infants that could
not do this, were also circumcised, and so must our infants be baptized. The
Lord said to his Ministers, baptize, but said not let every one that is
baptized offer himself voluntarily thereunto, as he does in the Lords supper,
say, take eat etc. it is otherwise in baptism, wherein the baptized are not
age^ts, but only patients: God thus disposing that the infants of the faithful
might be capable thereof, and sealed up for the Lords, as well as their parents.
And it is to be noted, that the desiring or offering to receiv baptism, is an
action differing from the thing desired, and so not a part of the same. As for
your mutual consent of both persons contracting together, it must be
understood, of God with the faithful and their seed, for such was the contract
or covenant making with Abraham, which continues still in force to al believers
and their seed: and this precedeth baptism, and is no part of the external
form thereof. Genesis 17. 1, 7. etc. Act. 2, 39.

And for that form of baptising in popery, with credis and credo, etc. which
others speak for the Infant, declaring (as you say) that there must needs be a
mutual contract etc. You know very well how it is continued upon a blind custom
and imitation, because such as were to be received into the church in the
primitive times, and to be baptized, being of years, did make confession of
their faith, and answered to such interrogatories as were demanded of them
concerning the same. This the papists apply to infants, the questions being
answered by the godfathers who ar said to be brought in by Higinus before whose
time, the parents presented their children to be baptized. This corrupt custom
and apish imitation, your self has condemned. Yet now having cast off baptism
it self, you scrape in the filthye Dungehill of Popery to advantage your self
against the truth, whose practice you know condemns your opinion of not
baptising of infants. If If therefore you will crave their testimony for your
form of baptism, why despise you their witness of baptising of infants, which
is the matter. And thus much for answer to your description of baptism.

Now concerning the outward ceremony of baptism, the Scripture Mat. 3. 11. 16.
^ar. 1. 10 Act. 8. 38 Mat 28. ^. ^. Jo. 1. 7 Act. 2. 38 ^. 3. 19. Gal. 3. 27
Rom 6. 3 ^ Col. 2. 12 ^. 3. 5. 6.
thus teaches, that the element in this sacrament is * water only, the form
of administering thereof, Christ commanded thus, baptize them into the name of
the father and of the son and of the holy ghost. This is that which the Lord
has instituted, whereby he would signify and seal unto his people "the
remission of their sins, * and the ingraffing into Christ, the mortification
of the old man and renewing of the spirit. This is the substance of this
ceremony, and is found to be still retained in the Apostate Churches. And
therefore, although it has been polluted by the hands of Apostates, as the
vessels of the Temple were by the Babylonians, and by adding of humane
inventions, yet is it in substance that which Christ ordained in his Church,
neither the element nor form of administration changed, and therefore not to
be iterated. Your third answer.

3. I answer that if the Antichristians had baptized persons confessing their
sins and their faith into the name of the son of God and the Trinity, it
had been true baptism, though in the hands of the Antichristians, etc.

First, you confess then, that the apostasy of Antichrist is not so great,
but that in the papal Churches there may be true baptism, not to be iterated.
That they baptized with water into the name of the father and of the son and
of the holy ghost, can not be denied, all that you except against, is the
administering of it to infants; and so this second question is answered in the
former: for if the infants are to be baptized, then stands their baptism good
without repeating which they have in Apostate Churches.

Lastly, where I said, that the wanting of a lawful calling to administer the
Sacrament made not a nullitie thereof, instancing the circumcision of the
Israelites by Apostats, and of Zippora her circumcising of her son, you
answer saying.

1 What say you to Cyprian and all that counsel of learned Bishops who concluded
that baptism of Heretics was a nullitie and decreed rebaptising.

This I answer, that if Cyprian and those learned Bishops did err what is that
to this purpose; for those examples that I have alleged are such as are
recorded by the holy ghost to be done, not by such as had lawful calling, and
yet stood without recircumcising. But suppose Cyprian and those Bishops found
that some were baptized by Heretics and not in the name of the Trinity, (for
seeing some denied the Deity of Christ, some his humanity, others held other
errors about the Trinity: It is not like that they would observe the true
form of baptism, but some strange form of their own devise; as some report
(how truly I know not) that you baptize your selves into the faith of the new
Testament.) And so decreed not rebaptising, but baptising of them that were not
before baptized with Christ's baptism. Indeed it is recorded by some, that the
Novatians, Arrians, Aetians and Donatists, did as you do, rebaptise those that
fell to their errors, which had been baptized before into the name of the
Trinity. Lastly, if Cyprian and those Bishops did err about this point of
rebaptising, as in some others they did, I am no patron of their errors.

2, I say, that the Israelites circumcision was in a true church and
Antichrists Ans.
baptism was in a false, and that is a dissimilitude.

That Israel in her Apostasy was not a true church, I have showed before: how
you in this disagree with your self, here I will set down your own Re.
words in your book of Paralels etc. against M. Barnard. page 14. thus you
write. A church falsely constituted (as in the old Testament was the apostate
church of the 10. Tribes, and in the new Testament is the Church of Antichrist)
is such a communion of men, where to God has not given the covenant, the holy
things, the promises, Christ for King, Priest and Prophet. etc.

Also in page 26. of the same book, you answering such as plead that they have
the Word, Sacraments, and conversion in the English Assemblies, have these
words. I say it is but as a thief has the true manns purse, and as the false
church of Jeroboam had, and as the Samaritanes, Edomites etc. had circumcision
and the sacrifices by usurpation. Here you have testified to the world that
Ieroboams church was a false church, falsely constituted etc. And now seeing a
disadvantage thereby to your new erroneous opinion, you doubt not to call it a
true church. This inconstancy befitts not him that will be a leader of others.

3. I know nothing to the contrary but Zippora might circumcise her son, her
An.
husband commanding her. For where is it said in the old Testament, that a
woman shall not circumcises for Moses did circumcise though Zippora was the hand
of Moses in that action etc.

When you deal against us about baptising of infants, you will have commandment
Re.
or example, or else you reject it as Antichristian, now y^^ being pressed with
this Act of Zippora you show nether, nor any reason for the lawfullnes of the
fact and yet you defend it, answering, that you know nothing to the contrary,
but Zippora might circumcise her son etc. What needs the Scripture to forbid
women to circumcise, when for the adminisstring of that ceremony God gave
commandment that Abraham the Genesis 17. 7. ^om p. with ^ers. 10-13 ^osuah. 5. 2
^ 4,
master of the family should circumcise al his males, as baptism is now Mat.
28. 19.
enjoined to the Apostles and Ministers of Christ; the which commandments
disable all others, whether women or men that have not such calling from God
for the administeration thereof. That Zippora did circumcise her son by Moses
commandment appears not in the Scripture, but that Exo. 4. 24 ^5.
she being greeved at her husbands neglect, did it: But if Moses ought to do it
himself, the question is whether he might command his wife to do it. The
non-residents in England are condemned for preaching by their substitutes, and
you dese^d that a woman may be a substitute to administer a sacrament. If
Zipporah may circumcise in case of necessity at the appointment of her
husband, why may not the midvvives in case of necessity baptize, by the
appointment of the Priests? You pretend rule, but in this you practis^ it not.

4. I yield that the Minister shall not prejudice baptism, if the baptism be
the Ans.
Lords own ordinance, etc.

In this we agree that the Minister, if he be not lawfully called, does not Rep.
so far prejudice baptism, as to make a nullitie of it, what is further here
to be answered, is done else where.

The 2 objection you answer, is, that although baptism be administered in a
false Church of Antichrist upon an unfit subject, yet it shall not be repeated,
no more then circumcision in the days of Jeroboam, etc. My words were these
That ^epl.
the children in that apostasy, are as fit subjects to receive baptism, as
the infants of Israel in the days of Jeroboam were to receive circumcision.
And you pervert my words and say, that I affirm, that although baptism be
administered in a false Church upon an unfit subject. Is this to confess that
infants are unfit subjects? to say, they were as fit as the infants of Israel?
Your self does acknowledge that the infants of ISRAEL in that Apostasy were
capable of circumcision. I said that the infants of the Antichristians were as
capable as they, not approving of the state of either, but arguing that if the
former might stand for circumcision, then also the other without iterating: the
state of the Antichristians, being alike to the apostate Israelites: but I will
come to your further answer, which is this.

I say that the Israelites infants in there defection were the subject that God
commanded Ans.
to be circumcised: so are not the infants in Antichristianisme, both for that
they are 1. infants. 2. members of a false Church. 3. the seed of unbelievers.

That the Israelites infants in their defectio^ were commanded to be
circumcised, Repl.
can not be proved, God is no approver of apostasy. When he gave to Abraham
and his seed circumcision, he did intend that it should seal his covenant unto
them, and that they should continue therein, and not apostate: and therefore
(to speak properly) the Israelites in their apostasy could be no fit subjects,
although upon their repentance the Lord let stand their circumcision. And so if
the state of this people be rightly considered, the dissimilitude between their
circumcision, and baptism in Antichristian assemblies, will not prove such as
you pretend. Your reasons to prove infants in Antichristianisme to be no fit
subjects of baptism, are of no weight. The first of them is answered in the
former part of this writing, where is proved that infants are fit subjects of
baptism. Concerning the 2. I might ask you why you make infants members of
Antichrists Church, and deny them to be members of true Churches? but to let
this pass, I answer, that this reason is of no force, seeing your self
confesses, that if Antichrist had baptized persons confessing their sins,
etc. it had been true baptism. To the third I answer, that the infants in
Antichristianisme are no more the seed of unbeleevers, then the infants in
Ieroboams Church were the seed of unbeleevers: both were the seed of apostates,
and that is all you can say of them. Their parents, (although apostating from
many truths, and polluted with men's inventions,) yet were not fallen from all
profession of Jesus Christ, but still did and do acknowledge salvation by him;
retain and believe many main grounds of faith, and excellent truths, and so
many, as the Lord has his people in Rev. 18.
Babylon brought to the knowledge of God by those doctrines there taught. And,
therefore thus I think of such apostates, that in respect of their outward
standing they remain in apostasy, having forsaken many truths, pollute Gods
ordinances, practice the cursed inventions of men: yet professing faith in God
and in Jesus Christ (though corruptly) I can not hold them as infidels simply,
but as the Israelites in their apostasy: and their seed may rather be termed
the seed of Apostates, then of infidels or unbelievers.

And whereas you say that the covenant of Abraham in respect of Christ did ^^
truly belong to the Gentiles after the coming of Christ as it did to the
Israelits though both in defection: I deny it: for the carnal covenant belonged
to the Israelits the carnal seed of Abraham even in their parents Apostasy, and
the spiritual covenant did never appertain to the Apostate parents. 2. much
les to the infants of them etc. 3. no nor to the infants of the faithful as I
have already proved. and Gal. 3. 14. is not to be under stood of the blessing
of Abraham to come upon any of the Gentiles in their Apostasy, but only being
in Christ as the words are, also. ver. 7. and 9. etc.

I speak comparatively of the seeds of the apostate Israelites and
Antichristians, affirming the one as fit subjects for baptism, as the other
for circumcision, because the Gentiles since Christ, have as much title to the
covenant with Abraham, as the Israelites had. This you deny, shifting off with
your devised carnal covenant. It is not for the spiritual covenant or
Sacrament, to belong to Apostates, that I contend: I know it belongs to the
faithful and their seed, though you say no. But this was the end wherefore I
did allege Gal. 3. 14. to prove that the covenant is enlarged to the Gentiles
and that they may now make as just claim to it for them selves and their seed,
as Israel could do. And therefore did reason thus: If the children of Israel
could chalendg right to the covenant and circumcision, their parents being in
Apostasy: then might the infants of Apostats in Antichristianisme do so: and
this is all that I said, not justifying the standing of the one or of the other.


III. Argument.
IF the word of God passing through the false Ministry of Anchrist was of
force to convert Gods elect in Babylon: Then is baptism passing likewise
through their false ministry, of force to seal up Gods covenant unto them;
and so consequently not to be iterated.

But the first is true. Apoc. 18. 4. for in babylon were Gods people converted;
other ordinary Ministry was there none, but that false Ministry of the
Papists; and therefore it is apparent that God made thereby his word effectual
to al them that believed Ergo etc. If it be objected, that if God should
convert his people by an Antichristian Ministry, it were to give Approbatio^
to a false Ministry, and to teach that men might lawfully use it, which is
absurd. I answer, for us to use a false Ministry is unlawful: but it is no
more absurd, or yet any approbation of a false Ministry for God to work
thereby the good of his own people; then it was his approving of the evil
service of Joseph's brethren selling him into Egypt; because he used their
Ministry for the saving of Jacob and his household; for God can work good by
an evil instrument.

If it be still urged that the Antichristian Ministers had no calling to
baptize: I say no more had the Jews to put Christ to death: yet was his
suffering avaylable to save all that believe: and so is the Sacrament to al Gods
people avaylable to seal up salvation unto them.

Mr. Smyth. I answer. First the word converteth none visibly unto me
particulerly known: so Ans.
can Baptism seal up none visibly unto me etc.


Rich. Clyfton Although Gods people continuing in Babylon cannot so welbe
discerned; Rep.
yet by their coming thensce, they manifest to me particulerly, that there they
were converted by the word, and so appear visibly unto me to belong unto God,
and to be children of the covenant. As for the time before, we take no public
notice of their secreete estate before God, nor can do Deuteronomy. ^ 29.
for the things revealed belong unto us. Further you say.

The mark of the Beast is undoubtedly baptism, whereby they are initiated
into Antichrist, and receive his mark as Christ's servants in baptism receive
his seal upon them, etc.

Oh how fearful a thing is it to blaspheme: baptism is the ordinance of God
though it was polluted by Antichrist: you may as well say, the word of God is
the mark of the beast: for Antichrist did pollute it also as you formerly have
confessed. Your mark of the beast reaches very far even to the Apostles
times, as the Ancients have witnessed of the baptism of Infants. And if this
was the mark of the beast, then was the mark before the beast, which is absurd
to affirm: for can the beast before it be in esse, make ^ both great and small
to receive a mark in their right hand or in (...). 13. ^.
their forehead. And that this baptising of infants was before the beast was,
we have showed out of the scriptures, and it may appear out of Origin,
Tertullian and others, that speak of infants baptism to be in practice in the
church, before their time, as in the former part of this writing is observed.
And it appears both by the * Revelation. And that of the Rev. 13. ^. 10. 11.
^. 17.
Apostle in 2 These. 2, 3. that the man of sin arose not to this height and
power to make small and great to receive his mark until there came a departing
first. And seeing this mark of Antichrist was such as small and great, rich
and poor, free and bound did receive, it can not be, the baptising of infants.
For then only the small should be said to receive it. And therefore the mark
must be such a one, as shall agree to all persons "great and small, rich and
poor, bound and free, and be received of them Rev. 13. ^6. Rev. 14. 9.
in that condition and state. And it must be such a mark, as they that worship
the beast and his image shall receive by a willing and actual consent, the which
can not be applied to infants: for neither can they worship the beast or give
voluntary consent to receive his mark in their hands or foreheads. An.


2. Antichrists baptism false (as I have said) in the definition, is none of
Gods ordinance, no not in the hands of the most faithful Minister, but Gods
word is the Lords ordinance though in the mouth of the most vile Judas or
Antichristian, yea though it be in the mixture of a 1000. heresies.

The same Lord that gave his word to his church, ordained also baptism (...).
to be therein. Indeed if baptism had been devised by Antichrist or any man
else, it were not to be reputed for true baptism at al, but that baptism which
is found to be in the Antichristian assemblies, is not Antichrists, the
contrary is proved before. Answ.


So that in this respect al^^ it follows not, that Gods word may convert in
popery, therefore Antichrists baptism may seal, etc.

It will follow, that as the word in Popery, so baptism in that Apostasy
retained since the primitive co^stitutio^ of the church of Rome in the Apostles
days, and as the word in popery may co^vert, so baptism may seal the^ that
are Christ's, being converted, for God can as well bless the one as the other.
Gods word does convert in Babilo^, yet is not the promise any more annexed to
that outward ministry of Antichrist, then that blessing, Genesis 1.
bring forth fruit and multiply, is by Gods ordinance tied to unlawful
conjunctio^s, but it pleases the L. by the ministry of his word and
ordinance to effect his own work in all such as shall be saved, though through
the hands of apostates.

3. You say, If Antichrist had retained the Lords true baptism, etc. viz. Answ.
that he had baptized persons confessing their sins and faith in the
Trinity, it should not have been repeated: But seeing he intends in baptism
to set an indelible caracter upon them, which is the mark of the beast to
confer grace ex opere operato to the infants which he washes etc. hence I
conclude, that he has set upp his own idol of abomination, and cast the
LORDS holy ordinance away, etc. Ergo, his baptism is anullitie or rather a
seal of perdition* etc.

Your self by your heresy setts up an idol of abomination, and casts away Rep.
the Lords holy ordinance of sealing his covenant to his people and their seed.
And here again you destroy one of your reasons which you brought against the
baptising of infants, which was, Caracte^ page 52.
because they were members of a false church. for you confess, that if
Antichrist had baptized persons confessing their sins etc. it should not have
been repeated. So that to be members of a false church shall not hinder the
efficacy of baptism. Again if Antichrist intends in baptism to set an
indelible caracter to confer grace, ex opere operato, to infants, and
therefore sets upp his own idol (as you say) what say you to his baptising
of the Indians which are of years? For he intends the same thing. And yet
his so baptising of the elder sort, etc. you will not have repeated. So by your
own opinion to set an indelible caracter to confer grace, ex oper^ operato,
is no good reason to prove the ^^erating of childrens baptism, for then should
it do so in the elder people confessing their sins etc.

As for the promise made by others for the party baptized, I place (as a
devise of man) amongst the accidental corruptions of this sacrament.

Concerning persons confessing their sins and faith, who^ you make the only
subject of baptism, I have a^swered before. And here tell you that the scripture
me^tioneth 1 Cor. ^. Act. 16.
persons that were baptized; yet says not a word, that they confessed their
faith and syns. And you ca^ never prove that al in the family of Stephanas,
Lidiah, etc. did confess their sins and faith: but to all that you say here,
answer is given before.


IIII. Argument.
THose holy things, which God by his merciful providence has preserved for his
people, through the hands of profane persons are not to be rejected for the
authors sake. Ezra. 1: 11, But the scriptures and baptism, has God preserved
in the popish assemblies for the benefit of his people. Therefore not to be
rejected for the Authors sake.

If it be objected against the Minor, it is not true baptism but false that is
administered in the Asse^blies of Antichrist: I answer, though it may be said to
be false in regard of some humane devises used in the administration thereof:
yet is it true baptism in respect of the matter, form, and author thereof,
which causes it to have a true being.

Mr Smyth. I answer directly that if it could be proved that baptism in the
kingdom of Antichrist Answ.
is appointed by Christ, and that water is the true matter of baptism, and the
true form is washing into the Trinity, I would yield unto you, but this you
have not proved etc. but to deal something more fully, etc. ^. water is not the
matter of baptism, but only the instrument. etc.


R. Clyfton. First I have proved that baptism which is administered in the
Antichristian Rep.
churches is not to be iterated: but that Christ appointed baptism in the
kingdom of Antichrist, I do not affirm; only this I say, that Christ ordained
this sacrament for his church, which becoming Apostate and yet reteyning the
same, is notwithstanding baptism, because it is of God. And so I affirm that
Christ is the Author of baptism, which the Antichristians pollute by their
administration thereof, as God was the author of that circumcision observed in
the apostate church of Israel. And therefore as circumcision received of the
Israelites in their Apostasy, stood as the seal of Gods covenant to so many as
repented: So baptism received in Babylon confirms the promise to al Gods
people departing thence, and returning to walk in the ways of the Lord.

But concerning the matter and form of baptism you charge me to have said in
my answer to your second Argument, That water is the matter and the form
washing with water into the Trinity. In calling water the matter* if so it had
pleased you, you might have understood my meaning, viz. that I understood
thereby the outward sign or element, whereof in Popery was no change. They
used the same which Christ ordained. And in calling it the matter, I did not
intend the subject or party baptized (which I know must be also one that
believes, or the seed of such,) but considering what Christ ordained to be
observed in this Ceremony, I found these: water, and the baptising therewith
into the name of the father, etc. The former I called the matter or element
wherewith the party is baptized, meaning that material outward sign, that
Christ ordained in this sacrament as in the other, he has done the like. For
it was not in my thought to intend, that if the water be administered with this
form of words, that it is baptism without a fit subject to be baptized: Nay I
hold it an error in the Papists which baptize their bells, and will have bread
consecrated (as they speak) to be a sacrament, though it be never received but
laid up in a box.

Concerning the subject of baptism or matter (as you term it) I will not
contend: but in that you deny the Infants of believers to be fit matter of
baptism, the contrary I affirm and have proved before.

2. I say that washing into the name of the father of the son and of the Holy
Ghost, Ans.
is not the form of baptism: for to wash a Turk, Jew, Fool, madman or
Infant into the Trinity is not true baptism, etc.

I answer, first, I know that forms can not consist without their subjects, Re.
and therefore I say, the form of baptising is retained in Popery, applied to
infants, though corruptly in that standing. Secondly, I stand not to defend,
that to baptize an unfit subject is true baptism: but this, that the baptism
of Apostates is not to be iterated when they repent and turn to God no no more
then the circumcisio of the Israelites in the like cause, 2 Chro. 3^. 6.-11.
21. as before I have showed.

3. That infants are to be baptized, I have already proved. And to baptize a
Jew, Turk, Fool etc. continuing in their infidelity, madness etc. we do not
affirm it lawful, nor yet the baptism of Apostats, for all such abuse that
holy ceremony being guilty thereof, as they are of the body and blood of
Christ, that receave it unworthely 1 Cor. 11.

The true form of baptism consists in 3. things 1. washing with water 2. a
new Ans.
creature, 3. into the name of Christ or into the Trinity.

This might also be granted, saving that by new creature, you mind only ^p.
such as are of years, and so appear to us new creatures by their profession,
excluding infants, who also must be so accepted of us inrespect of the
covenant, whereof they are partakers, as well as their parents. Also the
children of the faithful may be esteemed new creatures, seeing they are holy: and
are so to be accounted til they manifest themselves otherwise, which may be the
case of old persons, as of S. Magus etc. And the Apostle in the place alleged,
speaks of such as are of years; and by the speech of a new creature,
implies a special use and fruit of the thing signified by the outward sign,
and so is not a part of the external form of baptism as by Mat. 3. 11
man it is administered.

But if an infant etc. be washed with water into the Trinity. I say there is
neither An.
true matter nor form: And so al infants baptized by Antichrist etc. are to
renounce it and to receave Christ's mark of baptism etc. and when they shall
manifest a new creature etc. and then be baptized into the Trinity, this is
not Anabaptistry, but the true apostolic baptism: and so Christ, John, and
Christ's Apostles were Anabaptists, with you Sir. etc. for they baptized men
that were washed before, a thousand times with the Jews baptismes, Heb. 9. 10
etc. if it be blasphemy to say Christ, John, or the (...)
Apostles were anabaptists, though they were oftentimes some of them baptized
into the Messiah in type etc. so shall it be blasphemy in them that call the
true Christianes Anabaptists etc.

Sir, if you mind well your comparison it holds not, for those washings ^p.
under the law were proper ordinances of the old Testament, declaring their
repentance and clensing from their daily sins, and pollutions by faith Joh.
13 10
in Christ then to come: But baptism (whereof we speak) is an ordinance of the
Gospel, and that but * one, as their circumcision likewise was, and Ephe. 4. 5
therefore being once administered (though in some corruption) is Anabaptisme,
to be iterated. And it is such a washing as preaches (...) us the purging of
our sins by Christ. And therefore it is not (...) often washings under the
law that can make men ANABAPTISTS: for you know in what sense people now are
called ANABAPTISTS viz. for their reiection of the baptism of the Gospel which
they have received, and Baptising themselves again, as you have put in
practice. And seeing that which was administered in the Popish Assemblies, is
Baptism; it will be no blasphemy in us to call them ANABAPTISTS that have there
with been once baptized and do recounce it, and take to themselves a new of
man's invention. What else is here said, is answered before.

And thus I conclude the confirmation of this fourth Argument, that although
the POPISH CHVRCHES be apostate, the MINISTRY WORSHIP AND GOVERNMENT false; yet
the word and baptism therein reteayned (being the Lords ordinances) are not to
be rejected with their pollution, but (purged from these staynes) still to be
retained, and with Gods people to be carried with them out of spiritual BABYLON
as the Jews did the vessels of the Lords house out of Babylon of Chaldea. For
the precept concerning Apostate Churches is Hos. ^. Rev. 1^
to take away their fornications, and not the things of God polluted therewith.


V. Argument.
IF Antichrist be not the author of Baptism, but of some humane devises
annexed unto it in the adminstratio^ thereof: then are we not to pluck up the
wheat with the tares, Mat. 13. 29. and to cast away that which is Christ's with
Antichrists; but to separate from that which is man's invention, and still to
retain that which is of God. But to baptize with water into the name of the
father and of the son and of the holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19 is from heaven, Mat.
21. 25. and not from Antichrist. Ergo, we ought not to cast it away, but those
traditions wherewith Antichrist has polluted it, as examples, K. Josias, and
before him K. Ezechias, when both the land and Temple were polluted, (...)ng.
21, 7. and 23. 4. did not pull down the Temple, but appointed the Priests to
cleanse it, who did so, and brought out all the uncleannes that they had found
in the house of God, 2 Chro^. 29. 16. - 18. and 34. 8. For in reformation of
things, difference must be put between those things whereof God is the
author, and such as are devised by man: the former is to be purged from all
profanation, and the things still to be retained: the other quite to be
abolished. This rule in all reformation of religion ought to be followed.

Mr Smyth. I answer, that as when the Babylonians had utterly destroyed the
Temple, the Jews Ans.
built it again: so when Antichrist has utterly destroyed the true Church,
then must we build it up again. And when he has destroyed true baptism, then
must we rear it up again, therefore seeing Antichrist has abolished the true
baptism, and has reared up a baptism of his own, it must therefore be
abolished, etc.


R. Clyfton. First I answer, that baptism in apostate Churches, though it be
polluted, yet can not be said to be utterly destroyed, And therefore your
answer is not sufficient to prove the rebaptising of them that were baptized in
the Antichristian assemblies. 2. In rejecting of that baptism altogether, and
baptising a new, you do renounce that which is true therein, by your own
confession. viz. To wash with water, into the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy Ghost, in that in your new baptising of your selves you
repeat it again, which you ought not, if it be of God; and so indeed you
reteyne not any truth in it at all.

3. As for your comparison of a false Church or Ministry with baptism, it is
not equal: for if you understand by false Church and Ministry, that which is
devised by man only: then the constitutions thereof are not of Gods ordinance;
as in Iereboams Priests, and as in Provincial or Diocesan Churches, wherein not
one beam, rafter or stone, is appointed by the lord, and therefore can not be
retained with the purging away of the corruptions thereof. But in baptism, (I
mean that which is administered in Popery) there remaynes, the washing with
water into the name of the Trinity, which you with the tares pluck up and cast
in to the fire.

4. Whereas you say. That in the false baptism, Church, and Ministry, the
corruptions ar essential and the truth only accidental, and those accidental
truths must ^^ reserved and iterated. I demand of you what be these
accidental truths in a false Baptism, Church and Ministry, that are to be
iterated? and how you prove such iteration of accidents in baptism: if you
say, That to baptize with water into the name of the father etc. be an accident
to baptism, then is it not of the essence thereof, but Christ makes this
applied to a right subject, the Mat. 2^. 19.
form of baptism: And your self a little before have so Charac^ page ^4.
written, ^ow if it be of the form (which gives the being of the thing) how is
it an accidet? for you say, necessarily for having true baptism, we must repeat
washing into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost,
which are but accidents. And further you say, a Turk so washed is not
baptized. How prove you this repeating of washing into the name of the Trinity
etc.? and how does the baptising of a Turk prove this form of washing to be
an accident to the ceremony of baptism? seeing without this washing with water
into the name of the Father etc. it cannot be baptism.

And though this washing or ceremony in respect of the party baptized, may be
called an accident (as al such forms of things are to the matter whereupon
they are induced) yet to baptism it self, I mean, to the external ceremony
it is no accident or adiunct, but is of the very essence and being thereof, and
without which it cannot be baptism. And therefore how you can call the washing
with water into the name of the Trinity an accident, I do not conceive,
otherwise then as before, I have observed in respect of the party baptized, else
might the ceremony of baptism be for substance, without this washing with
water into the name of the Trinity. But whether it be of the essence, of
baptism or an accident, look with what warrant you do repeat it.

For suppose I should grant as much as you desire, that this form of washing
into the name of the Trinity were an accident to baptism, yet the Lord having
commanded that accident to be but once used without repeating, how can you
justify the iterating of such accidental truths (as you call them) for if it
were of God in that baptism administered in Popery (as you confess) then can
you not repeat it. Therefore your iterating of it, argues you do not
acknowledge it at all to be of the Lord: And so you retain not the accidental
truths in baptism as you pretend to do.


UI. Argument.
AS God has made an everlasting covenant with Abraham and his seed Genesis 17. 7.
which through the malice of Satan and all his instruments shall never be cut
of: So he preserved both in the Apostasy under the law and Gospel, the seals
thereof for the comfort of the faithful. And therefore the Anabaptists in
rejecting that baptism of Christ, whereof they were partakers, in the Apostate
Church, and devising a new, do bring in a new covenant and a new Gospel taking
upon them to baptize themselves without al warrant from the word, for I am sure
it cannot be showed that any did ever baptize him self without special
commandment from God, as Abraham had for circumcision. Genesis 17. 9. or John
for baptism. Mark. 1. 3. nor yet any others without ordinary or extraordinary
calling. Ioh. 4. 2. Mat. 3. 6. Act. 8. 38. and 9. 18. and 10. 40. and 16. 33.
If it be said the times be extraordinary, I answer, the Lord has left either
example or rule or ground of rule, whereby we may in extraordinary times, have
a sure warrant out of the world to inform us in every thing that we ought to
do.

Mr Smyth. I answer by an argument of like nature from Mat. 16. 18. framed
thus, Ans.
If the gates of Hell shall never prevayl against the Church, then there has
always been a^rue Church, and antichrist could never make the Church false:
and so you of the sep^ration have sinned most shamefully in calling the Church
of antichrist false: verum ^rimum: Ergo secundum.


Rich. Clyfton First I deny that your Argument is of like nature, neither will
your false Re.
relating of my words give you this advantage: for it is one thing to say, that
God has preserved the seals of his covenant, and an other to say, that these
seals cannot be abolished through the malice of Satan. I know the outward
seals and other ordinances of God might have been abolished by the malice of
Satan, if the Lord would have permitted it. For as Antichrist, (Satan's
instrument) has perverted many of Gods ordinances to abolish them out of the
church: As the worship, Ministry, Government, Censures, etc. so has he
corrupted the word and Sacrament of baptism: and if God had not otherwise
disposed, could have foysted in a new form of baptism in the room of it.

2. It is not the meaning of Christ in that place of Math. 16, 18. that there
should always continue a true visible church upon the earth, which Antichrist
could never be able to deface and corrupt: for the Scripture 2 These. 3. - 7.
Re^ 13. 11, -^ and 18. 4.
speaks to the contrary. But the promise of Christ to his church is this,
that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, that is, against his
people that by a lively faith build upon the rock Christ: this promise the Lord
performs to every true visible Church, so long as they cleave unto him and
continue faithful, and to his invisible for ever: even in the very days of
Apostasy, Satan did not prevail against the elect of God. The Lord had some
witnesses of his truth in all the time of Antichrist, as even Re^nerius the
Popes Inquisitor acknowledges, whose Testimony is cyted by D. Fulke upon the
Rev. 17. And albe it that there has been always a true church in a true
understanding, yet does it not follow, that that church from which we did
separate, was that true church, or yet that this true church, was always
visible. But I come to your second answer which is more properly (as you say)
solvendo.

That the covenant is said to be everlasting not in respect of the visible real
existance Answ.
in the world in an established church: but in respect of the stabilitie of it
in regard of Satan's inalice etc.

This answer of yours confirms my Argument and loses it not: for Rep.
I did not intend in saying, the Lord preserved or continued his covenant to
his people against the malice of Satan, that there was always a true visible
church walking in all the commandments of God, but this I minded, and do say,
that the covenant of God could never be cut off through the malice of Satan,
but continued firm to all the Lords people in all ages and times, yea through
the great Apostasy of Antichrist. You say.

There was no true church in the depth of Antichristianisme, and so no true
baptism. Ans.


This consequent will not follow, for though the church of Antichrist was no
true church: yet every thing therein was not so: for the Scriptures (though by
them abused) even in that Church were the true word of God, ^ep.
and so baptism in like manner was Gods ordinance therein retained, though
corruptly administered.

I deny that the covenant, Church, or baptism was visible always. An. ^epl.


Baptism, which was appointed to be a seal of Gods covenant has ever since
the first institution of it, been visible, and that even in the deepest of
Antichrists Apostasy. And the state of Apostate churches is not as the
heathen, where is no appearance of Christianity, for in them remaynes some kind
of visibilitie of Gods ordinances either more or less, accordingly as they are
more or less corrupted: For if all visibilitie should cease, they should cease
to be called Apostate, and indeed become no churches.

And therefore as in man after his fall in Adam there remaynes footsteps of that
image of God, wherein he was first created: so in churches degenerate from the
truth, remaynes some remnants of Gods ordinances that were given to his church.
The covenant is spoken of, and preached in those Apostate churches. And
baptism likewise administered, but not in that purity and light, as they are
in true churches. And as in the heavens, when the sun is shadowed with clouds
or mist, the proportion of it may be discovered in the mist or clouds, and be
perceived to be the sun: So is the covenant of God and the seal thereof,
wading through those foggie mysts of Popish errors and Antichristian
superstitions discerned and seen to be from heaven, of all the people of God,
whose hearts the Lord opens to apply them aright. Which if it were not so, God
could not have his people in Babylon, or church in the wilderness.

As you take upon you to set up a true church (as you say, but we say a false
church) An.
and will not be said to bring in a new covenant and a new Gospel etc. (for you
in your self conceitednes will reject them as Heretics, if there be any that
dare so say of you, forsooth:) So the Anabaptists (as you call them) do not set
up a new covenant and Gospel, though they set up a new or rather the old
Apostolic baptism which Antichrist had ^verthrowen.

To pass by the manner of your speeches which well might be amended: Rep.
I answer, first, that for the setting up of churches, it is the Lords work and
not ours, Ioh. 10.
who gathers his sheep into his fold, and we obey him in calling us out of
Babylon to join together to walk in his ordinances, who also inableth us
hereunto, accepts us to be his people, and Ephesians. 2.
to be citizens with the Saints and household of God. Therefore it cannot
properly be said of us that we set up a church: but that God buyldeth us up to
be his Temple. And being thus Mat. ^ 20.
gathered together in his name, we have the Mat. 2^ 20.
promise of his presence, and are assured of our standing, and that we are a
true visible church of Jesus Christ, (though it please you to call us a false
church,) and doubt not to approve our calling against you and al our
adversaries. And whereas you account it self conceiptednes in us to reject for
Heretics such as bring in damnable Heresies: it were good for them, whom we so
reject to look into their estate, and not wilfully to abide in their errors to
their perdition.

For the Anabaptists, whom you say, do not set up a new covenant and Gospel,
though they set up a new baptism. What they do, both their writings and
practice shows: but howsoever they persuade themselves to retain the old
covenant and Gospel, yet is it not so; for whosoever receives not that Gospel
and covenant that was preached and given to Abraham, and pretends to receive a
Gospel or covenant, they receive a new covenant and Gospel. But the Anabaptists
receive not the Gospel or Covenant preached to Abr. and yet pretends to receive
a covenant. Therefore it is a new covenant and Gospel which they receive. For
that Covenant which was given to Abraham, was given to him and to his seed, to
the Jews and their seed: but the covenant which the Anabaptists plead for, is
a covenant that should be made to the parents and not to their seed, and
therefore is not the same, but a new and strange Gospel, never heard of in the
days of Abraham.

Again that covenant that was given to Abraham was a sealed covenant to Genesis 1^
10. - 13. The A^ baptists any baptis^ to be a se^ of the cov^nant, and indeed
t^ have no outward s^ led covan^ at al.
him and to his natural seed: but that covenant which the Anabaptists will enter
into and receive, is an unsealed covenant, at least but sealed only to the
parents and not to their seed: and so is not the same but a new Gospel.

In my former answer I said, that it can not be showed that any man did ever
baptize him self without special commandment from God etc. and you thus
reply. I say, as much as you have to set up a true Church* wherein you answer
not directly to the point, but shift it of, with saying, that you have as much
power to set up baptism, or baptize your self, as we to set up a Church: for
suppose we have not this power to set up a Church, then how is your action of
baptising your self justified? But how we have power, for that we have done, I
have formerly showed, viz. that we have power by the Lords commandment to *
come out of babylon, to obey the truth reveiled ^ev. 18.
unto us, and to join together in the feloship of the Gospel, to walk in all
the ways of God. This is that we can do, and all that we do is by Phil. 1. 5.
divine commandment, for if the Lord had not so enjoined us, our coming
together should have been but an assembly of our own devise, and no Temple for
the Lord. Now if you will make your argument (which stands upon comparison)
answerable, you must bring like warrant from the Scripture, that you being
unbaptized, may baptize your self, or else that which we have done shall be
justified to be of God, and your baptism prove but a vain fancy. Further I
desire it may be showed, that baptism, which is a part of the work of the
Ministry, can lawfully, and by warrant from God, be administered by any, but
either by extraordinary authority, as by John, Ananias, the Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists: or ordinary, as by Pastors and Teachers. Or that a person
unbaptized without special commandment from heaven (for ordinary rule there
is none) may baptize himself, and having so done without any further calling
to office, take upon him to baptize others. And to do this, I would know, if
it be Cor. 4. 6
not to presume above that which is written. For if you that baptize your self
(being but an ordinary man) may this do, then may an other do the like and so
every one baptize himself. You that stand so much for commandment and
example, show us either of these two if you can, or any sound reason out of the
word? or else consider well, if that you be not fallen into that, which you would
condemn in others, viz. the practicing of an unwarrantable action. But you say.

A true Church cannot be erected without baptism etc.

If this be so as you say, then either that baptism which we received in the
Antichristian assemblyes is baptism, or else one that is no member of a Church
may induce the form (as you call it) upon Disciples, to make them a Church, and
this have we neither commandment nor example for. He that was the first
Minister of baptism stood then a member of the Church of the Jews, and had
also commandment to baptize: but this new doctrine teaches that one that was
never member of any Church shall baptize and make a Church, and that without
commandment from God. Now you say a Church can not be erected without
baptism, because baptism is the visible form thereof, consider you; (that
are so barren of proof for the administering of Baptising to your self, that you
can not show one good reason to warrant it to be lawful) if by condemning and
rejecting of that baptism which you received in Antichristianisme, you
overthrow not your new Church: for if a Church can not be without baptism, and
you not able to prove your new baptism from the scriptures, which have
rejected the old: Then is your assembly an idol: And so while you condemn
other Churches unjustly, for false, yours proves more false then any.

But concerning baptism, which you call the visible form fo the Church: I
answer, 1. the form of a Church is common to all together. 2. If Baptism be
the form, the^ it may come to pass, that one man may be a visible Church as
he that first in the company baptiseth himself, he is a Church being baptized,
for he that has the form upon him, must needs be the thing formed, And so Mr
Smyth was a Church, when he baptized himself, which is absurd to think.

But concerning the matter and form of the Church, this you have written, That
Paralels^ etc. pa. 11^
two or three faithful people are the true matter of the true Church of the new
Testament: and therefore have the true form or covenant of the new Testament,
induced upon them. Again, speaking of the exiled English Church at Amsterdam,
you say, that they have reduced the Church to the Apostolic constitution,
Differenc^ etc. in the Preface.
which consists in 3. things, 1. the true matter, which are Saints only. 2.
The form, which is the uniting of them together in the covenant. 3. the true
property, which is communion in all the holy things. Thus you contradict your
self: here you teach us that uniting of people together in the covenant is the
form of the Church. And in this writing, that baptism is the form. Certeynly
the holy Ghost Act. 2. 3. 39. Ephe. 4^ 4. 5.
distinguishes baptism both from the covenant and the body. But to contend
about the form of the Church, is here not to the purpose; seeing both you and
we grant that a Church must consist of baptized persons, you contending for
your new devised baptism, we holding that baptism which we have already
received.

Further you reason for the erecting of your baptism

That when al Christ visible ordinances are lost, either men must recover them
again Ans.
or must let them alone, if they be let alone till extraordinary men come with
miracles and tongues as the Apostles did, then men are FAMILISTS, or if they
must receive them, men must begin so to do. And then two men joining together
may make a Church, (as you say) why may they not baptize, seeing they can not
conioyne into Christ but by Baptism. Mat. 28. 19. compared with Mat. 18. 20
Gal. 3. 17. But it is evident that all Christ's commandments must be obeyed:
Ergo, this commandment, etc.

First for the visible ordinances of Christ, his Church has right unto them,
and his people are to have the use of them by such means and Ministry as he
has appointed: but every man may not take upon him the administration of these
ordinances, but * they whom the Lord has given Heb. 5. 4.
authority and office thereunto. God is not the author of confusion Cor. 14.
but of order. It will not follow because the Church is to have baptism
therefore any one may administer it when al are unbaptized. Thus might Jeroboam
plead for the * Priests that he made of the lowest of the people, King. 12
that it was a necessity seeing all the Priests of Levi were departed, and as at
this d^y they plead in England for their unpreaching Priests, that either they
must have such, or be without service and Sacraments, which plea, as we
condemn in them: so do we the administration of the Sacraments, or other of
Gods ordinances without warrant from the Lord. And therefore they must be let
alone til they may be had by that rule that Christ has left us for the
enjoying of the same. For this I am sure of, that the word of the Lord is
perfect, and CHRIST has left us certain direction for the practicing of al
his ordinances at all times. Now if the Scripture have not showed who shall
baptize in the Churches arising out of Apostasy, then who dare take upon him to
give direction? And though we are not to look for extraordinary men (which to
do, say you, were familisme) yet must we look for ordinary means: men must not
do that which they are not warranted by the word, though the thing be to be
done.

Secondly, for two being joined together in covenant with the Lord, to walk in
his ways, they have * warrant so to do (if there be no visible Church for them
to join unto) although I do not approve that every two Mat. 18
or three shall join together and so walk, when they may conveniently join to
a Church set already in the ways of God; neither may they attempt any thing
beyond their measure and calling, least they fall into the sin of Corah etc.
And as for two baptising themselves or one an other, that can they not do
without calling from God. And therefore you not having calling hereunto, and
being as you say unbaptized, I pray you tell me how you are authorized by Christ
hereunto, and conjoined into his name? The Admistration of Baptism is by
Christ Mat. 19. Ephe. 4. 11 12.
commanded to his Apostles and Ministers of the word, as before is showed.

As for your reason which is: That else they can not conioyne into Christ, but
by baptism. I answer, we may be joined into Christ, by being united in one
spirit into his covenant of life. And though persons that were never baptized,
be received into the Church by baptism, yet will it not follow, that such as are
baptized in apostate Churches (...), must any more be baptied, the^ they that
being circumcised were recircu^cised when they joined to the Church of the
Jews. And baptism is not our graffing into Christ, but the sign or seal
thereof, and so are those Scriptures which you alledg to be understood. And as
you say* The commandment of God must be obeyed, and so this commandment. It
is true, being done according to the order and way that Christ has appointed,
and therefore you break the commandment, to baptize your self and others
without commission from Christ, and are guilty of that which he reproved in the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15 3.
who tra^sgressed the commandments of God by their traditions: so you do in
this your new baptism transgress Gods commandment, to magnify your own
devised practice. Look well to it, the Lord has thus pronounced upon such
transgressors, Mat. 1. 5^
In vayn do they worship me, teaching doctrines men's precepts. and the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 11^ 21.
cursed are they that do err from thy co^maudeme^ts: the which judgment of
God you may behold in your selves (if God so open your eyes) who of one
company, are now at least divided into 3. each one refusing communion with
other, and still increasing in new errors.

But for the baptising of a man's self, you say,

There is as good warrant as for a man churching him self, for two men singly
are Ans.
no Church jointly they are a Church and they both of them put a Church upon
themselves: So two men may put baptism upon themselves.

This phrase of Churching a man's self, is not the phrase of the holy
Scripture, Repl.
it is the Lord that Mat. 2^ 19. Act. 1 46. 47. E^ 4. 11. 12.
calls men out of the world and gathers the^ together by his word, and
builds them up to be his Church as Christ says. Ioh. 10.
other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also I must bring and
they shall hear my voice. And they whose hearts the Lord opens, do willingly
obey his voice, and believing, Act. 2. 42.
walk together in his ways as before I have observed. To pass by your strange
phrases, the scripture thus speaks, that the Eunuch, Cornelius and others
received baptism administered unto the^ by the Ministers of Chr. but that they
or any other, did ever put baptism, that is, (as I understand you) administer
it upon themselves, I never read thereof in the scriptures: unless we should
think that John B. did it, who if it were so, had his calling extraordinary
from heaven.

As two persons unchurched have power to assume the church, each of them for
himself Ans.
with others in communion: so each of the^ unbaptised have power to assume
baptism for himself with others in communion.

These things would do well if they were proved. Concerning 2. persons or more
co^ing into communion together, I have before set down what I think. And now
for assuming of baptism, if you mean thereby receiving of it, (being lawfully
administered) the^ I grant, that they which are unbaptised may ^cts. 10. and 8.
12. ^
and ought to receive baptism in the communion of the Saints. But that 2.
persons or more may take and baptize themselves or one another in your
communion, I abhor as an humane invention. As for the examples of Abr. and
John B. administering the Sacrament upon themselves, if so it were, yet serve
^en. 17, ^. 13. ^ 26. Mat. 11. 10. 11. and ^ 25. - 27. ^. 13. - 15
nothing to your purpose: for Abraba^ had a * special commandment to
circumcise: so had John for his "baptism warrant from God. But will it follow
because these 2. administered the Sacrament upon themselves, therefore who list
may consecrate his hands to that office? What is this ^ls that you plead for,
but to overthrow that order that Christ has ^et down in his Church, to make
every one a Minister of the Lords Sacraments. Concerning the Proselytes, that
they did every one circu^cise themselves, is not proved by that of Exo. 12, 48.
for it is said there: when a stranger shall dwell with thee and will observe the
passover of the Lord, every male shall be circumcised unto him. This scripture
says not that every one did circumcise himself, but that every male should be
circumcised: Neither if the Lord had said, as the Translation is, let him
circumcise all the males that belong unto him, had this proved that all the
Proselytes had done it themselves; for it is said of Joshua, that the Lord bad
him make sharp knives, and return and circu^cise the sons of Israel the second
time. And (...). 5. 2.
yet will any think that Iosuah did himself circumcise every uncircumcised male
in Israel? or rather, that the Lord commanded him to see that it were done. And
so that commandment given to Proselytes was, that they should cause al their
males to be circumcised, or else they might not be admitted as members of the
Church to eat the Passover.

But grant that this was a special precept to the stranger to circumcise
himself and his family, the Lord laying this upon him, he had good warrant so
to do: but seeing the Lord has commanded the administration of baptism to the
Apostles and Ministers of the word, now it is to presume above that which is
written, for any man to take upon himself, to administer baptism to himself or
to others. Neither is this to follow the example of the Proselytes, if they had
done as you allege: for then the Master only and none else circumcised, and
he circumcised but his family. But this new opinion inableth any man, be he
Master or servant to baptize himself, and also to baptize others that are not
of his family. Note well how this example serves to your purpose.

Howbeit for circumcision, I take it, that it was administered by the Levites
after that they were called of office, because Number. 8. 14. - 18.
they were appointed in the room of the first borne of Israel for the service
of the Lord. And as I have heard, the Levites amongst the Jews, do circumcise
at this day.

But one thing more I would ask you, whether by two assuming baptism in
communion, you mean that two consenting together may the one baptize the other,
at one and the same instant, or that one shall baptize the other first, and then
he that is baptized, baptize him that was his baptiser, and what rule or
warrant you have so to do? and do not with obscure terms seek to set a color
upon your errors to deceive the ignorant.

As concerning the administration of the Lords Supper, to a man's self in
communion with others, and prayer prophesying and praising of God uttered for a
man's self as well as for others, of every unclean person washing himself at the
door of the Tabernacle going to sacrifice, of every master of a family
administering the passover to himself and all his family, the Priest daily
sacrificing for himself and others. All these proves not your desire.

For as touching the administration of the Lords supper, it appertains to the
Ministers of Christ to do it and not to every man. And by virtue of their
office they do administer, and as they are members of the church, they
participate of those holy things with the rest of the brethren: And this is
Gods ordinance: your case of baptising one another, is not alike: for there he
administreth the Sacrament that has no calling, and he that is unbaptised
himself, presumes to set the seal upon himself or upon an other. Also in the
Lords Supper al are agents according to their estate and nature of the action:
but in the receiving of baptism we are only patients.

As for praying, prophesying and praising of God, uttered for a man's self as
well as for others; this is Gods ordinance that men should pray and ^at. 6, 6, ^
etc. ^ph. 6. 18 ^. 2. 42. ^. 47. Tim. 2. 1.
praise God for themselves and others, and is not only a work of the
ministry, (save in public) but a general duty apperteyning to * all the
brethren: but the administration of baptism, is appointed to the Ministry.
And there is great difference between our prayers and sacrifices offered to
God, and the Lords Sacraments and word ministered unto us, the former we are
commanded to do our selves in our due place: the other is from the Lord unto
us, and we are the subjects to receive the same by the administration of Gods
Ministers, and al these things are the commandments of God.

Concerning those in the old Testament, that being unclean did purify or wash
themselves, they did thereby show forth their continual and voluntary
repentance and faith to be cleansed from their pollutions and sins by Jesus
Christ. Ioh. 13, 10. Neither did they this without the Lords Lev. 13. ^. and
15. ^. 27.
commandment. For were not the * purifyings of the unclean prescribed by
Moses? show us the like warrant for the new baptising of your selves, and the
controversy is ended; and unless you do it, what do all these examples prove
for you? seeing al these were done by warrant of the word, and you have no
scripture to allege for your doings. And for the Priests washing themselves
in the Laver, Exodus 30 ^^. 21.
God so commanded. But the Priests (you say) washing in the Laver at the door
of the Tabernacle was a type of baptism the door of the church. would you
then have us to think that every one co^ing to the Church: should baptize
himself, yea and that also every time they come to public worship? For if you
hold thus, you might also thus reason from your similitude. But similitudes and
allegories must not be pressed further then the intendement of them, and
proportion of faith will suffer. That washing, no doubt did signify that such
as come into Gods presence to offer any sacrifices, must be clean and holy: and
the water in the Laver might well be a type of the blood of Jesus Christ, and of
regeneration* in him, teaching that all the faithful (being made Priests unto
God) should be washed from al their sins in the blood of Christ, and
sanctified in him to the service of the Lord. And that therefore they should
continually repent of their sins and have faith in Jesus Christ, that so
through him, they and their works and service, may be accepted of the Lord, and
they in the end be received into his heavenly kingdom. But this will not
justify your baptising of your selves, for besides that which is answered
before, the Priests were commanded to wash their hands and their feet
themselves, for such use as is aforesaid. But in the new Testament we are
appointed to be baptized by the Lords Ministers, as has been declared already.
The same answer may be given to that of the Priests sacrificing for themselves,
that they had the word for their warrant, and were first to offer for their
own sins and then for the peoples. And this was an offering up to God: but
baptism is the Lords ordinance to be administered to us, and therefore in this
respect also, your reason is not alike.

Lastly, for that of every Master of a family administering the Passover, the
same is to be minded, as in the former instances. And seeing they were
altogether to eat of one food, (which shadowed out Jesus Christ and our
Redemption by his death,) it lay upon the father of the family, not only to do
the things of ministration parteyning to him, but to partake also himself of
the same common food and banquet with the rest. Moreover, although the master of
the family did so as then was appointed to be done by him: yet will it not
follow that every man may now administer baptism to himself and others. The
Master did that then for himself and his family, by the Exo. 12. 3^ 4. - 10.
commandment of the Lord, who was as a Bishop and a Priest in his own house,
and besides him none in the house might do it. But after that God had to his
church by Moses given laws and ordinances, and the Priests to do the service
of the Lord: the 2 Chr. 3^ 17. and 35. 1^ 11.
killing of the Passover was performed by the Levites and Priests: which
teaches us that it is not in every man's power to be a Minister of the Lords
ordinances, save they that have calling thereunto. And therefore I marveil that
you will bring in so many instances so unfitting to your practice: all which
examples might have taught you rather the unlawfulnes of your action, they
being al done by warrant, and yours without altogether.

Lastly, you say, A man cannot baptize others into the Church himself being out
of the church. Then I pray you Sir, resolve me how you can baptize your self
into the church being out of it, yea and where there was no church? or how you
could baptize others, your self being out of the Church? or how two can baptize
themselves to be a church that are unbaptised and without the church? And what
conclusion is this to say, A man can not baptize others into the Church himself
being unbaptised: therefore it is lawful for a man to baptize himself with
others in communion? If you have no better warrant for the practice of your
doings, then these reasons which you have already alleged, youn^ed not to
boast of your Plerophory of your Practice. But what is now become of your
plerophory and full persuasion about it, seeing you have already changed your
mind againconcerning your baptising of your self, and for this cause and other
the like matters, are by some of your people excommunicate,. It were good for
you to remember and keep that saying of the Apostle, It is good always to be
zealous in a good thing. Gal. 4. 18.


Mr Smythes Reasons for Anabaptisme of Elder people, Answered.
R. Clyfton THus having set down Reasons to prove that Apostates or
Antichristia^s co^verted are not to be rebaptised: let us come to the
examination of the reasons alleged to the contrary, the first whereof is this.


1. Because Churches are to be constituted now after the defection of
Antichrist, as they were first erected by the Apostles: but in the constitution
of Churches the Apostles receved in the members by baptism. Ergo, so must we
do now.
Answer

The estate and constitution of people now, is not a like to the state of the
Gentiles or Jews in the Apostles times, they differ in diverse respects. First
l the people then both of Jews and Gentiles never had been themselves, nor
were ever of the posterity of those that had been members of the Church of
Christ under the Gospel: seeing then was the first planting of Evangelical
Churches. But we are now the posteriety of such parents as were members of the
Church planted by the Apostles, else could we not have Apostated 2. That people
which the Apostles gathered into Churches were never baptized: And baptism
coming in steed of circumcision, and being a seal of our entering into Gods
covenant; it was fit that they which believed and became the seed of Abrah:
should so enter in to covenant they and their seed as he and his seed entered,
that is, as he and his, were received in by circumcision: so they and theirs
should be receved in by baptism: Act. 2. 38. 41. and 8. 38. But we are a
people that are already baptized, and the seed of them that were baptized, and
had received the Gospel. And (although through Antichrists deceaveablenes both
we and they were taynted with many corruptions) yet had they or might have in
that Apostasy, and so we also, so much faith, as thereby both we and they
might become the people of God. Apoc. 18. 4.

And concerning the co^stitutio^ of Churches, here it is to be noted, that the
co^stitutio^ of Churches set down by the Apostles was by the imediate direction
of the H. Ghost, And so serves for a continual rule of establishing Churches
to the end of the world: which form or frame laid down by them, no man has
power to alter or change. 1. Cor. 4. 14. 1, Tim. 6. 14. But the constituting of
Churches now after the defection of Antichrist, ma^^ more properly be called a
repayring, then a constituting of Churches; which through Apostasy have been
ruinated, or a gathering together of the dispersed sheep of Israel into such
forms or shapes of visible Churches (the pattern whereof is showed unto us in
the word) For (as before has been noted) our state is not as theirs was that
were the first constituted Churches: And so it will not follow (as is aledged)
that the receiving in of members into our Churches necessaryly must be by
baptism, as in the primitive time it was: except only of such persons as have
not been baptized before.

And herein I take it, lies the deceat of this Argument that it puts no
difference between the people of God coming ou^ of Babylon, and them that came
to the faith from amongst the Gentiles, equalizing Antichristianisme with
Gentilisme, the one being an apostate Church, the other no Church, the one
partaker of the word and sacraments (though with much corruption) the other
partaker of neither at all: the one professing Christ and teaching many truths
of God, and so many as the elect thereby might come to faith, Apo: 18. 4. The
other neither professing Christ, nor teaching any truth of God, whereby any
might be converted to Christ, and become Gods people, in that estate of
Gentilisme.

And thus having made plain the different estate of the first planted Churches
and ours in Apostasy, I answer 1. That Churches now are to be constituted. (if
repayring be not a fitter speech) as in the Apostles times, and that all such
as are received in as members being unbaptized, must be received in by
baptism: but for such, as were baptized in Apostate Churches, their*
repentance is sufficient without rebaptization, as it was to the Apostate
Israelites, who upon their repentance and returning to Jerusalem were received
of the Church, without any new circumcision. And therefore to add a second
baptism, with the Anabaptists, is to Apostate from Christ, and not to enter
into his covenant.

And in that the Apostles received in members by baptism, they could do no
otherwise, seeing the whole world was unbaptized: but if they had met with any
that before had been baptized into the name of Christ, as they that received
the baptism of John, and as we are, I make no question they did not, nor would
not have rebaptised them. And therefore the conclusion will not follow that we
are now to receave in by baptism, them that are already baptized.

Mr Smyth. As in the former point for baptising of infants, you are compelled
to run to the old Testament: and from thence to fetch the chief corner stone
of your building, viz. from circumcision: So in this second point you utterly
forsake the new testament of Christ, etc. and set us again to school to
Moses, as if Christ had not been faithful enough to teach us his new Testament,
but we must go learn the new Testament, of the old Testament, Christ of Moses,
the Gospel of the law. etc.


Rich: Clifton. Before you come to answer my exception against your reason, you
prefix Answ.
as it were for a ground, certain things which you entreat me and all the
Separation, especeally the leaders, well to weigh and ponder, and not to be
ashamed to learn of their inferiors. In which your great observation. 1. you
charge me to be compelled to run to the old Testament etc. What my answer is
to this your reason shall be justified. Now where you except about the former
point for baptising of infants against my running to the old Testament to fetch
my chief corner stone, etc. If I have done evil herein, bear witness of it: but
if I have followed the example of Christ and his Apostles, who proved that
which they taught by the Scriptures of the old Testament, why impute you this
unto me to disgrace? search these Mat. ^ 23. and 2. ^ 15. 28. and 3. and 22. ^
32. Joh. 23. and 5. 3^ Luke 24. 2^ Act. 2. 2^ and 3. 22. and 4: 25. 26. and 18.
28. Ro^ 4, 3, 6. and 7. 9. and ^ 11 with d^vers other
places quoted in the margent, and see if the things of the new testament, were
not proved out of the old. Yet notwithstanding I have used other reasons from
the Scriptures of the new Testament, to prove the baptising of infants, as in
my answer is to be seen. But my corner stone (as you please to call it) fetched
from the old testament, is so ponderous, as you can not remove it.

Concerning the forsaking of the new Testament, it is not I, but your self Mr
Smyth that sins therein, by casting the children of believers out of the
covenant of salvation. And as towching the scriptures of Moses and the
Prophets, Christ himself set us to school to learn of them the things Ioh. 5.
39*
that are witten of him: and yet this you fault in me as if it were not lawful
to prove doctrines and ordinances of the new Testament, out of Moses and
Characte^ page 44.
the Prophets. But I pray you Sir, that finds fault to be set again to the
school to Moses, why say you " we must attain to and learn all that the
school-Maister of the old testament could teach us. Do not you herein set us to
school to Moses? But it seems you are past Moses teaching, I would wish you
were not past Christ's also. The old Testament is not so abrogated, that withal,
the writings of Moses and of the 2 Timothy 3. ^. - 17. Pet. 1. 9. - 21.
Prophets, cease to be in force to teach us that live under the Gospel. And if
they be in force to teach, then are we to learn and to be taught by them.

As for Christ his faythfulnes in teaching us his new Testament, (which you
think is diminished, if we labor to prove any of the ordinances thereof from
the Scriptures of the old Testament) know you, that we hold Christ Heb. 3. 2.
to be faithful to him that has appointed, even as Moses in all his house. And
yet no disparagement to him or the new Testament, (but rather an honor) to
prove the parts and observances thereof, from Moses and the Prophets. For he
that bad us Search the scriptures, did also himself to the two disciples that
went to Emaus, Luke 24. ^^.
begin at Moses and at all the Prophets and interpreted unto them in all the
Scriptures the things which were written of him. Which practice of Christ, as
it does teach us that we may learn Christ and the new Testament out of Moses
and the Scriptures of the old Testament: so does it manifest his faythfulnes,
that taught and fulfilled all that was prophesied of him, not imposing upon his
church any new doctrine not heard of before. Baptism under the Gospel is
proved out of the old Testaments the Jews did not think it strange to be at
the coming of the Messiah, Ioh. 1. 25. And Mr. Smyth says, that the Jews
baptismes were into the Messiah to come in type. Ergo, our baptism being the
thing typed, must needs have warrant from the old Testament, and then it is no
disgrace to go to school to Moses to learn it.

And first I would know why we may not as well with the Papists, fetch one high
Repl.
Priest from Moses, succession in the Ministry from Moses, succession in the
Church from Moses, as a succession in baptism from Moses: and in effect you
fetch a succession of the Church from Rome, for in fetching a succession of
Baptism^ from Rome, which is the form of the church, yea and in fetching a
succession of the matter of the church, which is the seed of the Parents
baptized, you of necessity make the church of Rome a true Church.

First, for the Priesthood of Moses, the Ceremonies and such like ordinances
Answ.
of the church under the old Testament, they are Heb. 7. 12. etc. and cha. ^.
and chapter 9. ^ cha. 10. Col. 2. 16. 17.
removed by the coming of Jesus Christ, and therefore there cannot be any
succession thereof under the Gospel, save in Christ: but of the everlasting
covenant made with Abraham, and sealed to him and his seed before the law was
given, is no abrogation thereof. There is an everlasting continuance (which you
call a succession) not only in the Church of the old Testament, but also under
the Gospel as the Apostles do Gal. 3. 8* 9. Act. 2. 3*
witness, as also Mat. 28. 19.
a continuance of the sealing of the same. And therefore we must plead such a
succession both of the covenant and sealing thereof from our father Abraham:
seeing it is the Gal. 3. 8. 14. - 17. 28. and 4. 28.
same wherein we of the Gentiles are comprehended.

And this difference between this Covenant and the law and ordinances of the
old Testament, if it please you to take notice of, will answer your question
about succession. Yet I would not have you mistake me, for although I hold in
this sense a continual succession of the people of God partakers of this
covenant of salvation, I affirm not that there has been always, and at al
times known established churches, keeping soundly all the ordinances of Christ,
and making visible profession thereof. In the Apostacy of Israel the Lord had
his seven thousand that never bowed their knee to Baal, to whom this covenant
belonged, and so had he in Rev. 18. 4*
antichristianisme.

Again, we fetch not a succession of Baptism from Moses, otherwise then the
Apostles have taught us. Col. 2. 10. - 12. 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 3. 20. 21.
The sealing of the covenant was commanded to Abraham, and never repealed (save
only the outward sign changed, as before is said.) And as we fetch no
otherwise succession from Moses or the old Testament, then has been said: No
more do we succession of the Ministry, or of any other ordinance of Christ,
but in like manner and upon like warrant. 2. Concerning fetching of succession
of our church from Rome because of our Baptism: I answer, 1. that Baptism, as
also the Scriptures were given to the Church of Rome when she was a true church
and she retayning them in her Apostasy, we receive them as Christ word and
baptism, though continued through her corrupt Ministry and estate. 2. If
(according to your terming) succession of Baptism be granted, (being an
ordinance of God,) yet will it not follow, that therefore we must reteyn the
whoredoms of the church of Rome (which we are commanded to separate from, Rev.
18. 4) because we retein baptism, but rather thus, as we have baptism from
Christ, so are we to have the co^stitution of our church, and what is polluted
in either by Antichrist* to reject.

3. Our retayning of baptism administered in the Apostate churches, does no
more prove that we fetch succession of our church from Rome: then the
Israelites, that were circumcised in the church of Jeroboam, returning to
Jerusalem did fetch the succession of their church from the Apostate church of
Israel.

If it be objected that this people now separated from that Apostasy, were
matter of that false church: and so we fetch a succession of the matter of our
church from a false church. I answer, that al such of Gods people that stand
members of those Antichristian assemblies must be considered two ways. 1. in
respect of us and their outward standing, so are they members of those
Assemblies: 2. in respect of the Lord and their election; so are they no
members thereof, but the matter of Gods invisible church in time becoming
visible. As on the contrary in a visible church, all the people thereof in our
account are held true members, yet hypocrites 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
in the Lords account, are no members or matter thereof. And as the Apostle
says of Antichrists, if they had been of us, they should have continued with
us: so I say of Gods people in Babylon, if they had been of that Antichristian
church they should have continued with them, but by their co^ing out, it
appears that they are not of them, and therefore we cannot be said to have the
matter of our church by succession from Antichristianisme: but by the gracious
work of God in his people of al ages, and (to use your word of Succession) as
it were by a secret and hidden succession, even from the Apostles times. And
thus it will not follow (as you say) that we make the church of Rome a true
church.

If Infants of the church of Rome have true title to Baptism, by reason of the
faith Repl.
of some of their Ancestors that were faithful, then are they the true matter
of the visible church. etc.

We do not say that the Infants of the church of Rome, have title to An.
Baptism by reason of their Ancestors faith, but do afferme that in respect of
that Apostatical standing, neither infants nor their parents have right to any
of Gods ordinances: neither is it enough that people be elected, and thereby to
have right to Gods covenant etc. before God: but to be members of the visible
church and partakers of the holy things, there must be a Rev. 18. 4
visible going out of Babylon: 2 Cor. 6. ^6.
f^r what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols. the vessels of the Lord
must be carried out to Jerusalem, and then are they in their due place, and shall
have their true use, which in their Romish standing they could not have; albeit
in Babylon they were the vessels of the Lord. And herein are you deceived, that
if any of the ordinances of God be retained in the hands of Autichristians,
these ordinances must either make them a true visible Church, or be none of
his, and when they are brought out thence have no use.

These thing, may also answer that which follows: For upon this that we deny
Baptism administered in Popery to be iterated, you would conclude these
absurdities to follow. viz.

That infants of the Church of Rome are a true visible Ch: in the co^stitutio^
and essential Repl.
causes thereof. That the Church in the new testament comes by succession of
carnal genealogy through the church of Rome to our days. That the matter of
the church, viz. Infants descending of baptized parents, is by genealogy, and
the form of the Church, viz. baptism upon those infants, is by descent, and
therefore the Church is by succession. I demand, why may not the Ministry be
by succession as well as the Church, and England and Rome true Churches, their
Ministry true, etc.

To all which particulars, I answer thus, 1. Infants may be members Ans.
of a visible Church, but that a visible Church can stand of infants only, we
deny. 2. Neither Infants nor the elder sort standing in Antichristianism, can
be the matter of a true visible Church, being so looked upon according to that
estate and respect. 3. Baptism (which you would have the form) has his true
use in the visible Church of Christ, and to Gods people. 4. let the people of
God in Babylon and the Baptism that there they receive, be compared with Gods
people in the apostate Church of Israel, and with their circumcision: And it
will appear that the infants of the Church of Rome are not a true visible
Church, in the essential causes thereof, any more or otherwise, then as they
were in Israel. Concerning the Churches succession by carnal genealogy, I
answer, that as the covenant was made with Abraham and his seed; so under the
Gospel, does the promise belong to the parents and their children. And that
God had Apoc. 14. and 4.
his people in all the times of Popery that were within his covenant: Neither
is this to hold succession of visible Churches, but (to use your term) a
succession of true believers in all ages, though not always known in public,
it being the lot of the Rev. 1. 13. 14.
Church to be persequuted by the Dragon and driven to flee into the wilderness,
for a time, times, and half a time. And therefore seeing the matter of the
visible Church is not always, nor otherwise seen to descend from baptized
persos by genealogy, then as it did from parents circumcised in Israel: there
can be no other succession visible of the Church, or Ministry, then is
incident to such estate, but as in Israel there was * a breaking off, of both:
so has King. 12 33. ^ev. 11. 7. 12. 14. ^ 13. 7. 8.
it fallen out under the new Testament, a surceasing of succession of true
visible Churches and of the true Ministry in the apostasy of Antichrist. And
this may satisfy you why we may not return back again to churches continuing
in Apostasy.

But where you say, you hear some are minded to take up their former ministry
and return back again into England. You should have done well, either to have
forewarned such, (if you knew in them a purpose to sin) else not so easily to
have received the report thereof to make it public, and so to cause suspicion
to arise against any brother undeservedly. For mine own part, I know none of
the church to have any such thoughts. If any that have left the faith, as you
have done, and departed from the church, or for their sin justly cast out, so
do purpose, what is that to us? look to it your selves.

And truly for my part, I hold it as lawful to retain the church and
Ministry of England, as to retain the baptism, and when I shall yield to the
truth of the baptism of England, I will yield to the truth of the Church and
Ministry of England etc.

It may be you speak truer of your estate, then you think. But whatsoever Ans.
your persuasion is, I mind a difference to be put between baptism administered
in churches standing in Apostasy, and the constitution and ministry of these
churches: For baptism being the ordinance of God, may not be repeated, as
before is proved: but those Assemblies that consist of confused multitudes and
are not set in the ways of God, that have a false Ministry and worship, we
have a special commandment * to separate Rev. 18. 4 Cor. 6. 17.
from, as we have from al corruptions of Gods ordinances: but in no scripture
to reject the ordinances themselves for any pollution that is upon them.

Now it is further to be remembered, that we in retayning baptism, do not
retayn the corruptions wherewith it was administered, but that which is of God
therein: Neither do we hold it lawful for them that are come out of Babylon, to
return thither to fetch Baptism. And to make this difference to appear more
plainly, Let be considered the example of those Israelites that returned to
Jerusalem, who cast not of their circumcision, yet might they not justify for
true, that apostate Church or Ministry from which they did separate, or
continue in the communion thereof without sin.

But because I know the Ministry and Church of England is false, therefore it
must needs be, that Baptism, which is the form of the Church essentially,
etc. Repl.


For the Ministry of the Church of England, whether it be true or false, Ans.
is not the thing controverted between you and me: but that baptism in an
apostate Church is false essentially I deny, and your self confesses Char^
page 35.
that if it be administered by Antichrist to such as confess their faith and
sins, it were true and not to be repeated: which opinion of yours can not
stand, if the essence of baptism be destroyed. For your wish, that the Lord
would open all our eyes of the separation to see and our hearts to understand,
that all the old Testament was carnal, to type out and to teach them heavenly
things: and therefore their Church was carnal to type to us the new Testament,
etc. It has pleased God, (and we are thankful for it) to open our eyes to
discern of your carnal doctrine, and to understa^d the truth, which you labor
to obscure by your strange expositio^s. As for the old Test. which you call
carnal, and the church carnal: I tell you again and again, that all the
ordinances under the old testament, were spiritual in their ordination and
right use, as the Romans 7
law it self is holy and spiritual, and therefore are called Heb. ^
ordinances of religion, and the Tabernacle, Mikdasch, to teach that it was of
an holy use for the Lord. The old Ioh. 1^ Ephe. ^ 19. and 3. 1 Cor. 10 4. Ephesians. 4
Church also was a spiritual house, notwithstanding, that the first testament
had ordinances of religion which did shadow forth things to come, for in
substance both it, and the Church under the Gospel are Heb. 1. - 10.
the same, only differing in the outward administration of the covenant. To
the former Church holy things were administered, under types and figures: to the
latter more simply and in the plain manifestation of the truth. Now to prove
your carnal and typical Church, you say:

The matter of the old Church, was a carnal Israelite, and the form, carnal
circumcision Re.
a carnal seal. Genesis 17. 10-14. But the matter of the Church of the new
Testament is a true Israelite, the form is the circumcision of the heart, a new
creature, the holy spirit of promise, whereby we are sealed, which is
manifested by confession and baptism in water. Act. 10. 47. Ephe. 1. 13. Gal.
3. 27. and 6. 15. Io. 3. 5. Mat. 3. 6. Ro^. 10. 9. Act, 8. 36. 37. etc.

Concerning your carnal matter and form I have answered, page 12. and have
also proved that God did require of that his people Israel to be Exo. ^
holy and Ro^. 2. 29. D^ 10. 16 Jer. 4. 4 Ans.
spiritual. And for the form of the old Church, I have showed likewise that
they became Genesis Deuteronomy. 2^ 10 - 15.
a Church and people of God, by virtue of Gods covenant made with them,
whereunto circumcision was added as a seal to confirm the same, which they
also received, page 12. 13. 23. etc. The form of the Church can never be
wanting, the Church continuing to be a Church: but circumcision may be wanting,
and was wanting to all the Israelites (...) in the wilderness by all that space
of 40. years, and yet I hope they were (...)bers of his Psalm. 43.
Church all that time notwithstanding.

That which you set down for the form of the new testament, viz. Circumcision
of the heart, a new creature and the spirit of Christ, is internal, proper to
every true member both of the old Church and new: yea this form (if it be so
called) belongs to Gods people in Babylon and to all the members of the
invisible Church: but that outward form of a visible Church, which we are to
know it by, must be visible, and such as we can discern them to be a people of
God from all other assemblies. But this new creature and inward graces, you will
say are manifested by confession and baptism in water: so may it also, where
baptism is not had as it might be in Israel when they could not have
circumcision. Also the form of the Church, must be one indivisible thing
common to the whole, that gives the being thereof, as before I have observed:
but confession and baptism as it is particularly applied to every member, as
to the * Eunuch, Paul etc. so may it rest in one man, if all the rest should
dye or fall away, who could ^ct. 8. ^ 9. 18
not be a Church, and yet he has that, which you set down to be the form of
the Church. Wherefore Gods people joined together in the fellowship of the
Gospel, must have one general form, whereby they receive the denominatio^ of a
Church, and that is their solemn e^tring into communion under the covenant of
the Lord uniting together, to walk in all his ways and to be his ^eu. 29. ^
13. ^. 18. 20 ^i. 1. 5. ^. 2. 42 ^ifferenc ^he pre^.
people, which all that are afterward added to the Church must promise to
observe. And such a communion do we hold for a Church (and so "did you) For as
many stones may be hewe^ and squared, and so be fit matter for an house, yet
have not those stones the denomination of an house, until they be joined
together in one form: No more people confessing Christ, are to beheld a
visible Church until they be joined together in such a form, as Christ has
commanded. But to follow you in your comparison of these two Churches,
speaking of the Jews thus you say. Their carnal Church in the matter and
form, came by carnal genealogy, and so they all of them were gendered unto
bondage under the rudiments of the world. Gal. 4. 24.-25. under the carnal
Testament. Our Church in the matter and form thereof is by spiritual
generation, that is the genealogy of the faithful, of Abraham the father of us
all. Gal 3. 7. 9. 14. Ro^. 4. 10. 11. Their parents in that carnal Church, was
carnal Abraham, and carnal Agar, etc. our spiritual parent is Abraham spiritual
etc. Their Ministry was a carnal Ministry by carnal genealogy etc.

First I deny that either the matter or form of the Church of the ^^.
Jews came by carnal genealogy, as you apply it: They were made a Church and
people of God through the everlasting covenant which God made with Abraham and
his seed, else could not the Proselyts and their children have been matter of
that old Church, seeing they descended not by carnal genealogy from Abraham.
Again, that Church must be of the same nature with the covenant which gives
the being thereof, but this Deuteronomy. 13. co^f. w^ Luke 1. 7^ 73. 74. Cor 6. 1^
covenant is spiritual: Ergo the Church also is spiritual.

That place of Gal. 4. 24. 25. which you cite to prove that old Church to be
carnal, you missaply, as before I have showed, page, 14. Secondly I deny that
Hagar was the mother of the Israelites after the flesh, though Abraham was
their father, neither was Ismael the type of the Israelits as they were by
nature the seed of Abraham, but of such Israelits and others under the Gospel,
that by the works of the law sought to be justified, whereby they came in
bondage to the law as the Apostle witnesses. See the exposition of Gal. 4. 24.
25. in page 14.

As for the spiritual genealogy, both under the law and the Gospel, I do
approve to be the true seed of Abraham, but not in your sense, that excludes
the infants of the faithful from the covenant, which of us are to be Mat. ^
Act. 3.
accounted the children thereof, as well as these that outwardly profess their
faith.

And concerning the Ministry of the old Church, although none could be
Priests Exo. 28.
but of the line of Aaron, yet was the Number. 6-19. D^ 33. 8-^
tribe of Levi chosen by God himself for that office. And God * sanctified them
to the service of his name, and to the Ministry of holy things.

Lastly, you charge us, with an introducing of a carnal line into the Church,
to be baptized, and by succession fetch baptism upon the carnal line through
the Church of Rome, etc. " Numb* 19. 1 Cor. ^ 13.


Of this I have spoken before, and I answer further. 1. that we do not
introduce any other carnal line into the Church to be baptized, then the Lord
himself introduces, that is, the children of the faithful. And this is not (as
you say) to set up Iudaisme in the new Testament, seeing all the people of God,
of al nations and ages are bound unto it: for we know no other covenant, by
which we become the People and Church of God, but that same, which was made
with Abraham and his seed.

Concerning the carnal line (as you call it) though in respect of us it may
seem to stop in Apostasy, yet the Lord continues his promise to his elect
therein. Neither by this our retayning of baptism do we justify Rome to be a
true church, nor make our selves Schismatics: seeing we cast of her
adulteries, and keep that which is Christ's ordinance, by her polluted. Also you
charge us, To be fallen from Christ, and become a new second image of the beast
never heard of before in the world. For being fallen from Christ look that it
be not your own case. Of the image of the beast I read, but not of a ^ev. 13.
^. 15. and ^. 9.
new second image, and therefore no marveil though it be never heard of in the
world. (as you say) and if it had been by you unspoken of also, by so applying
of it unto us, your sin had been the less. And thus much in answer to your
premised ground. Next you set down the sum of my exception.

First I say, that the new Testament is as sufficient for the direction of all the affairs ^l.
and occasions that befall in our time in the new Testament, as the old
Testament was for the occurrents that befell under the old Testament, seeing
Christ is as faithful as Moses, and the new Testament as perfect as the old.
Gal. 3. 15. and therefore if the Lord had intended to put a difference betwixt
the Apostalike constituting of Churches and our constituting of them, in
respect of the persons to be admitted into the church, and in respect of
baptising, and not baptising, or rebaptising of them, he could and would have
done it* etc.

The sufficiency of the new Testament we acknowledge, and of the books Answ.
thereof for that use wherefore they were written. But it seems that you
confound the new Testament or covenant of grace with the books thereof: for you
reason thus, that the new Testament (meaning the books thereof) are sufficient
for direction of al affairs of the church. And your proof out of Gal. 3. 15.
is of the covenant it self, and not of the books thereof. And afterward you
allege as a reason for the same end, that the new Testament is perfect and
sealed with the blood of Christ, thus deceiving the Readers with an homonomy of
the word Testament.

The books of the new Testament were al unwritten when Christ sufferred and had
sealed the covenant of Grace. This Testament had been perfect, if there had
been never a book written. The history of the Gospel was written Ioh. 20. 31
Romans 1. 1. 2. and 16. 25. 26.
that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ promised and foretold in the
holy Scriptures of the Prophets, and that believing in him we might have
eternal life.

Concerning the faythfulnes of Christ, it consists in Luke 1. 70 and 24. 27.
^ Pet. 1. 10. ^1. 12. Act. 26. 22. and 13. 29.
fulfilling of those things which Moses and the Prophets had said should come
to pass. And if he give us direction for all the affairs and occasions that
fall out in our times, either out of the books of the new Testament or old, we
ought to be thankful to God, and accordingly to use them, and not bynd him, or
our selves, only to the writings of the Apostles: Seeing Christ is the Author
as well of the doctrine and writings of the Prophets, as of the Apostles. 2 Timothy
3. 16, 17. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 19.

Again, concerning the difference between the Apostolic constituting of
Churches and ours, which you charge us with: I answer, we plead for no
difference, neither do we practice contrary to the first planting of the
church (witness Mr. Smyth. Differences, in the preface lin. 12.) ^ns. ^
for as then such as were to be received into the Church, did confess their
faith, and so with their families were baptized, so we hold, that all such that
are unbaptised, and to be added to the church: must enter thereinto they with
their families, after the same manner, as in the Apostles times. And we do
acknowledge that all churches which have Apostated, are to be reformed
according to the pattern and platform laid down by the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures. But this difference we put between persons that were never
baptized, and such as have received baptism in an Apostate church: affirming
that the former are to be adjoined to the Church by baptism, the latter not to
be again baptized: which if it had been necessary, the Lord no doubt would
have commanded, when he bad his people to go out of Babylon. But seeing he
says not a word of the renewing thereof, we are to content our selves, and to
practice as the Holy Ghost 2 Chr. ^ 5. - 13.
else where does teach us, by the example of the Israelites in an other like
case. Now if you can show us either commandment or example or any good reason
in all the new Testament, to rebaptise them which have been baptized in
Apostate churches, we will receive it and practice it: if not, why do you plead
for it, and without warrant do rebaptise your selves, and also affirm so
confidently, that all things be so manifest in the APOSTLES writings, that upon
every occasion that falls out in our times, we have direction for it.

Lastly, it is not we that add to this new Testament (as you charge us) or
that bring in a new CHRIST, a new Church, a new Covenant, a new Gospel, and
a new Baptism: but you your selves are guilty of this sin, for you by your
new devysed baptism, have rejected the seal of GODS Covenant, and
consequently the covenant it self, and so the Author of it. And as JEROBOAM
forged the eight month out of his own heart, for to keep a feast unto ^in. 12.
the Lord: so have you forged a church of your own invention, and the receiving
in of members into it. And that which you would impute unto ^v. 22. ^.
us, is fallen upon your selves, even that * woe for adding to the word.

Secondly, I affirm that (as the holy Ghost says) the Antichristians are in
condition equal to Pagans, not called Israelites or Samaritanes, but
Babylonians, Egyptians, Sodomites, Gentiles: But the holy Ghost knows what
and how to speak: And therefore as the Babylonians, Egyptians, Sodomites and
Gentiles washings were nothing, no more is the Baptism of Antichristians any
thing* etc.

I have Answered to this before page 150. 151. And showed that the Jews, which
were called the people of "Gomorah, and their Rulers the Princes of Sodom,
should then stand in the same estate with Pagans, and (...) 10.
in condition be equal unto them, and their circumcision void, if the holy
Ghost, in so terming them, did mind as you do. This is a strange kind of
reasoning, that because the Antichristians resemble the Gentiles in some
filthy practices, for the which the spirit calls them Sodomites, etc.
therefore their condition in all respects, is as theirs. Christ called Peter
Satan, shall we thereupon conclude, that therefore Peter was as Satan in all
respects, because in his counseling his master to favor himself, he was like
him? Of Judah it is said, that she was more corrupt in all her ways, then
Samaria and Sodom, shall we say (because the Lord thus speaks) that Judah was
now to be recircumcised? If the holy Ghost calling the Antichristians Sodomites
etc. should teach us thereby, that he esteems no otherwise of the church and
Baptism, then of the Synagogues of Babylon, the washings of Egypt, then of
the worship of Sodom and the Pagans (as you say) then must he needs teach us,
the like to esteem of the churches of the Jews, and of the circumcision, when
he calls them the people of Gomorrah, and more corrupt in her ways then
Sodom, as before I have observed.

For your comparison of the Gentiles washings, with the baptism of
Antichristians, affirming, that as the former were nothing, no more is the
other. This is not to compare things alike: for the washings of the Gentiles
were of man's invention, and baptism is the ordinance of Christ. And therefore
it will not follow, that because men's devises are nothing, when any of the^
turn to God; that baptism also (God, ordinance profaned in Popery) is
therefore nothing, when any such Apostates repent and return to Sion. No more
is this a good reason to prove that the Holy Ghost did fore see, that the
Antichristians would abolish true baptism, by baptising Infants, because he
calls persons Apostating, Babylonians, Sodomites, Gentiles.

Thirdly, whereas you say that repayring the Church now after the Apostasy of
R^pl.
Antichrist is a fitter speech then constituting, herein do you both tax your
selves of the use of that word, constitution, and plainly signify that you
incline to maintain the Churches of England or Rome to be true churches,
wherein whether you do not forsake your first faith, and turn with the dog to
the vomit, look you unto it. etc.

If it had pleased you to have taken my whole answer, you had neither Ans.
cause to have excepted against the word, repayring, nor yet have gathered
thereby any inclination in us, to maintayn any thing that is corrupt either in
the churches of England or Rome, much less (as you say) to forsake our first
faith, and turn with the dog to the vomit. But you that thus speak, it were
good to take heed, you be not the dog that vomits out your blaspemous errors,
to the dishonor of God and offense of his people. If the word of repayring,
had been so faulty, you had done better to have manifested the untrunes
thereof, then to have bewrayed your evil thoughts in the unjust censuring of
others.

But concerning repayring or reforming, let the indifferent Reader judge, if it
be not more proper to us, then to constitute or plant, for who knows not that
there is but one constitution or planting of the church under the Gospel, which
is founded by the Apostles. And other form or frame can no earthly power
devyse then that which the Apostles have left us. And seeing at the first they
did constitute churches in diverse parts of the world, and those churches
ruinated by Antichrist: shall not the restoring of them to the first pattern of
the Apostles, be properly called a repairing? seeing they did not cease utterly
to be no churches, but are churches in corruption or ruin. But I will not
contend about words, for that which I strive for, is, to have the church in
that form as the word prescribes, both for people, worship, government, and
what else appertaynes thereunto.

Fourthly, I say that the Jews that were converted to the says and new
Testament Rep.
of Christ, by Christ, John and the Apostles in your account, were in a far
better estate then Antichristians, for they, as you say, were of the same body
with the church, of the new Testament, and their circumcision was a seal of the
new Testament, as you say, and they were in Christ Jesus, as you say, and were
washed I doubt not many of them into the Messiah etc. and why might not they by
John, Christ, or his Apostles be admitted into the church without baptism: If
therefore Christ, John and the Apostles would needs baptize them, and so by
baptism constitute them into the new Testament, that had al these prerogatives
in your judgment: much more will they have us to constitute Antichristians
converted into the true church by baptism.

This your reason is alike the rest, nothing good, for albeit that the Chapter ^ns.
of the Jews was a true church, yet had it not Christ exhibited in the flesh
before this time, wherefore it was meet, seeing the Priesthood and ceremonial
administration of that Church was changed, and the old was to cease, ^eb. 8. 13
that the Jews, as well as the Gentiles should be partakers thereof alike; that
thereby they might acknowledge Christ their Messiah to be come, who^ they looked
for. And as it was required of the members of the old Church, that they should
* believe in the Messiah to come: So was faith "required ^en. 15. 6 ^m. 4. 11.
^k 2. 25. ^or. 10. 3.
of them that should be admitted into the church of the Gospel, wherein both
Jews and Gentiles should be alike received and baptissd into his name.

As for the Apostate church of Antichrist, it is such a one as acknowledges
Jesus Christ to be come, and professes the Gospel, though corruptly. And
baptism received in the Apostate church has his use unto such as Acts. 8. 37.
and 2. ^1. 44. Cor. 10. 3
repenting, turn to the true church of Christ, because baptism is an
ordinance of the new Testament, appointed by the Lord himself. And though the
believing Jews were in Christ members of his mystical body, and their
circumcision a seal of the righteousness of their faith, yet was their faith in
Christ to come: and circumcision did seal up unto them Christ to come. And
therefore all this being but by faith in the Messiah to come, it was necessary,
that they should also receive him now being come, and be baptized into his
name, if they would continue members in his body. And so this may answer you,
why John, Christ, and his disciples did not admit the Jews, as members of the
church of the Gospel with out confession of faith in CHRIST now come, and
Baptism in his name. And yet we may receive into our Church, them that have
been baptized in the Apostate Churches without iterating of baptism, upon the
confession of their faith and repentance. Neither is this, to offer indignity
to the LORDS ordinances in the old TESTAMENT, (as you do seem to charge us)
for we honor them in their place, and right use, as the Lord then appointed
them, and your self, I suppose will not say, that you offer indignity to those
ordinances of the Lord although you acknowledge that baptism received in
Popery, is not be to repeated, being administered to such as are of years, upon
their own profession of faith.

Again etc. I deny that ever the English nation or any one of our predecessors
were of Re.
the faith of Christ, show it if you can, but we came of a Pagan race, til Rome
the mother came and put upon us her false baptism. And therefore though the
Romans might plead this, yet England cannot plead it,, and so your
dissimilitude cannot hold in that thing, and our case simply Paeganisme.

If all this were granted that you say, yet is the state of England in as Ans.
good case as Rome, seeing she by your own confession has Rome for her mother,
Ezech 44.
and as the mother, so is her Daughter. If England partake with Rome in her
Apostasy and whoredoms, she must needs be a member of her. But I pray you Sir,
will you admit of that baptism in Rome without new baptising of such as shall
come from thence? if you do, you overthrow your own position, viz, That
Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church by baptism.
And if you do not, why put you this dissimilitude between England and Rome
which serves not to the question in hand?

But you desire me to show if I can, that the English nation or any one of our
predecessors were of the faith of Christ: it may be I cannot show, that any of
them were Anabaptists before you, which you falsely call the faith of Christ but
I can show to them that will hear, that our English nation received the faith
before Rome fell into this Apostasy.

First, Gildas affirms Act. Monu^ Book. 2. p. 95. Gildas li^ de vict. Aurelij
Ambros^
that Britayne received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the Emperor under
whom Christ suffered. And then was not Rome Rom 1.
apostate. And further he says, That Joseph of Aremathea after the dispersion
of the Jews, was sent of Philippe the Apostle from France to Britayne, about
the year of our Lord, 63. And remained in Britayne all his time, who with his
fellows laid the first foundation of Christian faith among the Britayne
people. 2 Tertul. con. Indeos
Tertullian testifyeth how the Gospel was dispersed abroad by the sound of the
Apostles, and there reconeth up the Medes, Persians, Parthians and dwellers in
Mesopotamia, Jury, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Egypt, Pamphilia with
many more, at length comes to the coast of the Morianes and all the borders
of Spain, with diverse nations of France: And there amongst (...) other
recites all the parts of Britayne, and reports the same to be subject to
Christ.

And also reckons up the places of Sarmatia, of the Danes, the Gerrmanes and
Schythians with many other Provinces and Isles: in all which places, says he,
reigns the name of Christ, which now begins to be common. 3. Origin
says, that Britayne did consent to Christian religion. 4. * Nicephorus, says,
That Simon Origin. ^. 4. in ^ch. ^icep. li. ^. ^^0.
Zelotes did spread the gospel of Christ to the west Ocean, and brought the
same into the Isles of Britayne. 5. In the time of the Abbot of Cluniake, the
Scots did celebrate their Easter, not after the Roman manner, but after the
Greeks, as he testifies to Barnard. Which argues that they had received the
faith, and not from Rome. 6. Also it appears by a letter of Elutherius Bishop
of Rome written to Lucius King of Britayne, anno 169. that Lucius had received
the faith of Christ in his Land, before he sent to Elutherius for the Roman
laws: for so do the words of the letter purport, which are these:

Ye have received of late through Gods mercy in the Realm of Britayne, the
law and faith of Christ: you have with you within the Realm both the parts of
the scriptures, out of them by Gods grace take ye a law, and by that law,
through Gods sufferance rule your kingdom of Britayne, etc. And thus was
fulfilled in Britayne as well as in Isa. 42. 4
other lands the words of the Prophet, who says, " he shall not fail nor be
discouraged, (speaking of Christ) til he has set judgment in the earth, and
the Isles shall wait for his law. And it is also further written of this King
Lucius, that he did not co^pel the heathen, but embraced such as by the word
were converted. Which is to be observed concerning the constitution of the
Churches then. For it is said, that he founded many* Churches, and gave great
riches and liberties to the same. And because of this embracing of the faith,
it caused those great troubles that fell out between the Britaynes which were
Christians professing the faith, and the infidels, who brought in the Romans
which exercised much cruelty amongst the Christians. In Dioclesians time the
Churches of Britayne were greviously persecuted and many sufferred for the
faith of Christ, as Albanus, Julius, Aaron, Amphibulus and many more.

And thus if it please you to take notice from these writters, you may see that
this English nation were of such as professed the faith of Christ and and not
of a Pagan race, til Rome came and put upon us false baptism, as as you say,
neither that our case is simply paganism, if these things be thus, as is
aforesaid.

Next whereas I said that repentance of such as were baptized in Apostate
Churches was sufficient without rebaptization for their admittance into the
church etc. You answer. That the Churches of Antichrist were false, and Rep.
the church of the Israelites was not false. The churches of Antichrist were
false, because they consisted of the carnal seed baptized, which was not that
one seed, unto the which the promise was made* that is the faithful* etc.

I have showed before how well you agree with your self concerning the Ans.
church of Israel, which here you say was nor false, and yet have published to
the contrary. As for your grounds or reasons of the trunes of the Israelitish
church, and falsenes of Antichrists, whatsoever you can plead for the one, the
like may be alleged for the other. If Israel in her defection be accounted a
true church: then must Rome also in her Apostasy. Certain it is, that both are
to be esteemed Apostatical Churches, and this is that which we testify. And
towching Israel, if the carnal circumcision alone of the Israelites, had been
the sufficient co^stitution of that church, to keep it free from being
Apostate, they continuing it; why should the Lord bid tell her, Hos. 2. ^
that she was not his wife, nor he her husband. Or did the 2 Chro. 13. 14.
Priests and Levites well to leave their suburbs and possessions, to leave that
church to go to Judah and Jerusalem? but hereof before.

2. For the matter of the Antichristian churches, which you say was false,
because they consisted of the carnal seed baptized. I answer, that they were
not therefore false or Apostatical* because infants were baptized (whose
baptism is proved lawful already) but for that they brake covenant with God,
forsook their first love (as now you do) and followed strange lovers, Rev. 17.
2-6 16. ^ 18. 2. 3. 9* 24.
shed the blood of the Saints, were a cage of every unclean and hateful bird,
etc. and these are the sins which they are charged with, but never is it
imputed to them for sin, their baptising of Infants.

Wherefore an Edomite or Ismaelite coming to be a proselyte of the Jews Church
Rep.
that had omitted circumcision, is a true president of the Antichristian
Apostasy. etc.

This is against your self, for if they were uncircumcised, they ought to Answ.
be received into the Jews Church by circumcision. And so if any be
unbaptised, they ought now to be received into the chapter by baptism. But tell me
if an Edomite or Ismalite having circu^cisio^ and beco^ing a proselyte, was
recircu^cised? Now if the Edomites and Ismalites turning to the faith, either
were uncircumcised, or being before circumcised were not recircu^cised, what is
this to the purpose, to prove that Antichristians must be rebaptised? You add
also, so I take it the Proselytes were types of Antichristians converted to the
faith and admitted into the true church. Why say you not rather, the Proselytes
were types of the Gentiles, that under the Gospel are converted to the faith,
and admitted into the true church? As for their being types of Antichristians,
you know there is a great difference, seeing the Proselytes were uncircumcised
before their convertion, but the Antichrists are baptized already. But if this
be your thought that Proselytes, and their entrance into the Jewish Church were
types of Antichristians converted and admitted into the true Church, then I
trust you will, that the thing typed be answerable to the type: But you know,
when a Gentile or Edomite was co^verted to the profession of the Jews, and
became a proselyte, he was received (...) 12.
into the church of the old Testament with his family, and al his males must
be circumcised, as well as himself. Why admit you not that the Proselytes of
Antichristianisme (as you call them) should enter into the church with their
children, according to the type propounded by your self.

Moreover, whereas you say, that if the Apostles had met with such as we are,
they would have received us into the Church without baptism. I answer, if such
an example had been left us, we would then have rested satisfied: but seeing
the Apostles have left no such example or precept, therefore you are still in
your Apostasy and having not repented of, nor forsaken your Egyptian baptism,
are still unseparated, do still retain the mark of the beast, and are subject
to the woe that the Angel threatens to persons so marked.

Example is left of such as were circumcised in the Apostasy of Israel, and
were not circumcised again when they came to the church of Judah, and ^s.
this is written for our learning. Ro^. 15, 4. That baptism is but one, and
not to be iterated, the scripture teaches no precept nor example for
rebaptising. And therefore we may not forsake our baptism (howsoever you call
^ph. 4. 5.
or esteem it) seeing we know it is not to be repeated, but upon our repentance
it seals unto us the covenant of salvation, and is effectual for the
confirming of our faith.

As for Apostasy, whether we stand therein or no, let it be tried by the word,
we know you an unequal judge, that has apostated from the faith. And for the
mark of the beast, and the woe that follows, we know it is due to them to
whom it belongs. And if this mark were the baptising of infants, as you say it
is, then the Angel should threaten the woe to such as keep the commandments of
God and faith of Jesus, which is directly contrary to the Angels speech and
intendement. But it were good for you to take heed lest while you shoot of such
thundering pieces against others, they do indeed recoyle upon your selves.


Of M. Smyths second Reason for Anabaptisme of elder people.
R. Clyfton. Now let us come to the 2. Reason which is this:

2. Because true baptism is but one, but the Baptism of Antichrist is not
true baptism, and so not that one baptism of Christ. But all the members of
Christ must have true baptism.

Answer.

1. There is but one faith and one baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4. and therefore it is
sufficient to be once baptized, as it was to be once circumcised.

2. That the baptism of Antichrist is not true baptism, I grant, and do also
affirm that al members of Christ must have true baptism, and what then? must
it follow, that now such as are baptized, must be rebaptised, else cannot be
members of a visible church? I deny it, and do further answer, 1. That the
baptism which we received in the Apostate church is no more Antichrists, then
the word that we received therein: For Antichrist did never ordeyn a new kind
of baptism, but did only pollute with his inventions that holy ordinance of
Christ. And therefore if this baptism that we have received, be called the
baptism of Antichrist, it is to affirm an untruth, seeing the institution
thereof was by Jesus Christ, who commanded his Apostles to baptize all nations
with water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the H. Ghost.
Mat. 28. 19. And the same baptism for substance is still retained in the
Apostate churches, and none other.

2. This baptism may in some respects be called true baptism, as before I
have noted in my first reason against rebaptising* for 1. it has Christ for
the Author. 2. it has the true matter outward sign or element, which is water
3. the true form of administering the same, which is, baptising into the name
of the Father and of the sone, and of the holy Ghost, all which is practiced in
the popish Church: Neither is any baptized into the name or faith of
Antichrist, but into the faith or profession of Christ. And therefore our
baptime is the baptism of Christ, and to us that repent, true baptism, and so
consequently not to be iterated.


M. Smyth. I make Answer, that seeing Infants are baptized, which is the false
matter of baptism, and seeing in them there is not the question of a good
conscience unto God. 1 Pet. 3. 21. nor the heart sprinkled from an evil
conscience. Heb. 10. 22. which is the form. Seeing they cannot express,
credis? credo: abrenuncias? abrenunci^: which is the form of baptism, even
the mutual contract betwixt God and the party baptized, expressed visiblie in
confession: therefore the baptism is not Christ's, but antichrists. etc.


R. Clyfton. This is the sum of your reply to my answer, that Baptism
administered in the Antichristian assemblies is of no use to the penitent, and
is not baptism at all, because both matter is false, and the form is wanting.
Of the matter (whereof you speak) which are Infants, and of the lawfulnes of
the baptising of Infants, I refer you for answer to the former part of this
writing: Also for the matter and form of baptism, to that which has been
spoken thereof in this latter part. Only thus much concerning that which you
here insert to the form, To be the question of a good conscience unto God, the
heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, to express Credis? Credo,
abrenun(...)? abrenunci^. I will answer, first, that which the Apostle speaks
to such as were of years, he applies to infants. 2. In a good and true
understanding we may and ought to think, that children have their hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, by the spirit of God, in the blood of Jesus
Christ, else how could we hope they should be saved, seeing by nature they are
the children of wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3. but yet by grace the kingdom of heaven
appertayns unto them. Mat. 19. 14. 3. Although a good conscience be it which
ministers assurance of comfort to the baptized, yet is not that the form of
this sacrament, as now we speak of it. First, because hypocrytes in the church
receive the outward sign, as S. Magus did, of who^ it is said that he was
baptized: and yet neither Simon nor any hypocrite are sprinkled from an evil
conscience. 2. That which is required in the receiving of every sacrament and
in all parts of the worship of God, and in the whole course of our life, cannot
be the proper form of one particular sacrament: But a Deuteronomy. ^ 16. 1 Cor. ^ 28.
29. 3^
good conscience is required to be in the receivers of every sacrament, etc. 3.
There is an outward baptism, whereof Mat. 3. ^ Tit. 3. 5.
John and the Ministers of the Gospel are the disposers: and "there is an
inward baptism which the Holy Ghost ministers, which is Hebr. 1^ 22. 23.
the sprinkling of the heart from an evil conscience, and is indeed the thing
signified by the outward washing. But we must confider of Baptism as it is
external, and so to have an external form and matter.

Lastly, for the meaning of 1 Pet. 3. 2^
that place of Peter, I take to be this. That the Apostle in applying the
former example, to the times following the coming of Christ, would teach, that
the peservation of Noah in the waters was a figure of our baptism, which is a
type of our spiritual preservation from the flood of Gods wrath, saying, that
baptism that now is saves us also by the resurrection of Jesus Christ* And
least any might attribute overmuch to the outward Ceremony by way of
correction, he advertiseth us that salvation (to speak properly) stands in the
forgivenes of our sins etc. by the death of Christ, and that baptism saves,
in that it testifies and seals the same unto us. And this remission of
sins, is partly signified in putting away the filth of the soul, closely
insinuated, when he says, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh: And
partly in declaring the effect thereof, to wit, the confident demanding, which
a good conscience makes to God. For when we are washed from our sins we may
cherefully and with a good conscience freely call upon God. Now this being as
you see the effect of remission of our sins, and internal, how shall it be
the outward form of Baptism, which is an outward ordinance of Christ? To your
credis and credo I have answered before. Neither is that which is spoken to
them of years to be misapplyed to infants, as I have showed diverse times
heretofore.


Of Mr Smythes 3. Reason for Anabaptizing of Elder people.
The third Reason.
3. Because as the false Church is rejected and the true erected, the false
Ministry forsaken and the true received: So false worship (and by consequent
baptism) must be renounced, and the true baptism assumed.

Answer.

First, I grant that we ought to separate from all false or apostate Churches.
Apoc. 18. 4. and to adioyne our selves to a true Church, reformed according to
the pattern of the Apostles. 2. Also every false Ministry is to be forsaken,
Mat. 7. 15. 2 John, 10. Gal. 1. 8. and the true Ministers of God to be
received. Ier. 3. 14. 15. as did the faithful in Israel, that forsook the
false Priests set up by Jeroboam and returned to the Priests of the Lord to
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 30. 11. 3. It is our duty likewise to renounce all false
worship, 2 Cor. 6. 14-17. Esa. 30. 22. and to worship the Lord as he taught us
in his word. And thus far do I approve of this reason, but the consequence I
must deny, viz. that because false worship is to be renounced, therefore
baptism also. For 1. we are to consider in that baptism received in apostate
Churches two things, first that which is of God therein, secondly, that which
is of man: that which is of God, is the substance of baptism, as before is
observed, viz. the same matter and form which the Lord instituted and likewise
the same end, which is the profession of the faith of Christ: and this is not
false worship, and so consequently not to be renounced. Again, that which in
the administration of baptism is devised by man, are those unwarrantable
ceremonies of crossing, annoynting and such like, these are to be renounced as
vain worship, Mat. 15. 9. Now the ordinances of God are to be purged from the
pollutions of men, and not with their pollutions to be renounced. For if
pollution might warrant men to ca^^ away with it, that which is ordained of
God, then might not the holy vessels polluted in Babylon, have been brought
again to Jerusalem, nor yet the Temple it self that was so greatly profaned,
in the days of the idolatrous Kings, have been any more used as a place of
worship to the Lord.

2. I answer, that we have received as true Baptism in the apostate Church as
the people of God, did circumcision amongst the 10. Tribes: And therefore we
may no more renounce it, and to assume a new, then they that returned to
Jerusalem. 2 Chronicles. 30. 11. might renounce their circumcision, and be
recircumcised.

It is objected of some, that this comparison holds not, for* Israel was a
true Church, and therefore their circumcision was true: But an apostate Church
has nothing true, neither are the members thereof capable either of the
covenant or seal in that standing, and it is not true baptism to such.

This objection, in part I have answered before, and now answer further. 1.
that the Israelites in their apostasy were not a true Church, but a false:
seeing they separated from Jerusalem the true and only Church in the world: and
erected a new Church and communion amongst themselves, joining together in a
false worship and under a false Ministry, 1. King. 12. 30.-33. and 18.
19.-21. and so became an Harlot, Hosea 2. 2.

Secondly in the Apostate Church, there be some things true in the substance,
as the word and Baptism, though corrupted in the administration thereof by
false Ministers and humane devises.

3. The members of an apostate Church are to be considered two ways. 1. as
they stand members of ^^ch a Church: 2. as they are the seed and posterity of
their forefathers, which received the covenant for themselves and their seed.
And though in regard of the former estate, they have neither right to baptism
or the covenant (for the holy things of God belonges not to false Churches
properly) yet even to such members considered a part from such standing, and as
they are the seed of their forefathers, so are they capable of the covenant and
sacrament, and the same is avayleable to them upon their repentance. For in
apostate Churches God has his people which are beloved for their fathers
sakes. Romans 11. 28. and this appears in that he says, come out of her my
people. Apoc. 18. 4. And to such it can not be denied, but that to them
belonges the covenant: yea whiles they are in spiritual Babylon, as it did to
the Jews that were in Babylon of Chaldea. Bondage hinders not Gods grace.

But some may reply, that they whose fathers were idolaters and unbeleevers
could have no right to the covenant to be baptized through the faith of their
fathers. I answer, the right that children have to Gods covenant depends not
only upon their immediate parents, but title thereunto descends unto them from
their ancestors, Exodus 20. (if we respect herein Gods mercy,) even as men's
inheritances do from their former fathers. Neither do the members of an
apostate Church, cast of all profession of faith, for they believe the
scriptures, and in Christ, etc. though withal they profess diverse errors, and
worship the true God in a false manner.

If question be made how it can be proved that the members of an apostate
Church, had forefathers that believed. I answer, it can not be denied, seeing
that an apostate Church arises not out of a company of infidels (for then
could it not be called apostate, seeing that to apostate, must be in regard of
the truth) but is the ruins of a true Church: and therefore it must needs follow
that their forefathers were believers and had received the covenant.

And thus have I briefly answered these two Anabaptistical Positions with their
Reasons, as the Lord has enabled me for the present, wishing this labor might
have been taken in hand by such as could perform it better. And further entreat
that the truth (which I contend for) may not, by my weak defense bear any
reproach, but that which is falt worthy, let it return upon my head. And do
also earnestly pray that he that has thus written, and both he and they that
so practice, may seriously consider of that which is done, and glorify God by
repentance.

March 14. 1608. Rich: Clifton.

Mr. Smyth. In the next place you make answer to my last Argument, which may be
framed into this form. As the false Ministry and worship are rejected, and
the contrary true Church and Ministry assumed. So the false worship, and by
consequence the false baptism must be renounced etc. Although all that is
mentioned here is taken away in the former discourse, yet it shall not be amiss
to annexe something, for the further clearing of the point, 1. I deny that
Popish baptism to be true in the four causes thereof as you affirm. 1. the
Lord never instituted that infants should be baptized. 2. He never ordained,
that Pagans should be baptized. 3. He never ordained that the carnal seed of
the faithful should be baptized. Therefore seeing Infants that are not the seed
of the faithful, but the seed of Babylonians are baptized by Antichrist.


R. Clyfton. Concerning the causes of baptism, they have been formerly spoken
of, Answ.
To these particulars, thus I answer brieflly: to the first, that the baptism
of infants is proved in the former part of this writing. To the 2. touching
Pagans, that they should be baptized without confession of their sins and
faith, I am far from approving. 3. Concerning the carnal seed of the
faithful, (as you call it) I have before proved, that Gods covenant is made with
the faithful and their seed naturally descending from them, and have removed al
your objections to the contrary.

The matter of baptism is false: 1. The Lord never appointed that the party
should ^ep.
be baptized without his own confession. etc. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Heb. 10. 22.

This is true of such as are of years, and now at the first to be received ^s.
into the church, but not of their infants, or of the infants of the faithful
borne in the church: you allege not one example of any borne of believing
parents, whose baptism was deferd til he was able to make confession of his
own faith. Towching the places of 1 Pet, 3. 21. and Heb, 10, 22 I have
answered unto, in the former section.

Therefore the Lord does not contract with them, for Christ will not contract
^ep.
in marriage with a bride or spouse that is under age. Gal. 4. 14.

It is strange how you apply scriptures, would any that is a Scholar or ^ns.
made conscience of the truth, ever have applied this place of the Galathians,
to prove that the Lord will not contract with the infants of the faithful? The
similitude that the Apostle uses, comparing the Jewish church to an heir that
is under Tutors, might teach you, that the Lord did contract with that church,
how else could it ever have been his wife, and as a wife in one respect, so an
heir in an other, as here the Apostle calls that church. And surely she could
not be called an heir, if she had not title to an inheritance, and this then
must be by covenant. Besides the church of Israel was able, and did covenant
with the Lord: You labor to chayn up the Lords grace, and to bind him that he
cannot promise good to the children of the faithful, or save them in Christ,
except they do actually by voice and words of their own speaking, stipulate or
contract with the Lord the contrary Deu. 2^ 10. - 15. A^ 2. 39.
is witnessed by the holy Ghost.

3. The Lord did never appoint that baptism should seal up his new Tectament
Rep.
to infants. Of this I have spoken before throughout the first treatise. Ans.
And for your selves you hold that baptism seals up the covenant, neither to
young* nor old, and therefore you might well have spared this particular. As for
that which follows, or that infants should by his baptism be admitted in to
the body of Antichrist, etc. I grant, not into the body of Antichrist, for
Antichrist has no right to any of the ordinances of God: but the question is
not what he has right unto, but whether the Lords ordinance is to be rejected
together with the pollution thereof. The Lord did not appoint that Belsha^her,
his princes, wyves, and concubines should drink in the vessels of the Temple,
or them to be carried into Babylon: but Dan. 5. 2* 3. 4.
they being there profaned, yet were Ezr. 1. 8. - 11*
carried out thence and served for the use of the Temple. And so do we hold of
baptism, and of the scriptures, rejecting the corruptions that did cleave unto
them in Popery, and applying them with their right use to our selves.

But the end of Christ's baptism is to manifest visibly that the party
confessing his Rep.
sin, is sealed by the spirit unto the day of redemption, that he has
visibly put on Christ, that he is mortified, crucified, risen again etc. Romans
6. 1. - 6. Col. 2. 12. Gal. 3. 27. These ends of baptism I deny not, but we
must not deprive infants of this grace, neither exclude that Ans^
special end of baptism, to wit, the sealing up unto us the pomise of God,
which is the thing you can not away with. I know the true believers ar sealed
with the spirit, (a seal invisible): so were the godly under the old Test. all that are the Lords are in Christ and have his spirit dwelling in them, else
could they not be his. And it is true also that the promise of the spirit,
hinders not the outward means which God has sanctified for the begetting and
increasing of our faith, for he works together with them.

Seeing therefore the matter, form and end of baptism in the false church is
from man, even from Antichrist, therefore the Lord is not the Author of this
baptism, but the baptism is Antichrists wholly. And although he uses the
words, In nomine patris, and filij, and spiritus sancti, Amen, as the Papists
do in sprinkling holy water in baptising of their belles, and as coniurers do
in their charms, yet this can not make true baptism etc.

How untrue that is which you speak of Baptism in Popery, as being ^^s.
from Antichrist, and not from Jesus Christ for the matter, etc. I have showed
before. The Papists when they baptize children do intend to administer
baptism, and do baptize them into the name of Christ, and not into the name of
the Pope. And though they do in the use of this holy ordinance add a number of
superstitious ceremonies and observations withal, yet keep they the form * set
down by Christ without devising a new. And Mat. 2^.
therefore it is not true to say that baptism is Antichrists wholly. The
abusing of the name of God by papists or conjurers in their baptising of bells
and conjurations etc. is their sin, which we leave unto them selves: the
ordinance of God we retayn, which we know their abuse cannot annihilate. And
though you except these words, In nomine patris etc. have been profaned by the
Papists, As much may be said of the scriptures. And if profanation be a cause
sufficient to reject baptism, then by like reason may the scriptures be cast
away. And this also you are in a reasonable forewardnes, (for no translated
scriptures must come in your worship) yet for some uses, you are contented to
receive the scriptures, though they have been profaned, but baptism, for no
use at all: because say you, it is essentially corrupted in matter, and form
and use, yet not another matter, form and use: your self has confessed, That
if Antichrist had baptized persons confessing ^haracter ^g. 53.
their sins and faith, into the Trinity, it should not have been repeated.
So that all this flourish that you make about the essential corruption in
matter, form and use, stands in this, that you hold that infants are not
capable of baptism, which is proved already against you.

Again these corruptions in or about the matter and form of baptism are
accidental, and not the changing of the matter, form and end, as before is
showed. Furthermore, whereas I said, that the Israelites in their Apostasy
were a false church, and you answer, If so you understand a false church, Rep^
viz. meetings or companies of men assembled together in a wrong place, to a
wrong worship, to a wrong Priesthood, I yield Israel to be a false church, but
I deny that to be the true definition of a false church. etc.

By a false church I understand a church apostate, neither do I describe Answ.
a false or an apostate Church, as in the first place you set down, but such a
church I hold to be in apostasy that has 2 The. ^ 1 Timothy 4.
fallen from the faith and way of Christ Hos. 2.
broken covenant with God, and 2 Chr. 12. 11.
forsaken him, 2 Chro. 9. 1 Kin. 28. - 33. 14. 9.
that erects a new fellowship amongst themselves of their own invention, and
worship God by the hands of false Ministers with false worship, etc. This was
the state of Israel, which came to be without the 2 Chr. 1^ 3.
true God, etc. and therefore she was a church in apostasy, and not the true
Hos. 2. ^
wi^e of the Lord. That false is contrary to true, I grant, but in that sense
I never intended to call Israel a false church, as having nothing that belonged
to the true church in it, no more is Antichrists such a one. Yet the having of
some of Gods holy things in them in a corrupt manner cannot make them true
churches. ches.

Here you endeavor to prove Israel a false church, etc. A true church is
discerned in the true causes essential, and so a false church by the want of
those true causes essential, Repl.
the true essential causes of the church of the old Testament was the
posterity of Abraham, or proselyte circumcised, the want of those things only
made a false church etc.

If this be the true definition of the church under the old Testament, Ans.
then what would let that the Ismaelites and Edomites, being circumcised, were
not true churches, they were of the posterity of Abraham, as all do know. That
Israel was an Apostate church, is before proved, and by you confessed. As to
your essential causes of this church, and your carnal covenant, which is the
ground of your definition, you may receive answer before, page 12. etc. And
this more, 1. That the Israelites and proselytes were a true church so long as
they walked in the ways of God, but apostating, the Lord did call them an
harlot. Hos. 2, 2. 2. If these be the essential causes of that church as you
have set down, then the want thereof makes them not a false church (as you say)
but no Church.

Lastly, you bring us in a double respect or consideration of members of the
church Repl.
of Antichrist, etc. I answer, diverse things 1. I do not deny but that men may
be considered two ways, visibly as members of Antichrist body, invisibly, as
pertaining to the Lords, election and that is the meaning of the Apostle Romans
11. 28. but I deny that hence it follows that when they came from their
invisible being in Christ to a visible being in the true visible Church they
shall enter in any way but by the door which is baptism.

First, you grant a duble consideration may be had of members of Antichrists
Church, but not altogether in the same sense as I did propound it. The members
of an apostate Chapter though in respect of their outward standing they have no
right to the holy things of God, yet as touching the election of God, diverse of
them may belong unto him, whom he knows for his people, and calls them out
of Babylon, when and as it pleases him, even as that speech does show unto us,
which says, come out of her my people etc. Rev. 18. 4. God for his promise
sake made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did extend his love to their seed and
posterity, to save so many of them as he had * elected: And when Israel fell
into apostasy, did remember Romans 11. ^-5.
this his promise, and called thence such as he had chosen to witness his truth,
and gave them to separate from their false ways, and to return to Jerusalem.
Also the Lord having graffed the Gentiles in, and made them partakers of the
root and fatnes of the Olive tree, vouchsafes Romans 11. 7.
his grace to them and their posterity. But their apostasy, he hates, as he
did that of the Israelites. And yet notwithstanding he has his people Romans 11.
8.
in Babylon, whom he calls out to confess his name: for the covenant is
given to the believing Gentiles, as it was formerly to the Israelites and is no
more extinguished in the apostasy of Antichrist, then in the apostasy of
Israel.

And as for the meaning of Romans 11. 28. I take to be this, that whereas (...).
11. 28
question might be made of the saving of the Jews, they being now enemies,
etc. Paul grants that they are enemies in one respect, to wit, of the Gospel,
which now they received not, yet that in an other respect, they are beloved of
God, to wit, for his election and promise made to the fathers, so as through
the grace of his covenant, by which he had chosen that people to himself;
Israel shall be called and ingraffed again, and saved from their sins, etc.
But that promise was to their fathers and their seed, and this ingraffing
again of the Jews shall be into that estate, from which now they are fallen,
and which before time their fathers were partakers off.

As concerning baptism, I do not read that it is called the door of * Ro^
3-4. 3. 27.
the Church, the scripture has these phrases. Baptized into Christ, baptized
into his death, and such like. Notwithstanding in some sense it may be called
the door, because it sealed unto us Christ, who is the door, and for that it
is the first-ordinance, that either such as came to the Church, or that are
borne in the Church are made partakers of.

Whereas you intimate that a man being invisibly elect and having Title to the
Re.
covenant may thereupon, 1. visibly enter into the false Church by false
baptism, and then upon his repentance come to the true Church and enter
thereinto not by baptism, but that the door of Antichrist shall open him the
way into the Church of Christ Ans.
etc.

I answer, 1. do not your self intimate thus much concerning such as being of
years, and makes themselves profession; are baptized into Antichrists
Apostasy? 2. My spech was of such of Gods people as are borne Carra^ page 52.
in Babylon, (which your self calls * members of a false Church) 3. Baptism
that is retained in the Apostate Church of Antichrist, is not false in that
sense as you so call it, but is the ordinance of Christ there poluted, as
formerly I have showed. 4. Gods people coming out of Babylon do no more enter
into the true Church without baptism, then those his people that separated
from the apostasy of Israel came to Jerusalem without circumcision, otherwise
I do not intimate or speak.

Whereas I say you intimate so much, you teach contrary to Christ, who says we
Re.
must go in by the door, etc. and that we must first be taught and made
disciples, and then be baptized, etc.

The door is Joh. 10. ^
Christ, by whom if any man enter in he shall be saved. An.
And to be baptized first and after instructed, is not contrary to Christ's
commandment. The words of Christ you wrest from the true meaning thereof to
thrust infants out of the covenant and from baptism, and so your self is
guilty of teaching contrary to Christ, as formerly I have proved: and you might
as well deny Baptism to women by that Scripture, Mat. 28. 19. as to infants: for
Christ says, Baptize them, using the masculine gender, and not the feminine.

Secondly, I say that no man is under the covenant or under baptism for the
parents sake and that is not the meaning of the Apostle, Romans 11. 28. but his
meaning is, that the elect of the Israelites are beloved for the promise of God
made to Abraham, Isaac and Jaoob in respect of Chrict.

This place of Romans 11. 28. I have before expounded, Page 218. And that any is
beloved for their parents sake, (otherwise then in respect of gods free promise
made unto them and their seed,) I mean not. Yet if we consider the Lords
dispensation of his covenant, according to his grace of chosing a people to
himself, (of which the Apostle also speaks, Romans 11. chap.) and how he
conveigheth the same to the seed of believers, then it may be said, that God
loves the children for the fathers fake, with whom the Lord had made his
covenant so to love them.

Not for that the children shall be partakers of that covenant because of their
parents faith, or because of Gods covenant made with their parents and their
carnal infants, but because God elected them in Christ to life invisibly, etc.

The children of believers are partakers of Gods covenant, because the Lord of
his free gift and mercy giving it unto their parents, includes their seed
with them, as before I have proved. And thus we are to respect the external
dispensation thereof; and of this is our question, and not of the particular
election, and reprobation of this or that person: For so all are not Israel,
which are of Israel. And many ^^^. 9. 6. Mat. 20. ^ 16. and 25 - 11. ^k. 13.
24. ^^. Mat. ^ chap. 1. 2. 19. Act. 3. 25
to us are visibly within the covenant, which are not elected * to salvation.
Hypocrites will ly lurking in a visible Church, which shall not be discerned
until the last day, yet the holy things of God are administered unto them, and
they of us are to be reputed members, because visibly they appear to us so to
be. And should we not then thus reckon of the children of the faithful? the
promise being made indefinitely to " them and to their seed.

Neither is it the carnal line that is beloved of God for his mercy sake, but
the spiritual line, etc.

I answer, God for his mercy sake loves the line of the faithful, because of
his promise (as I have said) to chose out thereof, (eve^ out of their carnal
line so to call it) such as he will save by Jesus Christ: And all this line of
the faithful so long as they continue in the Church, to us is holy and
spiritual, though in Gods election none be holy to him, but those that he has
chosen: which two things you confounding, make all this doctrine obscure unto
your hearers.

But what is this to prove that Antichristians are beloved and under the
covenant, for the carnal line descending from a believing auncestor? Re.


I do not say that Antichristians are beloved and under the covenant unto us,
considered according to their outward standing: but this I say, that Ans.
in an apostate Church there be (though to us unknowen until they come out
thence) of Gods people that are descended of believing ancestors, and are
beloved and come under the covenant because God will be found faithful in his
promise, and Ex. 20.
show mercy to thousands of them that love him.

Or if it were granted, how does it follow that the baptism visibly receved in
the Re.
Antichristian false Church is true baptism sealing up the covenant to them
that the Lord converted in the false Church.

I answer, that while they remain in that estate they can not make this
comfortable use thereof unto themselves; but when such as be converted Ans.
in that false Church, do separate from the same, and turn to the Lord, having
right to the covenant, they have right also to the seal, and to all the holy
things of God, in that they are the people of God. And so as the word
converteth, so baptism seals, because the efficacy thereof is of God, which
can no more be hindered by the wickedness of man, then the word could be
hindered from converting them that belonged to the Lord.

Lastly, whereas you fetch the Title to the covenant and to baptism for infants
in Re.
the false Church, from some ancestor believing, 40. generations happily
before, according to that Exodus 20. 6. I answer three things. 1. You must prove
that some of our Predecessors had that actual faith and were members of true
Churches, and this you must prove for every member you receive in without
baptism, thereby to assure you that he had title to the covenant and baptism,
by his carnal line. 2. You must by the same reason receave by baptism, if you
can come by them, all the infants of the Thessalonians, Galatians, Collossians,
Philippians and Churches of Asia that did sometime believe. 3. I deny that you
expound that place, Exodus 20. truly, for the Lord directly does require that
they, upon whom he shows mercy should fear him and keep his commandments,
etc.

To the first particular, I answer, in that our Predecessors were all in
apostasy Ans.
yt argues that they descended from believers. Apostasy must be from the
faith once publikly defended: And where there is a publik face of an Apostate
church, there was formerly a public face of a church professing the truth,
from which they are fallen. And even their retayning of baptism to this day,
is a confirmation thereof. Again, this is witnessed by them that came out of
Babylon, that they are descended from believers, whose seed the Lord now
remembers in his mercy, to do good unto. But we are not to stand upon
particulars, the general estate shows what was the precedent estate of
Antichristians: neither are we to inquire any more into the particular
condition of their Predecessors or parents, that come out of Babylon, then they
of Jerusalem did inquire into the particular estates of the forefathers of
those Israelites, that left the Apostate church of Jeroboam to join unto them.
For receiving in without baptism you are answered before.

To your second particular I answer, that the estate of them must be
considered, whether these be in Apostasy as Rome is, or be quite fallen from
the faith, and be no churches at all* but as infidels that believe not in Jesus
Christ and his word: if their estate were but apostasy, and that they believed
the Scriptures, worshipped God and retained baptism, (though all these in a
corrupt manner) then should we do alike unto them, as we do to the papists. But
if they were become infid^ls, and the candelstick removed from them, so that no
stepps of a church remaynes amongst them: then are we to receive both parents
believing, and their children, into the church by baptism, as the Apostles in
the like case did. Accordingly, for receiving the infants of the Thessalonians
etc. if we can come by them, we hold it thus, if their parents return to the
Lord and his church, or if some of the faithful undertake their education as
their own children.

In the third particular you deny, that I expound the place of Exodus 20. 6.
truly. My words are set down before, page 213. And my meaning was this, that
concerning those that are born in an apostate church, the Lord remembers his
covenant made with their forefathers that believed, and does call of their seed,
(whom it pleases him) to the knowledge of his truth, and faith in Christ, not
regarding their immediate idolatrous and apostate Eze. 18. ^. - 17. ^ Chro. 30.
^ 11.
parents, whose sin can not * hinder Gods promise: as the Lord did remember
to show mercy to those of Israel that "left that apostate church, and returned
to Jerusalem, as now he does unto us. And this is all that I alleged ^his
scripture for. But you in a kind of bitterness and detestation of our
forefathers, do here again utterly deny that ever they believed.

How religion came into our land, I have showed before, that there have been
and are believers in it, I make no question. And whether there have been
visible churches in the Apostolical constitution, I leave to be confidered by
the histories forenamed, and the great persequutions they suffered for the
truth of Christ. And seeing there have been so many Martirs put to death in our
nation, for the witnessing of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, mind well what
wrong you do to your native country, in denying, that any of them did
visiblie believe. And of the church of Rome, it is undeniable that it was a
true established church in the Apostles days.

But you wonder at me that I should say, that seeing we are Apostates, that we
had ancestors that sometime believed: and your reason is, because we are
departed from the scriptures, not from the faith of our Ancestors, who never a
one of them believed in a true constituted Church. There cannot be an
Apostasy, or falling away from that we nor our fathers ever had. If we
apostate from the faith of the scriptures, either we or our fathers 2 These. 2.
once believed that which we are departed from, or else how is our standing
apostasy?.

But our fathers (say you) believed not in a true constituted church. Indeed I
think they did never beleev in such an heretical Church of Anabaptists as you
account a true constituted Church, that must have all the members received in
by Anabaptisme, their children excluded: but this is certain, that the general
face of a people standing in apostasy, does argue that there was a face of a
church before professing the faith, as in the examples of Israel and the church
of Rome may be seen.

Thus through Gods providence and blessing I am come to an happy end of
answering R^p.
your writing, wherein I praise the Lord for his mercy, I have received such
assurance of the truth that all the earth shall never be able to wring it out of
my heart and hands. And therefore I desire you Sir, and all the leaders of the
Separati^^ to weigh seriously, even ^^twixt the Lord and their own hearts upon
their bedds* this which is written etc.

I am sorry to see how you deceive your own heart in a false persuasion to Ans.
justify your errors, and most blasphemously as it were to make God a Patron
thereof, by praising him for his mercy. that you have received such assurance
of the truth that all the earth shall not be able to wring it out of your heart.

Whereas you are fallen from faith, separating your self from the communion of
all true Churches, and become a pleader for, and a practiser of old
concondemned heresies, into which you are given over of God, for just cause
known to himself.

And whereas you desire me and the Leaders of the Separation (as you call them)
seriously to consider of your writings: such counsel for mine own part, could
I wish to your self, to examine your writings by the Scriptures, from the
meaning whereof, you have erred pitifully, and to pray unto the Lord that this
evil may be forgiven you. And to remember well how quickly you fell into these
errors, not conferring with others or counselling with the word of God, as you
should have done: but following your own deceitful and deceiving ha^^, being
strongly deluded by Satan, who still does encourage you in this new walking,
that you are persuaded it is the undoubtedst truth that ever was revealed unto
you. But know you Sir, that the works of the flesh are pleasant, whereof heresy
is one. And (...) 5. 20.
that Satan will strongly persuade thereunto, when the Lord has given men over
to believe lies, that would not receive the love of the truth. And as you
confess that you may err in particulars, (as you do indeed) so think also that
you may err in your main points of controversy, which were unheard of in the
Apostolical Churches of the first age. As you have begun to recall your
baptising of your self (as we hear) in some respect, vid in that you baptized
your self and others without lawful calling, etc. so proceed to renounce it
altogether, with all your Anabaptistical errors. And let me say to you, in
persuading you to return unto the truth, as you say to me in moving me to
error: As you love the Lord and his truth and the people that depend upon you,
embrace it, and apply not your self to shift it of: Think it a great mercy of
God to offer you any means to see your erroneous walking. I speak unto you out
of my best affection toward you, and that poor deceaved company, for whose
fall I have great sorrow of heart. And because you adjure us in the Lord to show
you your error, I have done for mine own part what it has pleased God to
enable me for the present, and so have others also taken pains, if God would
give you an heart to be satisfied with the truth.

On the back side of my answer, was written thus:

If you reply, show your strength that we may make an end of these
uncomfortable oppositions, etc.


Mr Smyth. Sir, there may be weight in my Reasons and you happily either cannot
through prejudice, or will not, through some sinister respect, see the weight of
them, I pray you be not charmed by evil counsel, but either show me mine error,
or yield to the truth, I would be glad to be an instrument of showing you this
truth also: at least, you by showing us our error shall discharge a good
conscience: if you do not answer among you all, I proclaim you all subtly
blind, and lead the blind after you into the ditche.


R. Clyfton. Sir, what small weight is in your Reasons I have showed in this
writing. And though you think I can not through prejudice, or will not through
some sinister respect, see the weight of them, mine own conscience does clear
me of both these imputations. For the Lord that knows the secrets of the
heart, is witness, that I have not of purpose to mainteyne any untruth
wittingly, stopped mine ears, or shut up mine eyes from any truth revealed
unto me, for any sinister cause or prejudice of your person: but if I did see
any further truth, I would (the Lord assisting me) receive it with all
thankfulness. Neither do I hang my faith upon the persons of men, but upon the
word of God, to be charmed by evil counsel, (evil you call that which
condemns your errors) but if by any man I receive further instruction or
co^firmatio^ in the Lords truth, you ought not, nor shall not diswade me from
it, call it charming, or what you will. I would to God you were no worse charmed
by the counsel of Satan, then I am by those whom you point at, in these your
speeches, I doubt not but we should then walk together comfortably in the house
of God.

I have showed you your error, as you desire. And for this truth (as you
falsely call it) that you would be glad to impart unto me, I dare not herein
make you glad, but wish rather that you might be sorry, that we might rejoice
in your conversion. (...) any former truths whereof you have been an
instrument of mine (...)ction, which you insinuate in this word, also, I am
thankful to God for ^^: But if you remember, that truth that you informed me
of, was concerning the trunesse of this Church whereof I stand a member, which
you now hold to be Antichristian. And therefore if I had not had better ground
for my practice, and builded my faith herein upon the word, your revolting
would have sent me back again to my former estate.

For your proclayming of us all subtly blind, if we answer you not. In this
you show still the loftines of your spirit, as if men were bound to answer you
in every thing you write. Now you are answered both to this and to your other
heretical book of Differences, etc. And if you further oppose against the
truth, I trust the Lord will arm his Servants to contend for the faith once
given to the Saints. Our cause is Gods, we fear not your forces.


Rich. Clyfton.

FINIS.
1610
Faults escaped.
Page 20. line 27. the Christ, put out, the.

Page 21. line 3. for him, read, them.

Page 80. line 3. for kithin, read, within.

Page 130. line 18. for females, read males.

Page 139. line 19. read, be saved.

Page 173. line 14, how if, put out, how.

Page 149. line 4. for Rich: Clifton, read Mr Smyth. and after line 6. read,
Rich: Clifton.

Page 181. line 7. put out, In Israel.

Page 187. line 20. for many, read, may.

Other faults may easily be discerned.


