AN ADVERTISEMENT CONCERNING A BOOK LATELY PVblished by Christopher Lawne and
others, against the English exiled Church at Amsterdam.

By Richard Clyfton Teacher of the same Church.

Psalm. 57.4. My soul is among Lions: I lie among them that are set on fire:
even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue
a sharp svvord.

Esa. 50.6. I gave my back unto the smyters, and my cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

Mat. 10.24.25. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
Lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master is, and the
servant as his Lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more them of his household?

PRINTED In the year of our Lord, 1612.

The Preface to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, it is not unknowen, that when Thomas White published his
Book, called A Discovery of Brownisme, (as now again of late, Christopher
Lawne and others with him have done theirs) that there was an Inquiry and
Answer thereof written by the Pastor of this Church, wherein he followed the
particulars from point to point. In which regard it may be thought less
needful to write any thing about this latter Book, being of like matter and
argument with the other. Yet in some respects, we have thought it not amiss,
now to give thee this short advertisement, and the few observations following,
about the contents of this latter Book also, especially about that point of the
division made lately among us, and the articles given out thereabout.
Concerning which there was not such occasion before, either in that Answer to
Thomas White, or in any other of our writings, to publish somewhat thereabout,
as there was about the other matters contained in this Book of theirs. And
therefore for thy better stay and information, is the advertisement following
now given thee about these things: where they are more at large (though yet but
briefly) spoken of. Which thou shall do well to consider of indifferently, and
be not carried from the truth or against it by any sinister means used to that
purpose, but remember what has been the lot of the truth and servants of God in
all ages. And as thy love is to the Lord Jesus Christ, so let it appear in the
embracing of his truth revealed, and i^ giving witness unto the same. And the
Lord our God increase in thine heart, the riches of the full assurance of
understanding to know the mystery of God, Col. 2.2.
even the father, and of Christ, and to rejoice in the faith and order
prescribed in his word. And he give thee to discern thereof aright, that the
entiseing words of man's wisdom, deceive thee not: but go to the law and to
the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them. Esa. 8.20. So may thou soundly judge of things that
differ. And the Lord give thee understanding in all all things. 2 Timothy 2.7.

AN ADVERTISEMENT CONcerning a Book lately published by Christopher Lavvne and
others, against the English exiled Church at Amsterdam.
WHen it pleased the Lord Jesus to reveal the word of his truth, unto the
Gentiles, by the ministry of his servants the Apostles there arose up
adversaries to vvithstand the same, and to abuse his vvitnesses thereof. When
Paul and Barnabas were sent forth by the Lord to preach the Gospel to the
nations, they coming to Paphus, the Deputy Sergius Paulus called them unto
him, and desired to hear the word of God; then Satan stirred up his
instrument, Elymas, a false Prophet and a sorcerer, who withstood them, and
sought to turn away the Deputy from the faith. Act. 13.6-10. The like also
did some of the Jews at Antiochia, who seeing the word of God to prevayle
amongst the Gentiles (and them desirous of further instruction therein) were
full of envy and spoke against those things, which were spoken of Paul,
contradicting and blaspheming. ver. 45. Like enemies did Paul again find at
Ephesus, of the Jews. For he having spoken boldly in their Synagogue for the
space of three moonths, disputing and persuading the things concerning the
kingdom of God: then certain of the Jews having their hearts hardened, not
only disobeyed and believed not the word, but spoke evil of that way
before the multitude. Act. 19.8.9. And many other the like examples of men
opposing against the word of truth, and of haters and persecuters of the
professors thereof might be shevved, both out of the Scriptures and
ecclesiastical histories.

And as then it was, in the first opening of the light to the Gentiles, that
Satan by his Ministers withstood the preaching thereof: so now since that
the Lord in mercy has discovered the man of sin, and caused his truth
(obscured by the dark mistes of Popery) again to be revealed to us in these
last times; sending his first, Apoc. 14.6. etc.
second, and third Angels, to preach an everlasting Gospel to the^ that dvvell
on the earth, that were overspread in Apostasy with the errors and
abominations of the man of sin: and to teach us to walk in the ways of
God; calling us from the worship of the beast, and receiving of his mark, to
keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus etc. even now also, I
say, have there risen up enemies of all sorts, to stop this way of truth,
and to reproach, vex, and persequute the vvitnesses thereof. For to pass by
all those hard speeches and ungodly deeds that have been since and before the
days of Luther against the Saints and faith of Jesus; I will come to our
own particular case and state, whereof there be many of us, that by
experience can give testimony, what hard measure we have sustained for the
cause of Christ: and do still undergo reproaches, sclanders, railings against,
and the like: as it cannot be unknovven (especially to our countrymen) what
we have borne at the hands of some of them, who have many times and ways
smitten us with their tongues: Ier. 18.18.
besides all the other troubles and persecutions sustained by us, to
imprisonment, banishment and death it self.

And what is it for, but because (according to the measure of grace, given us
from above) we have separated our selves from such corruptions of Antichrist,
wherein we formerly stood: and do walk in the way of the Lord revealed
uuto us out of his word, witnessing against all false ways and devises of
men brought into the Church for the worship and service of God, our desire and
endeavor being to stand and plead for that old and good way of God, wherein
all are bound to walk. Ier. 6.16. For if the opposition against us were
only and simply for sin, and through an hatred that such men have against
sin, then would they first begin with them selves, both to look to their
own sins and iniquities, and to take the like course against the sins and
transgressions of those Churches and members thereof, where now they are, or
where ever they should be.

But thus has it pleased God to make us like in bearing reproaches and
calumniations to his Saints and people of old, who feeling the burden thereof
to be heavy and grievous, complained unto the Lord, saying: How long shall the
adversary reproach, shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Psalm. 74.10.
And again, they utter forth their complaint, saying: We are a reproach to our
neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. Psalm. 79.4.
And even this is our case, who also are made a reproach to our neighbors, a
jest and a laughing stock to them that are round about us: having our souls
also (as they had theirs) filled too full of the mocking of the vvealthie, and
dispitefulnes of the proud. Psalm. 44.13. and 123.4, So that in respect hereof
we may complain with David, who said, I was a reproach among all mine
enemies, but specially among my neighbors; and a fear to mine acquaintance,
who seeing me in the streets fled from me. And again, I am become a stranger
unto my Brother, even an aliant unto my mothers sons. I became a proverb
unto them, and they that sit in the gatespake against me, and the drunckards
song of me. Psalm. 31.11. and 69.7.8.11.12.

And although our loving Father do thus humble and chastise us justly for our
sins, yet does he also in mercy cover them: and gives us now to bear these
sclanderous reports, of Schismatikes and the like, for the testimony of his
truth: In which respect the Lord indeed honors us. For our Churches estate,
and our consciences do witness with us and for us to God and men, that we
have not willingly left any truth, or any ordinance of God, that we had
formerly received with others in our apostate standing, but are careful to
reteyne them all (what in us is) purged from the corruptions that were mixed
with the^, in our former corrupt receiving of the^. Neither have we made
division and offenses contrary to the doctrine, which we have learned from
the Apostles; but do walk in the ancient way of the primitive Churches,
keeping the ordinances, worship, and order of government, prescribed by the
Apostles, without the mixture of Antichristian or other humane additions: And
therefore unjustly are we termed Schismatikes. If it can be shevved otherwise
in any thing, let the vvitnesses, the vvritings of the Apostles and Prophets be
brought forth against us: and we trust we shall through the grace of God
yield thereunto: as we have been careful hitherto to show it forth in the
redressing of such things as have been observed among us to svvarve any way
from the word of God. Great are our trials by men on all hands, which we
suffer for our witness bearing of Jesus, vvhiles besides our exile and other
afflictions, some are speaking bitter and sclanderous words against us, yea
and our own neighbors spare us not, and others also sharpen their pens to
reproach us, and to that end write reprochful books against us: that we may
say with Israel, If the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up
against us, they had swallowed us up quick. Psalm. 124. 1-3.

Yet if these reproaches and hard dealings touched our selves only, and did not
with all reach to the truth which we witness; we could and would rest
patiently, waiting until the Lord avenge our cause; and would not once open
our mouths or set our pens to paper, to write in defense of our porsonall
injuries: But seeing thus together with detracting of us, the truth of God
comes to be reproched, and despised in this respect; if we should pass over
these things altogether with silence, and not stand in defense of the Lords
cause, we might be arraigned justly as guyltie of betraying his truth, and as
men ashamed of Christ before men: We dare not therefore herein be vvanting to
bear witness to the word of truth, when men thus labor the darkning
thereof, and for the maintenance of their own corruptions, do set them selves
to speak and write against the same.

Of late there is come forth a pamphlet and sclanderous book full of reproaches,
published by one Christopher Lawne and other his companions. In which there
are contained sundry things of diverse sorts. Some touching our general cause,
about the Church of England: some concerning the singing of Psalms used among
us: some about personal matters, concerning diverse of us and others: some
touching a divisio made lately by diverse among us, etc.

Concerning our general cause, although we have written often, and many
treatises thereabout, which remain yet unansvvered: yet seeing we are here
again thus abused about it; and that not only by the persons aforesaid,
(which we might better pass by) but by one M. Robert Parker, whose
testimony is here inserted: we purpose therefore (Godvvilling) to write in
particular about his testimony; etc so again by this occasion to publish
somevvhat more about that our general cause aforesaid: although for the
present we have both some occasions to deal in other things, and some reasons
to stay us yet a while from publishing of that, which by the grace of God,
we purpose to do. In the mean time, let this be noted concerning M. Parker
and his testimony: how he has heretofore in a large book pleaded against
the Church of England, that by reason of the cross in Baptism, and other
Ceremonies retained among them, they become guilty of the breach of all the
ten commandments, as also of communion with Antichrist, and slaverie under
him, etc. Now we purpose to try, how he can on the other hand approve the
state of the same Church, as now it stands, and as it is witnessed against
by us: and how he can vvarrant us communion with the same in that their
estate: or whether it may please God by this means to give him and others,
better to observe and regard their halting betvveen two opinions, then
hitherto they have done. We find that for the former plea, handled in his
book, he has alleged the Scriptures ple^tifully, as throughout the book may
be seen: but whether he can so do for this latter, spoken of in his
testimony against us, time and further occasion will manifest. Yet in the
mean time all may see, that there is not the like done against our cause,
either in his testimony published, or in the whole book, vvherevvith his
testimony is joined: which is as barren of vvarrant from the Scripture, for
the estate of the Church of England called into question, as M. Parkers former
book against it is fruitful therein. Which let the Reader well observe.

Touching the singing of Psalms used amongst us (whereof the persons
aforesaid speak also their pleasure in their book) we are purposed ere long,
if God vvillto publish them: whatsoever those men say or would insinuate to
the contrary, or in any other respect thereabout. And so we shall leave it
to the indifferent judgment of all, how these men have dealt with us in this
behalf. And sooner also might we publish both these and other things, then we
do, were it not for the troubles, that these men and others have procured us,
and still do.

As for the personal matters published in the book aforesaid, although we
leave the matters concerning others to them selves; and do for this Church
acknovvledge that indeed we have had our transgressions and infirmities like
as in the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and others in all ages, and at this day
may be seen: for which we are much grieved: yet is it good and needful for
the Reader here, and alvvaies to remember that saying, Quis erit innocens, si
accusare sufficiat? If to accuse be sufficient, who can be innocent? For there
will be accusers alvvaies (as M. Parker upon the same saying infers in his
book) as long as the Maxim lives, M. Park. scholast. disc, against
symbolizing with Antichrist in ceremonies, etc. 2 book. page 118.
which one gave once in Alexanders court: Fortiter calumniare, nam etsi vulnus
curetur, cicatrix tamen remanebit. Give out calumniations mightily, for though
the wound be healed, yet will the scarre remain. But the godly will better
consider of things, remembering the common frailty even of the best, and not
forgetting the commandment of God, whereof M. Parker in his testimony
seasonably puts the reader in mind, Thou shall not receive a false tale
agoinst thy neighbor: as also knovving that all lying and reproachful dealing
should not by right live longer then the lie of the Gibeonites. And how ever
we be dealt vvithall in this sort, yet must we comfort our selves, in the
assurances of Gods mercies, and in the common and continual lotte of Gods
servants, vvalcking through good and through evil report before us.

Now touching these men and their dealings I purpose not in particular to
shevve how ungodly, and unjustly they have dealt against us: not only
contrary to all piety, but against all modesty, in laying open the
infirmities and transgressions of some (whose repentance is known even to
these reprochers the^ selves, as it was to the whole Church) also in shameless
publishing of some things never heard of in our Church, nor so much as known
to the parties vvho^ they mention; besides their uttering of some things also
very false and untrue. And that so, as the vvriting it self in the cares and
judgment of the wise does sufficiently convince the Authors of abundance of
malice, and argues in them want of grace, and of the fear of God, (a just
judgment of God upon the^ that have vvalked haltingly before God in his Church,
and have vvilfully refused to hear the voice of Christ Jesus in the same) that
have so spitefully and sclanderously written against this Church, against the
Pastor and other Officers and members thereof, and have thus with their bitter
venomous toungues smitten them, who^ the Lord does accept, and to whom (I
trust) he will requite good for this their cursing: as David in a like case
did comfort himself. 2 Samuel 16.7-12.

And touching our forbearing now to answer their vvriting being such as it
is, it may suffice that we have shevved heretofore, concerning the like
vvriting of Thomas Whites, that we can and have ansvvered such shameless
vvritings, least such fools should be wise in their own conceits: Prove. 26,
5. and so might do by this book, for the reproaches and sclaunders therein
contained, as we did by that other: but it seems partly not so needful,
seeing the same things and the like are now published by these, that were
then also by Thomas White (whereunto answer was given) partly not meet or
good to follovv these wicked men in their ungodly courses: but to observe that
other proverb of Salomons, which says, Answer not a fool according to his
folly, least thou also be like him: Prove. 26.4. as also to leave them and
their dealings to the judgment of the Lord, and to the censure of all godly
and indifferent men, to judge whether they would justify any amongst them,
that should so carry the^ selves, as to publish to the world, the slippes and
sins of the particular persons of their societies.

For if men should take this course, as these have done, what volumes might
not be vvritte^ of the faults and sins of particular Churches? Is there any
society or company to be found on earth, that if any would make a diarie of
their lives (yea even of them that are religious and godly) but there would be
found many things amiss among the^? and yet no grace to any of such a
company, (especially in such a spiteful manner) to commit such personal
sins to print? Let these men take a like survaie of such societies or
Churches, that they are vvithall, and see if they can not find as many, yea
(if they would not be partial) a great many more vices and other manner
transgressions, then with al their sclanders they are able to charge this
Church vvithall. And will not any then, judge these men in this their doing,
to have shevved great malice and partiality: and that not the spirit of God,
but Satan (that enemy to Michael and his Angels) has set them on work to
reproach the truth it self, by this their vile dealing? Or would them selves
take it in good part, if we should lay open their own personal sins,
which we know by them, both many and great? What have they then done to
us, or how have they kept herein that rule of Christ, which says, Whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them. Mat. 7.12. But
being sorry to see the^ thus add more sin to their former sins, for which
they were excommunicate, I will leave the^ for the Lords censure to work
upon them, if so it please God, for the saving of their souls in the day of
the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.

And here by this occasion, we will speak a little concerning Gods work,
about two others, who have hertofore written against this poor Church, and
against the Pastor and members thereof, as now these have done. The one was
George Iobnson the Pastors brother, who dyed at Durham: the manner of whose
sickness and death was signified hither to his brother by vvriting from thence,
by a friend of his that was often with him, both before and in the time of
his sickness: Who vvrote hither, that he being in prison, bestovved the most of
his time, in finishing the book which before he had begun, and whereof some
sheets are printed; which when he had done, it pleased God to visit him
with sickness unto death. At which time on his death bed, he gave out (as he
vvrote, and is well known) very heavy and great exclamations about his
sins by the Lord laid to his charge, calling unto God for mercy. And in this
sort (says the Gentleman that writ the letter, and was present there) he
continued by the space of an hour that I was with him, showing great trouble
in mind, yet not without comfort in the Lord, whose servant I doubt not but he
dyed. The words uttered by him, and other circumstances mentioned in the
Letter aforesaid, we spare yet to set down: as we would also still have
done the thing it self, but that we are thus continually provoked hereunto,
and that we hope it will be for the good of others, to stay them from such
courses: and above all to the glory of God, which is to be observed and
acknowledged in all his works.

And whereas it is so often objected, by M. Bernard, M. Hall, M. White,
Christopher Lawne and others, that the Pastors brother was excommunicated
among us, and his father also, it is to be noted, that yet never a one of them
has undertaken to shevve the causes to be unjust, or the thing unlawful. Nay
when Mr. White made it one head of his book, to except what he could about
the excommunications that had passed in this Church, and vvrote of sundry
persons and their causes in particular: yet it may be observed, that he does
not so much as once offer to insist upon theirs: which of all others no doubt
he would most of all have done, if he had thought he could have made any plea
thereabout. And who will not consider, that such as would thus blame the
excommunicating of any persons, should first be able and careful to show the
causes thereof and the proceeding against them, to be unjust? For otherwise,
if they be just and lavvfull, so as none can except thereagainst, it is the
more godly, and commendable (though accompanied with greater trial) when
neither father nor mother, brother nor sister, son nor daughter are spared.
As in the Scriptures we read, how Moses commended and God blessed Levi, for
not knovving his own father or mother, brethren or children, but observed the
word of God, and did his will against them, though it were to the inflicting
of death upon them: Deuteronomy. 33.8.9. with Exodus 32.26-29. Either therefore let men
by the word of God disprove the causes and proceeding in the excommunications
they except against at any time: or else being not able so to do, the more they
write against us, the more it makes for us in deed; and so will be observed
by them that are wise according to godlynes.

Besides, seeing the parties here spoken of are now departed this life, if M.
Johnson should write any thing about the^, by which they should now be found
blame worthy: who can not perceive, that this then also would be abused
against him, and that men would not stick to say, that now he might speak
what he would of them, when they were not living to answer for themselves;
and that although they were now dead, and so near unto him as they were,
yet he would write thus and thus of them, etc. For they that spare not so to
abuse him as now they do, even about things publicly heard and known,
whereof there are so many vvitnesses yet living: how would they much more
abuse any thing that he should now say or write concerning them, when they
are gone and departed this life? They that observe how he and the rest of us
are dealt vvithall, will consider these things. And it shall be good for him
and us all, to possess our souls with patience, and to wait on the Lord,
trusting in his mercy, making our refuge in the shadovve of his vvings, till
our calamities be overpast, and that it please the Lord to save us from the
reproach of them that would svvallovve us up. For doubtless God will send forth
his mercy and his truth: as he has hitherto graciously delivered our souls
from death, and our feet from falling: that we may walk before him in the
light of the living. Psalm. 57.

The other that vvrote in like sort, as these have done, was Thomas White
spoken off before, who after his living here, and vvriting so ungodly as he
did, returned and lived a Minister at London under the Prelates: where when
he had after some while gotten a benefice in such sort as he did, the Lord
soon ended his days. These things I thought thus briefly to mention, being (it
may be) of some not regarded as they should. And how ever the Lord spare such
me^, and let the^ go on in their course a while, yet in the end if they
repent not, his hand will find them out, and bring their ways upon their
own heads: as throughout the Scriptures we may read. Psalm. 52. and
55.12.13.14.15-23.

But now omitting to write any thing more of them, that have thus dealt with
us, and leaving them to the Lord: I will proceed to the next and last
special matter, which at this time I purpose to speak of. And that is about
the persons (spoken of in this last book) who of late divided them selves from
us, and have since that time given forth some exceptions and Articles of
difference, both here at Amsterdam and othervvhere. Here they gave out some
which we heard of, but never had copy of them, until now that these men
have printed them, being taken (as they say) from the original copy.
Otherwise also they have given out the like, in letters sent into England, as
we have heard, and by means of one there, to whom they sent had certain
knowledge thereof: who dealt more godly and indifferently thereabout, then
any other of them, that have in such sort ben possessed and praejudiced
against us. And as that party dealt well with us, in acquainting us with
those things, which thus covertly were written and given out against us: so
did we also for his better satisfying write unto him again in particular
thereabout. The which both Articles and Answers thereunto, we have thought
good to keep them by our selves hitherto. But seeing that other the like in
effect, though increased in number, are thus published to the world, and that
therein they have not as they ought, handled and justified the causes for
which they separated from us (which were annexed at the end of the treatise
upon Mat. 18.17. and shall also be again annexed here, but have gone about
also to possess the world with other matters, then those for which they
made their breach: and by these their courses, do impute blame unto our
doctrine, as if we mainteyned opinions contrary to the truth, laboring
thereby to set a more glorious show upon their popular government and
pleadings: and that thereby we perceive, the truth is much hindered, and we
injuried, and many by their means and opinions so deceived, that they despise
the holy government of Christ, which he has set in his Church to be
administered by the Elders thereof, and refuse to submit thereunto: and that not
only they who have thus written and dealt here, but others also in our own
country, praejudiced with these matters, and sinisterly possessed with some
of their vvritings, against us and our cause, are likewise corrupted, and so
have shevved it, both when occasionally some of us have been with them there,
and also among them selves, as we hear: we have therefore for these and other
the like reasons thought it good, not to keep these things any longer private
by us, but for the better satisfying of all, touching the things we hold, and
the clearing of our selves from the imputations laid upon us hereabout, and
removing the scandal which some have taken and are like yet more to take upon
the publishing of this vvriting of theirs: now therefore to print also the
said Answer to their exceptions, that men may see, and be able the better to
judge be^tvveen us and them, when they shall have heard both of us speak, and
shall have asvvell our answers as their objections to read and consider of by
the word of God.

And though it have thus fallen out betvveen us and our brethren, and they
grown to that height, that they would not be persuaded to continue with
us in communion; wise men will consider, it is but an ancient practice of
Satan thus to disquiet and trouble the Church of God. In the Church at Corinth
were contentions and dissensions raised up amongst the brethren, so that some
held of one Teacher, some of an other 1 Cor. 1.10-12. And afterward what
contention grevve betvveene the eastern and vvestern Churches about the time of
keeping the feast of Easter, none can be ignorant that has read thereabout the
ancient histories. Also what fell out betvveene our own countrymen at
Franckfurt in the days of Q. Marie, (they being then in exile for the truth,
as now we are) their troubles and contentions are extant in print thereabout.
Yea our Savior himself says, it must needs be that offenses come, Mat. 18.7.
And the Apostle says, there must be schisms and heresies among you, that they
which are approved may be made manifest. 1 Cor. 11.18.19.

Now seeing the like troubles, divisions and disagreements have fallen out in
former times in the Churches of God, and that men have their infirmities
(though otherwise being religious and fearing God) they which are of a
spiritual discerning, will not upon every occasion that arises amongst the
professors of Christ, by reason of their weaknesses, and personal sins and
infirmities, open their mouths to speak evil of the way of God, though some
take pleasure therein, who shall find one day the avenging hand of God upon
them, if they repent not.

And touching these persons aforesaid, that have so separated from us, and thus
offensively written, I persuade my self, that many of them, are persuaded
(though deceived by the subtlety of Satan) that they have the truth, and that
they did run at the first into these extremities, being carried (as the
Anabaptists and others also have been) with a zeal for the truth and glory
of God against that Antichristian Apostasy and government, which formerly the
Prelates and ministers of that usurped authority oppressed the^ vvithall. And
for mine own part, I hope that so many of them as are the Lords elect, he
will in time (by the means used for their good) give them to see, both their
errors they stand in, and their grievous sin, in so rashly and unjustly
breaking off them selves from the Church whereof they stood members, and that
others by their example will take heed of the like hereafter.

These things I thus write, not to excuse evil in any, but to take away
occasion from them that seek occasion to raise up sclander against the cause of
God, by reason of these things thus falling out amongst us: and that men should
know, that the way of God hangs not upon the lives of men; but is to be
regarded in respect of the Lord the author thereof. Very evil therefore do
they, that take occasion upon such dissensions, to blaspheme the truth it self.
The erroneous vvalking of any professors, shall not excuse others, that
imbolden themselves thereby to stand in Apostasy, and seek not after the
truth and way of God, that Christ has commanded all to walk in.

Thus having (good Reader) praefixed this short advertisement, for thy better
informatio^ about the things aforesaid, as also about this my purpose in
setting forth of this Answer to the Objections aforsaid: receive now the
Answer it self, as it was penned by the writer thereof, with some additions
thereunto by the same author, upon occasion of inlargeing and publishing of the
said Exceptions now printed. This answer I pray thee (Christian Reader) view
and consider well, that if it be the vvil of God, thou may be satisfied of
the truth we hold about these things. And if in any thing we fail hereabout
through ignorance, and want of understanding, we shall willingly receive, and
that with thanks, thy brotherly advertisement thereof.

And because among other things, we are much abused about a particular
concerning the Church of Rome, we have therefore hereunto annexed somewhat out
of the writings of M. Iunius against Bellarmine, about that matter; not that we
rely upon the judgment of men in causes of Religion, but because we know that
many, who are carried with a praejudice against us, will yet more stay them,
when they see what M. Iunius has written of that argument. In whose writing
although there be some school terms, hard to be englished well in our tongue,
for the understanding of all, as we desire, yet we have so done it into
english, as we hope the meaning thereof will by all be conceived and attained
unto.

And thus leaving these things with the event thereof unto the Lord, and his
good blessing of his mercy in Christ: I humbly beseech the most wise God, to
cause the light of his heavenly word to shine forth more and more, for the
discovering of all error and false opinions and courses hindering the success
of the ancient truth, and so to establish the Churches of God, in that old and
good way, prescribed by the Lord and his Apostles and Prophets. Amen.

A COPY OF THE vvriting, touching the division made among us, which was sent
to a friend in England, By Mr. H. A.
BEcause you have heard of the sorrows that have befallen us here, M. Ains.
Letter.
whereby your grief is the more augmented, and because the true report and
estate of things perhaps is not so well known unto you, I will also briefly
touch the smart wherewith God has humbled us, and caused our breach to be as
the sea, which can not be cured. Many days of comfort God gave us here
together, whilst in singlenes of heart we sought him, in the mids of our
pilgrimage with love and peace: But love of pre-eminence, which has always
troubled the Church of Christ, has also troubled us: whilst the Governors of
the Church which should serve it with meeknes, would rule it with Lordship. 1.
Confess. artic. 24. Apol. page 26.63.


1 For whereas we had learned and professed, that Christ has given the power
to receive in or to cut off any member, to the whole body together of every
Congregation, and not to any one or more members sequestered from the whole: Now
we have been lately taught, that the Church which Christ sends to, for the
redress of sins, Mat. 18.17. is not to be understood of the whole body of
the Congregation, but of the Church of Elders. And it being granted of all,
that with the Church is the power, the Elders being the Church, have the power,
and so not the whole body of the congregation together.

2 We had learned, 2. Tre^^. of the Ministry of Eng. page 63. Apol. page 63.
that every true Church of Christ, has this power to cast out obstinate
sinners from amongst the^, and this not only when it has Officers, but also
when it wants them: But wow we were taught, that a people without Officers
have not power to cast out obstinate sinners. Which doctrine, amongst other
evils, overthrows the constitution of the Church that so taught: for it was
gathered and constituted by Christians without Officers, receiving in the
repentant, and casting out the disobedient: whereas by this opinion, they had
power from Christ to do neither: for they that can not cast out, can not
receive in: one power is for both.

3 We had learned that every Christian Congregation has power and
commandment to elect and ordeyne their own ministry, according to the rules
of Gods word, 3. Confess. art. 23. and 35. Apol. page 46.
and upon such default in life doctrine or administration, as by the rule of
the word depriveth them of the ministry, by due order to depose them from
their ministry they exercised, yea if the case so require, orderly to cut
them off by excommunication: But now it is by some mainteyned, that the
Congregation can neither put into office nor put out of office, unless they
have officers to do both: and can neither for heresy nor other wickedness
excommunicate or depose their Eldership.

4 We had learned that none may execute a ministry, 4. Confess. art. 21.
but such as are rightly called by the Church, whereof they stand ministers,
unto such offices, and in such manner, as God has prescribed in his word: But
now those will execute a ministry, which have not rightly been called by the
Church, whereof they stand Ministers, according to their own account and
doctrine: which hold (as before) that a people without Officers have no warrant
from God to make or depose Ministers.

5 We had learned that it was gross error and notorious absurdity, 5. Apol.
p. 113. and 116 n. 112.
either to hold the popish Church to be a true Church, having a true
ministry, and true Sacraments, or else that men must admit of rebaptising: But
now we have heard, that the Baptism of the Popish Church is true Baptism (by
which we are bound to communion) or else that men must be rebaptised: and that
the Church of Rome is the Church of God, because Antichrist should sit in the
Temple of God.

6 We had learned that all particular Congregations are by all means
convenient to have the counsel and help one of 6. Conf. art. 38.
another, in all needful affairs of the Church, as members of one body in
the common faith: yet here when differences had arisen about our common faith,
and could not amongst our selves be composed, they would not desire nor consent
to have desired the help of our sister Church at Leyden, although it were
instantly urged by many members, that their assistance should be had.

And when without their consent the help of that Church was obtained, and they
labored our peace, and a way of peace was agreed off between the Churches,
this agreement and peace was not stood unto but reversed by them, contrary to
our will, and to the will and liking of the Church at Leyden, as the same Church
can testify for us.

Wherefore after long disputing these matters, when no way of peace could by
us be found to continue together in the truth and holiness. But lamentable
Dissipation of the Church and members began to grow, to the dishonor of Gods
name, and wounding of our hearts, we followed the commandment of the Apostle
which said, I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which we have learned, and avoyde them.
Romans 16.17. And have since labored to build up our selves in the holy
faith, whereunto God has called us, in love and peace, mourning for the great
scandal and reproach which Satan has wrought by this breach amongst us.

Thus have I showed you the fountain of our sorrows, which God for our sins
has brought upon us. He look upon us in mercy, and pity the dispersion of
Sion. And you as you have known the truth, which is sealed to your conscience,
so abide therein faithful unto the end, knowing it is the lot of Gods people
thus to be exercised with troubles in it self, which if we bear with patience
and constansie and do overcome, our portion shall be in the tree of life,
which is in the midest of the Paradise of God.

H. A.

THE ARTICLES AND OBJECTIONS About the division, which are published in Lawnes
discovery of schism, page 79. etc.
THe 23 article of the Confession of our faith (whereto also our Apology
agrees, page 46.47.) professes that every Christian congregation has power
to elect and ordeyne their own ministry, etc. and upon desert again to
depose, yea and excommunicate them. These have defended that a Congregation
without Ministers can not ordeyne officers. And that if the Eldership fall into
heresy or wickedness, the whole Congregation cannot depose nor excommunicate
them. And that a Congregation, without an Eldership, cannot excommunicate any
wicked person whatsoever.

2. The 24 article (confirmed in our Apology, page 60.62.63.) professes that
the power to receive in, or to cut off any member, is given to the whole
body together of every Christian Congregation, Mat. 18.17. etc. These have
pleaded for the Eldership to be the Church, Mat. 18. and to have both rightful
power and able power to excommunicate, though without and against the consent
of the body of the Congregation.

3. The 29 article (as also our Apology page 51.52.) professes that the
Hierarchy of Archbishops, Lordbishoppes, Priests, etc. are a strange and
Antichristian Ministry and Officers, not instituted by Christ's Testament, nor
placed in or over his Church. These have placed over them one that was made
Priest by a Lordbishops ordination, so as because of it they did not ordeyne or
impose hands on him, when at the same time they ordained and imposed hands on
others, whom together with him they set over the Church.

4. The 31 article (and also our Apology, page 109.) professes that such
ecclesiastical assemblies as remain so in confusion and bondage under that
Antichristian Ministry, Courts, Canons, etc. cannot be esteemed true visible
Churches, etc. These now plead not only for them, but for Rome it self, to be
the true Church of God.

5. The 32 article (whereto our Apology agrees, page 52.53.54.) testifyeth
that all such as have received any of those false Offices (of Lordbishops,
Priests, etc.) are to give over and leave them: and so has it been practiced
here before by all such Priests as came to our faith and Church: now one is
Minister over them, ordained Priest by the Prelates, as is before said.

6. The 33 article (which our Apology also confirms, page 45.) professes
that people being come forth of the Antichristian estate, etc. are vvillngly to
join together in Christian communion and orderly covenant, and to unite
themselves into peculiar and visible congregations, etc. These have pleaded
that all are bound to communion, by virtue of their baptism received in the
Church of Rome, or other Antichristian assemblies.

7. The 35 article (confirmed also in our Apology, page 46.47.48.) professes
that a people so joined together, may proceed to choice and ordination of
Officers, etc. Now these plead, that the people may not proceed to ordination
of Officers, except they have Officers before to do it.

8. In our Apology, page 113, it was maynteyned to be gross error, and
notorious absurdity, either to hold the Popish Church to be a true Church,
having a true Ministry and true Sacraments; or else that men are unbaptised,
and must admit of the Anabaptists rebaptisation. These have themselves, much
objected to us, that either the Church and Baptism of Rome is true, or else we
must be rebaptised: Both which we still deny.

9. The 38 article of our Confession, professes that Congregations are by all
means convenient to have the counsel and help one of another in all needful
affairs, etc. The practice of this was was denied, when in our greatest need
and trouble they would not consent to have the counsel and help of the English
Church at Leyden, which professes the same faith with us.

1. Before our parting, we offered, that notvvithstanding our differences of
judgment, that we would continue together, if our former practice might be
retained: but this was refused. 2. We desired that then we might have a
peaceable parting: and to be two distinct Congregations, each practicing, as
they were persuaded, yet nourishing brotherly love and unity: This also they
would not agree to, unless we would leave this city. 3. We procured,
though without their consent, the help of the English Church at Leyden, who
labored our peace: a way of peace by these themselves propounded, and by the
Church of Leyden and us agreed to, these after reversed, and stood not unto,
unless we would go dvvell out of this City. And although in the treaty of
the Agreement it was testified by the Elders of that Church, that unless it
were to the apparent undoing of us, and of our families, we should not be
dismissed again to dwell here: yet because we would not absolutely promise to
leave this City, they would not stand to the agreement which themselves had
mad^.
THese are the Articles and Objections, that are in the printed copy
aforesaid. Which therefore we had not thought to have printed again. But
when we had finished this book, we received out of England from another
friend, another of M. A. his letters sent thither, wherein these also are set
down, in this manner and order, and in the same words, with very little
alteration thereof. We considered also that in the Answer here follovving,
there is often reference made to the printed copy of these Articles and
Exceptions: and that therefore it would be good for the Reader, to have the^
here ready at hand. VVhereupon we thought it not amiss to print the^ again,
and to advertise those that have the books, to insert them betvveen C. and D.
if it be not already done to their hands.

Now follovveth the Answer: which was first made to the former letter,
according to the six particulars thereof: but is since enlarged by reason of
this printed copy aforesaid. Concerning which also we could note and answer
more and other things then now we have done in this shortness of time. As,
about some special respects and uses in some cases to be had of the Fathers of
families, or of the chiefest and fittest of them: (as upon occasion some of us
spoke in the reasoning had among us): Also, that vvheras they would seem (in
their letters and exceptions) as if they had desired peace and accord with us,
yet besides all the things noted hereafter about their dealing, Page 74.75. etc.
this also is remembered, that when we were treating of some way of accord,
some of them publikly said, they would never yield thereunto, unles we would
revoke our agreement about the understanding of Mat. 18.17. and that also as an
error. Which we could not yield unto: as may be perceived by the agreement
it self, which is hereafter set down, page 95.96. etc. But omitting now to
speak any further of these or other things, that might also be noted about
their objections and dealing: we will for the present only desire the Reader
(about the particulars) still to remember that which sometimes we have
mentioned here, Page 44. and 45. etc
that extraordinary cases must have their vvarrant accordingly, and that the
things concerning a people without officers were left to further
consideration among us, and needed not by us now be stood upon, seeing our
estate and question was of the ordinary government of a Church established
with Officers. For which also see the Treatise on Mat. 18.17. tovvard the end
thereof. And now read the answer of the foresaid letters and objections, as
here it follovveth.

AN ANSWER TO the writing and exceptions aforesaid sent to the same party, by
Mr. Fr. Io. Whereunto he has also added some things more, upon occasion of
the other copy lately printed.
TOwching them that have divided them selves from us, and M. A. vvriting unto
you therabout, there are diverse things of weight which you should do well
carefully to observe. And first how they having left us upon two particular
matters (concerning the Churches government, and the exposition of Mat. 18.17.)
they do not directly keep unto them, as they ought: neither answer the things
printed thereabout, so long since. Whereunto both we, and all that love the
truth, and desire their conversion, must be careful to keep and hold the^. And
even by this their dealing it may appear, how needful that our publication of
the matter was, both for manifestation of the truth held by us, and for meeting
with their clamours, and all their disorderly and unapproveable courses, so
much affected by them.

Secondly, it must be remembered, that our profession alwaie has been, and must
be, to have the word of God for our direction in all things; by it to try all
things, to keep that which is good; and to refuse and redress whatsoever is
evil, or any way erring therefrom: (For which see the Praeface of our
Confession at the end of it: And in the Apology page 13. and 41: as also the
Answer to Thomas White, page 36.) So as there is no weight in it to say, Thus
we held heretofore; and now we hold thus: unless it could be showed, that it
is against the word of God, that which now is held by us. Nay seeing the faith
of this Church, is that only which is grounded upon the word of God, in the
vvritings of the Prophets and Apostles; and so our faith is the common and
ancient faith, which was held by Israel of old, and by the Primitive
churches since the coming of Christ, it follows there uppo^, that vvherin so
ever we have swarved in faith or practice therfro^, it has be^ our aberratio^,
and not our faith indeed.

Thirdly, concerning the special particular in question, our ancient
profession has been, Cons. a^t. 17. and 19.
that the Church is to be governed only by those laws and Officers, that the
Lord has appointed in his word, and by none other. From which howsoever we
have erred in our practice, yet this is our ancient faith: so as that which
now we do, is to reteyne our euncient faith, and to reform our practice
according thereunto, as we are bound daily to grow in grace and in obedience
of the faith. And for our practice also, if we would insist upon it, our
ancient practice it self was otherwise, then as lately of a few years it
had been: which later course the people that are departed from us would have
had us to reteyne. And so they them selves would have had us kept a later, and
leave our auncienter practice. Thus much also we vvrote to Leyden before the
division was made, and then Mr. Ainsvv. himself subscribed unto it.

Fourthly, observe in their exceptions against us, if they be not (almost all
of them) such as the Anabaptists would object in much like manner. And a
vveake cause it must needs be, that relies upon the Anabaptists, or any other
erroneous grouds. How much better had they done, if they had considered with
themselves) that when Christ himself taught doctrine which was not only
sound and true, but evident also and comfortable to such as could understand it
aright, yet many of his disciples when they heard it, said, This is an hard
saying, who can hear it? and so both murmured at it, and were so offended with
it, as they went back, and walked no more with him: Ioh. 6.60.62.66. Or if
they had regarded that which M. Ains. has well observed (in his Arrowe page 4.
against Idolatry) that Satan has separated me^ from the Church, as by other
means, 1 King. 12.27, 28.29 Jude v. 19 Heb. 10.25.
so also by causing them to withdraw and schism them selves for some pretented
cause or quarrel, as did the Israelites, and others after them etc.

Fifthly if we should set our selves to make exceptio^s against the^, as they
have done against us: we could se^d and spread our private letters (as they
do) accompanied with more sound and better observatio^s against the^, touching
such things as have passed among us. As for example, a little to imitate and
resemble their veyn of vvriting, thus: Many troublesome days and full of
contention has God exercised us here together withal, vvhiles we could not be
brought in singlenes of heart, with humility to obey the governors, and
observe the government prescribed in his word, and to seek him in the midest of
our pilgrimage with love and peace. For love of preeminence which has always
troubled the church, has also troubled us, vvhiles the people that should be
under the Governors, would be over and above them, etc.

For 1. whereas we had learned and professed that Christ was the only king
and Lord of his Church, Conf. art. 10, 17.19.20. Conterp. page 175.176. and in
other Treatises every where as Defen. against M. Sm. p. 126 127.128.
and had left unto it among me^ but a ministerial government, and that all the
multitude of the members, the saints, ought to obey and submit to the
Eldership in every church: Now we have lately be^ taught, In their dispute
against us and in M. Rob. Iustif. 217.225. etc.
that the people as kings have power one over another; and that the saints
being kings are superior to their Officers, because the order of kings is the
highest order or estate in the church: and so an order superior unto, and above
the order of Officers or Eldership. Also, that the Church may in relation to
the Officers being servants therein, be called a Lord etc. which things they
affirm for proof of their opinion, touching the points in question betwee^ us
about the Churches government. And vvheras we have still professed, that the
people were inferior and under the officers; now we have had it much urged
about the question co^troverted, that the people are superior and above the^.
Thus to adva^ce the people one over another as kings, and to make them
superlours, above their Governors, and to entitle them with kingly and Lordly
power in the outward policy and affairs of the Church and members thereof
(whereas Christ has given his Church no other but a ministerial power and
government) what is it else, but in deed to set up such Churches and people as
so many Idols? Like as Mr. Ainsw. shows against the Prelates, Mr. A. Atrovve
against Idol. page 19. and 20.
that Idols are set up with impiety, when among men, one is set up as Head of
the Church, others as Archbishops, and Lords spiritual, etc. For does it not
thus come to pass, that as the Prelates on the one hand, so the people on the
other hand, do even become Idols: whiles both of them run to extremities in
such advauncing of themselves, and neither of the^ will keep or be kept in the
mean, and in the ministerial way, which the Lord has appointed in his word?

Confess. art. 24.
2 We professed heretofore, that Christ gave the power of receiving in and
cutting off to the whole body together of every Christian Congregation, and
not to any one or most members sequestered from the whole, etc. Now we have been
taught, that in cases of question and controversy, the greater part of the
people are the Church, though all the Elders and other brethren be against
them, and it being granted of all, that with the Church is the power, that
greater part of the people (though never so erroneously carried) being the
Church, they have the power, and so they may receive in and cut off, though
all the Elders and other brethren (it may be but one fewer, and of much better
judgment) be against it.

M. Ains. Conterp. p. 177.
3. We vvrote heretofore, that the Elders have the reyns of government
committed to them: Now we are taught, that the government of the Church is not
Aristocraticall; yea that the people as kings have the power, and the greater
part, of the people (though in error) are the Church: as is noted before. And
so then by their opinion will follow, that the greater part of the people, yea
that all the people, being kings, have the reins in their hand; and may
decide, stay, determine, and conclude all matters of controversy in the
Church: though all the Elders and other brethren be against them.

Cons. art. 34. Plea for infa^ts p. 180. to 185. Co^te^p. page 177.
4 We professed heretofore that no Sacraments should be ministered until the
Pastors or Teachers were chosen and ordained into their Office. Now it is hield
by some, that seeing all the holy things of God are the Churches, and people
without Officers are a Church, therefore they may without Officers have the use
of the Sacraments and all the holy things of God: and consequently may receive
in by Baptism, confirm by the Lords Supper, cast out by excommunication etc.
And in this writing sent unto you, it may be observed, how they infer that
people without Officers may cast out, and therefore may receive in, there being
one power for both.

Conf. art. 21. Conterp. page 176.177.
5 We had learned that none may usurp or execute a ministry, but such as are
rightly called by the Church whereof they stand ministers, unto such Offices,
and in such manner, as God has prescribed in his word: Now it is held by some,
that people out of office, may execute all the works, and duties of the
ministry, for Baptism, Lords Supper, Ce^sures etc. And these men in their
second exception here write, there is one power for receiving in, and casting
out, and that people without Officers may do both, as is observed before.

Conf. art. 1.10, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.34, 36. and throughout the
Conf. Apol, and other of our Treatises, as Defense against Mr. Sm. page 10, 13,
88, etc.
6 We learned and used heretofore, to apply to our estate and use the things
that the Scriptures teach concerning the Governors and people in Israel: Now
we are excepted and opposed against, if we do so with these exceptions, and
the like, viz. that they had civil authority and government, which the Church
has not; that they could not in Israel forgive one another sin, as we can
now: that the people now have more power, then in Israel, because now we follow
Christ into heaven, And yet the people were typically carried in by the
Hyepriest in the precious stones on his shoulders and breast: as the most holy
place it self was a type of heaven.
whereas the people might not follow the High priest into the most holy place
etc. And what if any other would say, that by like reason the Elders now
should have more power, then the Elders in Israel, because the Elders now
follovv Christ into heaven, whereas the Elders then might not follovv the high
priest into the most holy place? And that Kings should have more power nov in
religion, then the Kings of Israel, because Kings now follovv Christ into
heaven, whereas the Kings then might not follovv the hiepriest into the most
holy place: no nor so much as into the holy place, to come to the altar to
offer incense. 2 Chronicles. 26. And note here also, that Christ and the Apostles
reasoning from the civil estate of the Governors and people of Israel, and
applying the things of it to the kingdom and Church of Christ, and to the
Governors and people of the Church now, should (by this new learning of
these men) be thought to misapplie those Scriptures, and places so alleged by
them. As Mat. 21.24. John 10.34. Act. 1.20. Ephesians. 12.13.19.20.21. and in a
number the like places. Plea for Infants p. 166.167 268, etc. Treat. against
the Anabap. p, 16. etc. and some grounds tending this way in the Apol. p. 108
etc. and in Answer to M. Jacob p. 7, and 13, etc.


7 We held that the Baptism of Rome was as true Baptism, as circumcision in
the Apostasy of Israel was true circumcision, and needed not to be renounced
and repeated: now we were taught, that the Baptism aforesaid is an Idol.
And we know that all Idols, yea and all monuments of idolatry, are to be
renounced and rejected. Esa. 30.22. And an Idol is nothing in the would, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8, 4. so as then such baptism is nothing, and such people
are an unbaptised people, and ought therefore (with the Anabaptists) to get
themselves baptized.

Thus if I would follow their course, you may see I could note down some
doctrines and assertions, not all of the soundest, which our opposites have of
late delivered and given forth: although I have hitherto held my peace there
about. Neither would I yet publish them, if there were or might be hope of
their repentance and amendment. but for your better information concerning
them and their dealing, I have thus impar^ed them unto you. By which any may
consider whether it were not high time for us to look to these persons, and
to these things, when they vere come to this pass, and grown to such an
height among us.

Now next for answer of their exceptions sent unto you against us: though it
be not so meet to be done in a private Letter, seeing we have published the
causes of the division they made, whereunto they have not yet given answer: yet
have I thought it not amiss, upon this occasion, and unto you (as your case
stands) to write somevvhat thereabout.

For the first therefore, which is made by comparing together the understanding
of Mat. 18, 17. with the Confession, Art. 24. and the Apol. page 62.63. I have
already written and published a Treatise concerning the exposition of that
Scripture: where also the reasons alleged in the Apology are purposely and
particularly treated of: to which I refer you thereabout. And what dealing
is this of theirs, that having made such a division, as they have done, they
leave the Treatise unansvvered, which was purposely written upon that occasion,
and argument, and yet cease not privately thus to insinuate, as they do?
Besides, if for their wonted Phrase (the Church of Elders) they would use
such terms, as othervvhere the Scriptures in our translations have, and as the
word it self does signify, namely, the Congregation of Elders, or the
Assembly of Elders, or the like: then both themselves and others might sooner
perceive the vanity of their error, and the light of the truth against the^.
Neither should they forget, how M. Ainsvvorth himself, in his Answer to Mr.
Bernard, shows that the word is sometime so used for the Congregation or
Assembly of Elders and Governors, Mr. Ainsw. Conterpoys. page 113. Lastly,
you may observe in the Article of our Confession here alleged, Conf. art. 24.
that for the declaration and proof thereof these Scriptures among other are
cited, Psalm. 122.3. Lev. 20.4, 5. and 24.14. Numb. 5.2.3. Deuteronomy. 13.9. all
which do directly carry us for this matter to the Church of Israel and
constitution thereof: which now (through love of their error) they would not
be brought unto, for the consideration and deciding of the matter betvveen us.

Observe also hereabout, that the power of receiving in and cutting off given
to the Church of Israel, was by them used and to be performed according to
order, and not any way to weaken, but to stablish the Elders authority. And
we must not be strangers from the policy of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. etc. Yea this
very instruction in Mat. 18.17. is such, as it accords with and has
reference unto the grounds and ordinances of God, taught of old by Moses and
the Prophets: as is shevved in particular in the Treatise aforesaid, and in the
Churches agreement published there about: So as their opposition against us
therein, is indeed against Israel, against Moses, and against the Prophets: And
whether the^ it be not also consequently against the Lord and his ordinances
prescribed in his word, let all indifferent men judge. Such is their error,
and so great is their transgression and iniquity.

And hitherto of the first Objection: which in the printed copy, is the
second. Where furthermore observe, how when they do here quote the
Scriptures alleged for proof of the 24 Article of the Confession, they do it
thus, Mat. 18.17. etc. whereas in the Confession, it is thus, Psalm. 122.3.
etc. Which is to be noted in diverse respects: First, because it shows, that
at the setting down of the Confession, the Scriptures of the old testament
were observed for the confirmation of it, asvvell as of the new. Secondly,
that Mat. 18.17. is so to be understood, as may agree with the other
Scriptures, and namely with Psalm. 122.3. Lev. 20.4.5. and 24.14. Numb. 5.2.3.
Deuteronomy. 13, 9. which Scriptures are in this article also alleged, and joined
with that of Mat. 18.17. Thirdly, that it must be understood with agreement
and proportion to the order and manner of Israel, whereof these scriptures do
directly speak. Fourthly, that therefore our understanding of it now, as we
do, is (in the truth of the point it self) according to our ancient says:
and not theirs who would make us strangers from Israel, and would persuade
us that Christ's doctrine in Mat. 18.17. is a nevve rule for the Churches now,
which Israel had not. And that these people therefore have in deed left the
ancient faith, which thing they object unto others.

Moreover by the Scriptures asoresayd joined together and compared with the
estate of Israel, it does appear (and reason it self does teach it) that we
must distinguish betwee^ the sentence of excommunication, and betvveen the
execution thereof: as betvveen the sentence of death, of leprosy, or the like,
and betvveen the execution follovving thereupon. Now in Israel the Elders in
causes of death, and the Priests in case of Leprosy, had a rightful power to
give out the sentence of death and of leprosy and the like, according to the
law of God, without asking the peoples consent, yea and though it should have
been without and against the consent of the people, whom they call here the
body of the Congregation. Deu. 1.16. and 17.8-12. and 24.8. with 2 Chronicles.
26.16-20. Levit. 13. etc. And when the Elders and Priests had so pronounced
the sentence according to the word of God and duty of their office then was
it for the people to perform the execution accordingly: as may be seen in the
Scriptures aforesaid, and many other the like.

Thus also the Elders may now by virtue and duty of their Office give out the
sentence of excomunicatio^, according to the law of God, and the people should
accordingly put it in execution, by avoiding the exco^mmunicated persons till
they repent, etc. Or if any of the people can except against the Elders
proceeding therein, they are to be heard: as in the foresaid Treatise upon Mat.
18, 17. I have vvritte^ heretofore. Where note further, how in that Treatise
it is often mentioned (and particularly in our agreement about the
understa^ding of this Scripture of Mat. 18.17.) that we should always understand
and observe these things according as in Israel (in the due proportion and
perpetual equity thereof): and therefore not to abridge the brethren of their
assent or any right that does apperteyne unto them by the word of God: but to
do all things acco^rding to the rules prescribed therein, etc.

And here let me then ask of this people thus divided hereabout: first,
whether in Israel the Lord abridged the people of their right and liberty any
way, in that by his word the Elders and Priests might admonish sinners, and
give sentence of death, and leprosy, and the like things, without asking or
taking the peoples consent thereunto. Secondly, whether the people have any
more right and authority in the Churches government now, then the people of
Israel had in those days: Thirdly, whether the people of Israel were not
kings and priests, even a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation, as well as
the Christian people are now: Exodus 19, 5, 6. Psalm. 149.1. etc. with 1 Pet.
2.9.10. Rev. 1.6. Fourthly, whether the Churches power, which the Lord has
given unto it, be not a ministerial power only? Fifthly, whether the Elders
power be not ministerial under the Lord, in and for the Church, so as it is
the Lords primarily, the Churches secondarily, and the Officers ministerially
or instrumentally for the Lord and the Church, whose Officers they are: and
that therefore there is no weight in their Objections about the Elders power,
as if it were not the Churches, and that which perteyneth to the body of the
Congregation: but that in deed it is the Churches, and so to be ministered by
the Officers whom the Lord has set in his Church, to minister in his name,
for the Churches use and benefit: and that they which oppugn the Officers
herein, do not only oppose against them, but even against the Lord, and the
Church, for which they would seem so much to plead. And finally, whether the
Opposites in the Churches government, as the Anabaptists in the Sacraments,
would not make us aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and that so there
should not be one body of them and us, one Lord over them and us, one says of
theirs and ours, etc, as the Apostle has taught us, Ephesians. 2.12-22. and 3, 6.
and 4.4. etc. Which how absurd and ungodly it were to hold, we vvish they
may in time well consider with them selves, before more errors and further evils
grovve upon them, then yet are.

Furthermore, let me also ask, why they do not here speak of themselves,
(asvvell as of us) what they pleaded to be the Church spoken of, Mat. 18.17.
as namely, how some of the^ taught publikly, that it is the whole Church and
Congregation, alleging to that end, Number. 15.33. and 27.2. and 35.12. as also,
that Christ in this place, speaks of the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.1. etc.
and that therefore we are to understand it of the whole Church: How some also
pleaded, that it must be understood, of men, women and children that can
sorrovve and rejoice with others: pressing to this purpose, that which Paul
speaks of the body and parts thereof sorrovving and rejoicing one with
another, 1 Cor. 12.22-26. And furthermore how it was also affirmed, that in
cases of question and controversy, the greater part of the people (though
without and against all the Elders and other brethren) are the body and the
Church, there spoken of, yea though they be in error, etc. And now in their
exceptions pleading about it, they speak of the whole Congregation, and of the
body of the Congregation, in an opposition against the Eldership: and so seem
here to imply also such an understanding thereof. Touching all which, it were
long to rehearse, either what reasoning we had, or what might be shevved
about these points. But some fevve things I will note thereabout.

And first, if this rule befound in the book of Numbers and laws of Israel,
as by the doctrine and allegations aforesaid appears, then is it not a new
rule, first given in Mat. 18.17. as was held and urged both often and
earnestly among us. Secondly, these Scriptures in the book of Numbers, speak of
civil cases and government: and yet when we allege these or the like about
the Elders, as they do about the people, they except against us, as if we
misapplyed the Scriptures, and give the Elders civil authority: which I
suppose they will not give to the people, though they make such allegations
about them in this question, as we do about the Elders. Number. 15.33. and 27.2.
and 35.12.
Thirdly, touching these Scriptures and the like, it is certain, that the
sinners and pleas in Israel were brought before the Congregation of Elders to
be judged by them, as may appear by these Scriptures them selves, being
compared with Number. 36.2. Deuteronomy. 19.12.17. and 1.12.16. and 16.18. and 17.8-12.
Josh. 20.4.5.6. 1 Samuel 2.25. 2 Chronicles. 19.5-11. Psalm. 82.1-6. Mat. 5.22. Lnk.
22.66. Act. 6.12. etc.

Moreover, Number. 15.33. and 27.2.
two of the Scriptures alleged, speak of the people of Israel when they
were in the wilderness, where they were six hundred thousand men, beside
children, Exodus 12.37. And would they have us think, that this people came
together to hear examine and judge the cases of sin and question there spoken
of, or that the parties there mentioned were brought or came unto all that
Congregation, as they would have the causes of sin and sinners to be brought
unto the whole Church and congregation among us, yea and the people to be
bound to come and judge the brethrens causes, that do fall out from time to
time?

And for the third Scripture so alleged by them, Number. 35.12.
if it be compared with Deuteronomy. 19.4-12. it makes the point yet more plain
against them selves. For Moses speaking of one and the same matter in both
those places, Number. 25.12.
uses in the one place the word Congregation, and in the other the term of
Elders: as if he would himself tell us, that he speaks of the Congregation of
Elders. Deuteronomy. 19.12.
To which end also see Josh. 20.4.5.6. where the same matter is again spoken
of: and Deuteronomy. 19.15-18. where after the treating of the former matter, he
gives a general rule for the cases that might fall out among them. And
whether now we should believe Moses or them, let themselves judge.

Touching the phrase of the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 18.1. etc.
Mat. 18.1. etc. howsoever many have been carried thereby to think that this is
a new rule, and perteyning only to the Churches of the Gospel since Christ,
and that the people now are otherwise interessed in the Churches government
then they were in Israel of old: yet it is evident that the same phrase is
also spoken of the state and Church of the Jews, Mat. 22.2. etc. and that
therefore such collections from this manner of speech are not sound.

And what is there here taught by Christ, that the Jews should not be
careful to observe, asvvell as we? Should not they be humble and harmless,
as little children, and so enter into the kingdom of heaven? Mat. 18.1-4. with
Psalm. 131.1.2. Prove. 15.33. and 16.19. and 18.12. and 25.6.7. 1 Samuel 12.3.4.
Psalm. 138.6. Should they not avoid giving offiences to others: and when others
offended the^, should they not deal with them, and shevve them their sin;
And if they did not repent and amend, bring them to the Congregation of Elders,
to be further dealt with according to their demerit; Or if they did repent,
forgive them? Mat. 18.5-22. with Lev. 19.14.16.17.18. Deuteronomy, 19.15-19. and
21.18-21. and 25.5-9. with Ruth 3.9-13. and 4.1-13. 1 Samuel 2.25. Esa. 58.6.7.

And further in the same chapter it may be observed, Mat. 18.23. etc.
that Christ teaching how God requires men to forgive one another their
sins (under the similitude of a king taking account of his servants)
propounds it by the same phrase of the kingdom of heaven. And this also is a
duty which God required of the Jews alvvayes, asvvell as of us now. Lev.
19.18. Exodus 23, 4.5. Psalm. 7.4. Act. 7, 26.

And in the next chapter, Mat. 19.13.14.
Christ speaking of little children that were brought unto him, says that of
such is the kingdom of heaven. Which was alvvayes true of the infants and
children of the Jews, as of ours now. But if any would gather hereupon, for
babes and little children (as some do for the men, women, and greater children
upon the like manner of speech) that therefore they are to have a hand in the
Churches government, and that the causes of sin and question falling out in
the church should be brought unto them (asvvell as to the Elders) and they
bound to be present to hear and judge all such causes arising among the
brethren: I suppose the people them selves, that hold the former opinion, and
make such collections to maynteyne it for the whole Congregation, yet would
think it absurd thus to reason about the lesser children: although they be of
the body of the Congregation, and that of such also is the kingdom of heaven.

Again in the next chapter save one, Mat. 21.43.
Matthew shows how Christ said, that the kingdom of God should be taken
from the Jews, and given to (the Gentiles) a nation that should bring forth
the fruits thereof. Mat. 21, 43. So as then by the doctrine of Christ himself,
it is one and the same kingdom of God, under which the Jews were, and we
now are. The differences about some vvorldly ceremonial and mutable things,
neither do nor can carry with them an abolition of the things spiritual
moral and perpetual: Neither may we at any hand or under any pretense suffer
our selves to be made aliants from the common wealth of Israel, as is noted
before.

For the other Scripture, 1 Cor. 12. chap.
1 Cor. 12, chap. the Apostles purpose is not there to speak of the cases and
pleas about sin, and of the manner of dealing therein (as in Mat. 18.15; 16,
17. and as our question was among us) but of the diversity and inaequalitie
of gifts and functions given by the Lord in and to his church for the help and
service of all, to the building up of the mystical body of Christ. VVhereupon
the Apostle shows it also by the similitude and proportion of the members of
the natural body, and of the several faculties thereof: which he applies
and extends, even to the feeblest members, and to the least and youngest
children of the Church that are but newly baptized, 1 Cor. 12.13-22. etc. to
whom yet he appoints not the cases of sin and pleas of the other members
of the church to be brought for judgment and censure, as these men hereupon
would infer, and as the matter in question is about Mat. 18, 17.

Moreover, the things there spoken of the body, and of the parts thereof,
might likewise of old be applied to Israel according to their estate; and they
were then bound accordingly to walk, as members of one and the same body,
affording all help service and comfort they could one unto another. Yet this
might not then, nor may not now, hinder nor pervert the ordinance of God about
the Elders hearing and judging the causes of their brethren, and censuring them
according to their demerit: but in deed it does much more strongly establish
it, inasmuch as the Governors are by the Lord set in the Church for that use,
and so for the benefit of the whole: as also, that all the members have not
gifts fit for examining of persons and deciding of cases and questions that do
fall out, and yet notvvithstanding are members in the body, and have
otherwise their good use, being fitly employed, and must be helped of the rest
as their need is, and be partakers of the gifts bestovved upon others, for
their good and comfort.

And yet further, this Scripture is more direct against the^, in that it
shows how in the Church some have a more chief place then others, as the
head, and eyes, and hands in the body: and are therefore to be respected and
employed according to their gifts and place, wherein God has set them, 1 Cor.
12.14. -- 28. Which is little regarded of them, who in cases of question and
controversy (where there is greatest need of most knowledge and wisdom)
will then look where the greatest number of the people is (though they may be
of the most simple) and will have them to be the Church, and to have the
Churches power and authority to give the sentence (yea albeit that all the
Elders and other brethren of better judgment, but fewer in number, be against
them): as if the multitude should still be follovved, and that there were no
difference or inequality of gifts, of Office, or other respect at all to be
had Which how far it is from the intendement of this Scripture alleged by
themselves, let all that understand according to sobriety judge.

And let these men if they will not be taught otherwise, 1 Cor. 12. and
compare with it, romans 12. 3-8.
yet learn of their own bodies, from which the Apostle borrovveth his
similitude here: and there they shall see, that all the members of the body
are not given or used for counsel and determination in the things that concern
it (though yet they have their other profitable use): whereupon it is, that
when some part of the body is hurt, the hand is not used or sought unto to
see withal, nor the foot to hear, neither does the head take them to consult
and determine what to do there about: but when the head it self has
considered and determined (according to the gift and duty thereof) then it
uses the help of the hand or foot or any or all the members, according as
there is need and occasion. And thus have all the members their good use and
service in the body, being rightly used and applied thereunto. But should now
hereupon the hands or feet say, because they are not sought unto and employed
to see hear and determine, as the eye, ear, and head are: that therefore they
loose their right, and are not used or regarded as the members of the body
should? Yet after such a manner plead the people aforesaid, that they are
vvronged and loose their right and liberty, if when matters of sin and
question arise between brethren of the church, they be not sought unto, and
bound to come together to hear and determine the cases, to examine and censure
the persons so dealt vvithall.

Nay though the Elders sit publicly to hear and judge such causes, and that
it be left free for any of the people to come that vvil: yet they think they
have injury, unles that they be called upon and bound to come together; and
that they also make inquisition and censure the causes and persons dealt
vvithall; and that the greater number of their voices (though without and
against all the Elders) be taken for the Churches sentence, etc. Which in
deed, what is it else but as if either the whole body should become one member,
an eye, an ear, an head, or the like: or as if the foot should say, Because I
am not the hand, I am not of the body: or as if the hand should say, Because I
am not employed as the eye, ear, or head, therefore I lose my right, and am
not used or esteemed in the body as I ought to be? Yea what is it else, but to
bring them selves into bondage (and in deed to bring an Antichristian servitude
on the people in the Church) when it being left free unto them to come or not
to come, yet that shall not suffice, unles they be bound thereunto, as is
aforesaid,

And so it shall not be enough, that the Elders by their Office are bound unto
it, Romans 12, 7, 8. 1 These. 5.12.13. 1 Timothy 5.17.18.
and ought to have mayntenance for the doing of it, and of the other duties of
their Office: but the men must (without any allowance for it) leave their
trades and callings, the women their houses and samilies, the children their
schooling and employment, the servants their work and labor, As may come to
pass in great co^gregatio^s and when many cases are to be heard, etc.
and must come together (though it should be day after day) to hear and judge
the cases that fall out betvveen brother and brother, according to Mat. 18.17.
For by this Scripture in 1 Cor. 12. chap. they will have it understood of men,
women, and children that can sorrovv and rejoice with others, as before was
showed. And many more things might be noted about this and the other Scriptures
spoken of: but these few observations may suffice.

Yet before I proceed, let me by this occasion note two things more hereabout
in general. The one, that as it often comes to pass with heretics,
schismatiks and Antichristians, that the very Scriptures alleged by
themselves, being searched and duly weighed, they are fit and forceable
against themselves: so it is fallen out with these men in this case: as may
appear by that which has been said touching the Scriptures thus alleged by
them. The other is a thing, which M. Ainsvv. has well observed about
Idolatry, that it is a sin which cleaves fast to all flesh, Arrowe against
Idol. chapter 2 p. 23. etc.
so as the best in the world do easily fall into it, do take pleasure in it,
and are hardly drawn from it: An example whereof may be seen in the people
aforesaid, who being carried with the love of their error about the matter
spoken of, would choose bondage before liberty (yea and a bondage accompanied
with many other evils ensuing upon men women and children) rather then they
would be drawn from the error and Idol set up in their heart. But I hope
their children (if not themselves) will in time grow vviser, how ever in
other things it be too common, that the children remember their fathers altars
and Idols, as the Prophet Jeremiah said of the people in his days. Ier. 17.2.

Let me also about the matters themselves concerning the greater part of the
people, the whole Congregation, or body thereof; the men, women, and
children of years; pleaded to be the Church spoken of, Mat. 18, 17. desire to
know by what Scriptures they will now manifest and confirm it to such as
are otherwise minded: If they speak of 1 Cor. 5, chap. (as some do) that is
purposely handled in the treatise on Mat. 18.17.
as also, if the women and children should in a controversy be the greater
part, whether then they be the Church there spoken of; and have the Churches
power and authority to excommunicate the men: and whether these persons
divided not them selves from the Church, when they left us; seeing we were
the greater number both of the Elders and people, whom they departed from:
Also, whether the Elders be of the body of the Congregation, whereof they
speak, or not (for here they seem to make an opposition betvveen the body of
the Congregation, and the Eldership): And if they be, what place they have in
the body, whether a superior or inferior place: And whether in the
Congregation and presence of them, the women and children have authority (by
virtue of that rule, Mat. 18.17. to examine rebuke and admonish their husbands,
parents, and masters, being there dealt vvithall for sin: seeing the Church
is told; and the women and children are of the Church; and they that are of
the Church there spoken of, may examine and admonish, and are to be heard and
obeyed, etc.

Neither let them think much, that I propound such questipns, or that I speak
thus about women and children etc. For they know, that such assertions and
pleading we have had from them, and that such opinions are among them. And we
know, that if they answer directly to the things here and before propounded,
the truth will better appear, and the controversy be sooner ended between us:
And what they hold and mainteyn concerning these things, is needful for us
still to insist upon, seeing that about the understanding of this Scripture of
Mat. 18.17. they have so dealt and left us as they have done.

Other things I will omit, that might here also have their place and use:
noting this only, that it is a strange and extraordinary case, when a
controversy should so stand, as all the Elders should be one way, and all the
people another way. And in extraordinary cases, the course and warrant from
the word of God must accordingly be had. But what is this to the ordinary
manner of government in the Church, whereof the question was among us, and
vvhereabout it was particularly mentioned at the beginning, that our reasoning
should be?

Lastly, what weight is there in this exception of theirs against our
understanding of Mat. 18.17. more then might be against Israel of old, who
could understand such speeches of the Congregation of Elders, without
impeaching any liberty of the people or falling into any error against the
truth? But I have spoken hereof before: and of this matter, more largely then I
purposed: though yet not so largely as I might, considering the point it self,
and how they have carried themselves thereabout. Now I will come to the next
Objection.

Treat. on Mat. 18.17.
where also I have treated purposely and largely of the place of the Apology,
which they have here alleged: so as that should first have been ansvvered,
before they had thus dealt as they have done; especially, seeing that there I
desired answer and confirmation of that opinion, vvriting in this sort about
it, Where find we in the Scriptures, that God has thus laid upon the people
without Officers to excommunicate? Where is the precept for it? Which be the
examples of it? Or what are the grounds requiring and bearing it out? In the
same place also I noted, that in the Scriptures we may observe not only sundry
examples, showing how it has been done by the Lord himself, and by his
ministers and Officers: but also diverse ordinances and grounds directing and
warranting us to do likewise. The particulars whereof see in that Treatise;
with diverse other considerations and reasons thereabout. Which might have
caused them either to answer us, or at least (as there is noted) to consider
with themselves how the Churches excommunication can be administered by any but
such as are the Lords and the Churches Officers and Overseers: and how people
without Officers can chalendge to themselves the ministration of this, any more
then of the Sacraments, etc.

And besides, you may perce^ive both by our churches estate, and by particular
note set down in the said Treatise, that our controversy was about a Church
established with Officers: and that it was before our parting agreed among us,
to leave the things concerning people without Officers to further
consideration. To which also I do still refer it. Only where he says here,
that our doctrine overthrowes the constitution of our Church, which was
gathered and constituted by Christians without Officers, receiving in the
repentant, and casting out the disobedient, etc. I will hereupon note a fevve
things briefly, to shevve the error and weakness of their exception herein.

And first (omitting what is said before) it were vvorth the knovving, by
whom (or by what Church) the first man or first two men of this Church
(whereof they speak) were received in, and by what power. Secondly, it is
known and not to be forgotten, Ephesians. 4.4.5 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. and 12, 13. Act.
2.41.42.
that by our baptism, as also by accord in the truth, we are bound to
communion, in any thing lavvfull (as God gives occasion and opportunity
thereunto): which thing was heretofore showed unto them: though yet they have
not learned it as they should. Thirdly, it is also plain and uudenyable, that
to choose or give voices in election, is not a part of government, or a duty
peculiar to the governors of the Church, but an interest, power, right, and
liberty, that the saints and people out of Office have and should use in
elections, not only at first, when they have no Officers, but alvvayes after
in other elections also, even when they have Officers over them. Lastly,
seeing our doctrine overthrovveth not the constitution of the church of Israel
before Christ, nor of the primitive Churches after Christ, it ca^ not therefore
overthrow the constitution of our Church, or of any other, that is accordingly
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the head corner stone. Ephess. 2, 19, 20. By all which you may see, how
vain and frivolous this their exception is. To which may be referred the
first, sixth, and seventh of the Objections in the printed copy. And so
touching them, observe the things spoken of here, and in the foresaid Treatise
upon Mat. 18.17.

For the third, it being of much like nature with the second before, viz, that
the Church may excommunicate any Officer deserving it, as well as any other
member. Also that if all the Officers do jointly transgress and so persist,
then the Church which did choose them, may also depose and refuse them for
being their Officers any longer, and may separate themselves from them. But
that the people may excommunicate all their Officers or whole Eldership
together, I desired to see it showed and warranted from the word of God. This
was then ansvvered, and sent from hence in a general letter to the church at
Leyden: as is known unto them, and was by Mr. Ainsw. himself also subscribed
at that time, for my answer hereunto: howsoever now they speak not of it.
So far as choosing reaches (which being not an action of government, may be
done by people out of office) so far also may the refusing go. And whatsoever
(in extraordinary cases) is attempted further, must be approved by the word
of God, that so it may be admitted.

And now for the exception it self, (which is here the third, but in the
printed copy is the first): note these things moreover concerning it: that the
particulars of the 23 Article of our Confession here alleged, being found true
in the Churches of Israel before Christ, and of the Gentiles since Christ: the
exception made hereabout can not be of weight against this or any other Church
established according to the word of God, as those were, but must be also
against those churches vvithall. For which see and consider the Scriptures
alleged in the Confession for confirmation thereof. And observe here also,
whether it can be showed by those or any other Scriptures, that any in Israel
or in the primitive Churches did ordeyne Officers, or depose, or excomunicate
either the^, or any wicked persons deserving it, but such as were Governors
and Officers among them.

Which scripture we have indeed thus alleged heretofore.
If any insist upon Numb. 8.9.10. which of all other places is the likest, or
only like to be objected, because there it is said, the children of Israel
shall put their hands upon the Levites: then note also further, that by this
phrase of speech of the children of Israel, and other such speeches of the men
of Israel, the tribes of Israel (and the like in the Scriptures) are the Elders
of Israel often meant and understood. As for example, in another the like case,
they which are called the Elders of Israel, Lev. 9.1. are in the same chapter
called the children of Israel, Lev. 9.3. where the Septuagint have in both
places alike, the Senate or Eldership of Israel. As also Josh. 7.23. where the
Hebrew has the children of Israel, the Greek translation has the Elders of
Israel. And very reason it self teaches so to understand it. For otherwise
how should so many hundred thousand of Israel, as then were of the people,
either at once hear or do the things there spoken of? And if it be said, some
did it for the rest of Israel, then I ask, first, who those some were, but
the Elders, whom Israel now had. Exo. 3.16. and 4.29. Lev. 9.1. etc. and
secondly, under whom they did it, but under the Lord, who set them over the
people to minister and govern in his stead. Exodus 20, 12. Number. 11.16-30. Deu.
1.9-18. and 16.18. and 17, 12. and 19, 12.17. etc.

So likewise they which are called the men of Israel, Ios. 9, 6, 7, 14. are
in the same chapter called the Princes of the Congregation, Ios. 9, 15, 18, 19,
21. And they which are called the tribes of Israel, 2 Samuel 7.7. are
othervvhere called the Judges of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 17.6. In like manner, that
which is sometimes said to be done by the people, Exodus 20.18, 19. 1 Samuel 8.7,
10, 19, 21. is othervvhere said to be done by the Elders Deuteronomy. 5.23. 1 Samuel 8,
4. In which places and actions common reason also teaches so to understand
the speeches, as was shevved before. And in like sort may be observed, how
the word Church or Congregation is diverse times used for the Assembly or
Congregation of Elders, Number. 35, 12, 24, 25, 29. with Deuteronomy. 19, 11.13.16.17.
and 31.28.30. Josh. 20.4.5.6. Psalm. 82.1. 1 Chronicles. 29.1.6. with 28.1. etc. as
is noted in the other Treatise on Mat. 18.17. And many such Synechdochicall
speeches (where the name of the whole is given to a part) may be observed in
the Scriptures. Which vvhiles men will needs understand, according to the
letter, they grow into many errors, some one way, some another, as others
also do in other things, mistaking figurative speeches, as if they were spoken
and should be understood literally.

And thus much I thought to write further hereabout: And this also, that they
should better observe the clauses particularly expressed in the article spoken
of, Conf. art. 23.
as namely that the electing and ordeyning of the Officers is to be according
to the rules in Gods word prescribed, that deposition likewise is to be by due
order, and that the cutting off by excommunication must be done orderly. Which
clauses as they bind us to show by the Scriptures, that the people not being
in office may choose their Officers, as is proved both there, and in the
Apology here cited, page 46.47. so do they also bind these persons thus
making exception, to show out of the word of God, like rules, practice, or
vvarrant, of ordination, deposition, and excommunication, ministered and
performed by people out of office. Which till they do, what weight or use
is there of their exceptions, save that it turns to be a means for the truth
to be better found out, and more cleared from time to time.

third herebefore: where therefore see the answers. And if they would here
imply a particular matter concerning one of our Ministers, about imposition of
hands: that is a point also left to further consideration among us: beside that
it fell out since their departing from us: and therefore perteynes not to the
plea about their division, which was made before. Yet notvvithstanding the
answer which follows here to their fifth and next exception, will both give
some light to the point it self, and show good reason of the needful
discussing thereof: which you shall do well therefore to consider of as
follovveth.

But first (by occasion of that which is printed) I will here annexe a little
more. For now they do in particular express this matter, concerning one that
was minister in the Church of England, and is since chosen Teacher of this
Church, and received among us, without any nevve imposition of hands. So now
refer hither to this Objection, the third and fifth in the copy that is
printed. Touching which, let me first signify that our testimony against the
Antichristian hierarchy of the man of sin, treated of in the Confession, is
not by us reversed or weakened any way, but now is rather more sound and
stronger also, then it was hitherto, inasmuch as it is more firmly grounded,
not only against the apostasy of Antichrist, but also against the errors and
confusion of the Anabaptists: whereabout we have been encumbred, not a little.

For the Anabaptists holding that Antichrist had utterly destroyed all Gods
ordinances, so that there was not so much as true Baptism r^^eyned and had
among them, thereupon they began to baptize the^ selves again. Whose errors
vvhiles we confuted (as by our books published thereabout may appear): and
vvhiles some of them objected, that we should no more reteyne the Baptism,
then the ministry there received: we had thereuppon just occasion given us
to consider thereof. And so vveighing with our selves, that one main and
special reason against rebaptization is, because Baptism is an ordinance of
God, which was had in the Church of Rome, before she fell into apostasy, and
has been there continewed ever since the Apostles times (hovvever it be
commingled among them with many corruptions and inventions of their own) we
began to consider, whether the like might not be observed and said concerning
Imposition of hands, that it was had from the Apostles in the Church of Rome
before her apostasy, and is there continued to this day; though mixed with
many pollutions and devises of their own.

And entering into consideration thereof, we observed these things among other
about it. 1. That Imposition of hands is of God, and not an invention of man,
not a post or threshold first brought by Antichrist into the Temple of God, but
had therein before Antichrist sat there. 2. That baptism and imposition of
hands are joined together, among the principles of the foundation spoken of,
Heb. 6, 2. which we thought therefore should in this behalf be well regarded.
3. That imposition of hands is in the Church of Rome still given to the Office
of ministry, and in the name of the Lord: as they do also still administer
baptism. 4. That we found not either precept, example or ground in the
Scripture, binding us to the repetition thereof. 5. That the Priests and
Levites in Israel becoming unclean, when afterward they were cleansed,
retained still their places of being Priests and Levites: And that the children
of the Priests and Levites succeding after them, did minister without a new
anointing or new impositio^ of hands: Yea that in the case of Idolatry, the
Levites repenting kept their function, and the Priests also, being only
debarred from the altar, but still remaining Priests, both doing such duties
and enjoying such benefits thereof, as the other Israelites might not, no nor
the Levites, but in cases of necessity.
Levit. 22.1-9. and Ezech. 44.10-14. 2 King. 23.9. with Lev. 21. and 24, 9.
Mat. 12, 4.6. That in the Scriptures vvefinde, how some Officers were admitted
with it, and some without it. As about the Levites may be observed: and about
the Apostles also, that Paul and Barnabas had imposition of hands, which we
read not that the other Apostles had. Act. 13, 1, 2, 3.7. That some Churches
hold it not of necessity to be had: That the Church of Scotland (as we hear)
does not use it at all, but in stead thereof give the right hand of
fellowship: That the first ministers and officers of the Dutch and French
reformed Churches had no imposition of hands; because at their first coming
into order, they had no Elders to impose hands: That the ruling Elders and
Deacons at this day have no imposition of hands among them, as we understand:
That neither the apostate nor the reformed Churches repeat it to the ministers,
when they go from one Congregation to another among them. 8. And it may also
be observed, that thus we show the keeping of communion with all other
Christians and Churches, what in us is: as we do also by reteyning our
baptism, and any other truths and ordinances of God had among the^: which
still we keep, purging them only from the corruptions wherewith they are
defiled among them.

Now when upon our occasions, diverse things hereabout were observed among
us, we thought it best to stay and consider further thereof; knovving that if
we find it to be such as ought to be done, we can do it at any time: or if
it be otherwise, that then this course which we took is the best. Other
reasons we considered also on the other hand, which I need not here mention.
But seeing we found that it was even from the Apostles times in the church of
Rome long before she became apostate, as baptism was; and that the repeating
of it among us, and not regarding the having of it there, is a means to
strengthen the Anabaptists in their errors; and observing vvithall such
considerations about it, as are here before related, we stayed our selves: and
rested in this, that the Church did choose him into office; and that we did by
prayer commend him unto God for his grace and assistance in the ministration
thereof: Which we did without imposition of hands at that time: as both our
selves had before done, at our first growing into order; and as the French and
Dutch Churches also did, when they first began reformation among them.
VVhereabout if any sounder and better course be showed hereafter at any time,
we can then proceed further, as there shall be cause.

In the mean time, let it here be observed, how these that thus object, and
their partakers, can (all of them) hold that the people having no office may
excommunicate; and (some of the^) that they may also minister the Sacraments:
and yet can except against such as are in office, if they do but make question
of a ceremony or any thing thereabout.

And lastly, let themselves consider, how the Anabaptists object against us,
that we receive such for members of our Church, as were baptized by the
Prelates and Priests in apostate Churches: so as because of it we baptize them
not again, when at the same time we baptize others that were never baptized
before: And also, that the leaving and repenting of all the corruptions and
apostasy among the^, will not satisfy the Anabaptists, unles we leave also
the baptism it self, and hold with them that there is not so much as one post
or threshold of Gods remaining in the apostate Church; as some also of these
that thus except against us, have not stuck to affirm.

They that are wise and unpartiall, will carefully consider and regard these
things, though these men them selves cannot yet be brought so to do. And now
I vvil proceed to the next objection.

the fourth and eight in the printed copy do agree, it was in deed said,
that the baptism of the Church of Rome is true baptism. And so it is, as the
circumcision in Isreal's apostasy was true circumcision, and not to be
repeated again. And if it be not a true baptism, it is a false baptism: And
false baptism is not Gods baptism, nor Gods ordinance. For God is the author
of truth, not of falsehood.

Moreover a true baptism are we bound to have, when we have the means to
attain it. Else the neglect thereof is sin. Wherefore they that hold it not
to be true baptism, must become Anabaptists, and be rebaptized. Which thing
let them well look unto.

And seeing (in the printed copy) they say, they do still deny it to be
true baptism, I will here therefore insist upon it somevvhat more. And first,
it must be remembered, that when I said, the Baptism of the Church of Rome is
true baptism, they did not only deny it so to be (which alone they speak of
here) but affirmed it also to be an Idol: whereof here they speak not at all.
Note also, that our speech was and is, of the outvvard baptism in the Church
not of the inward baptism of the holy Ghost, which is and may be either with
or without the outvvard baptism; and whereof none will offer to say, that it
is not true baptism, or that it is an Idol, as was said of the other.

Now therefore upon their opinions and assertions, I reason further thus: If
the Baptism had in the Church of Rome, be not true baptism, then it is not
the Lords baptism, ordained by him in his Church: And if it be not that
baptism of the Lords, the^ they which have no other but it, should not in that
estate eat the Lords supper, but should get the Lords baptism, before they
come to the Lords table. For as in Israel none might eat of the Lords
passover, that had not the Lords circumcision; so now may none eat the Lords
supper, that have not the Lords baptism. Exodus 12, 48. Act. 2, 41, 42. 1 Cor.
10, 1-4. with Act. 18.8. and 1 Cor. 11.26. And so by this doctrine and opinion
of theirs, as often as they come to the Lords table in that estate, they
pollute and profane it, and eat and drink judgment to themselves: and
therefore had need betymes to look unto it, and to examine and judge themselves
hereabout, least they be judged of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.28. and.

Again, there is but one baptism, as there is but one body, one spirit, one
hope of our calling, one faith, one God and Father of all, etc. Ephesians. 4.4.5.6.
1 Cor. 12.13. Now the baptism had in the Church of Rome, either is that one
baptism, or is not it. If it be that one, then it is true baptism, without
all question: If it be not, then they which have no other but it, have not that
one baptism, spoken of by the Apostle in the Scriptures aforesaid: and
therefore must get it, not only before they may come to the Lords table, as is
aforesaid, but also that they may have the comfort of this one baptism, and
the true outward seal of Gods covenant, to confirm unto them that they are
baptized into that one body; partakers of that one spirit; heirs of that one
hope of eternal life; under that one Lord, in that one faith, the children of
that one God and father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in us
all. Otherwise, so long as they neglect or deprive themselves thereof, it
will follovv upon them by their own opinion and assertion (which they say
they do still hold) that they stand in great sin, neglecting or contemning
to have the true baptism, instituted by the Lord, and that they deprive
themselves of great comfort, and confirmation on of their faith, about the
particulars aforesaid, touching the body and spirit of the Lord, the faith
and hope of the children of God even our Father in Jesus Christ.

Furthermore, the baptism had in apostate Churches, either is a seal of the
covenant of God, or not. If it be a seal of the Lords covenant, then sure it
is true baptism. If it be not, then see what great things will follovv
thereupon: As first, that they which have no other baptism but it, have not
the outvvard baptism that seals unto them the covenant of God: and therefore
must with the Anabaptists get another, that they may be assured they have
the seal of Gods covenant of grace and salvation: Secondly, that there neither
have been, nor shall be in Babylon any of Gods people under his covenant; which
is contrary to that which is written, Revel. 18, 4. where the Lord shows
that he has his people, vvho^ by the words of his covenant he calls thence,
saying Come out of her, my people, etc. And if these men will say, that
themselves are not of such people there spoken unto, then let them tell us
when and how they came under the covenant of God, and let them also show it
without stablishing their own righteousness of works thereby: Thirdly, that
the baptism now had in apostate Churches is not answerable to the
circumcision had in the apostasy of Israel: For that circumcision (though had
in apostasy) was true circumcision, and a seal of the Lords covenant, to his
people; and therefore needed not to be renounced or repeated. But the baptism
now had in the apostasy of the Church of Rome, they say is not true baptism,
and so not a seal of the Lords covenant to his people now, as the other was
then; therefore must be renounced, and another that is true obtained. And thus
again, in this they make themselves (and would make us) straugers from the
policy of Israel; as in the point of government also was observed before.

Neither will it now help them to allege those Scriptures, or the like, as
we have produced heretofore against the Anabaptists, to approve the reteyning
of our baptism had in apostasy, without renunciation or repetitio^ thereof:
as namely, 2 Chronicles. 30. chap, compared with Exodus 12, 48, 49. Genesis 17, 10-13.
Lev. 26.14-44.45, 46. Deuteronomy. 4.25-31.2 King. 9, 6. and 13, 23. Psalm. 78.9-38.
and 89.30-34. Ezech. 16, 44-63. and 43.7-9.2 These. 2, 3-8. Romans 11, 2-5. and
15.4. etc. For now it will be ansvvered them, that in Isreal's apostasy they
kept circumcision which needed not to be repeated, seeing it was true, and
sealed Gods covenant unto them: but that these cannot so plead for the baptism
had in the apostasy of Rome, because themselves say, the baptism of the
church of Rome is not true baptism; and so not the seal of Gods covenant to
them which have no other but it. Whereunto what they will answer, let them
bethink themselves. And let the^ show us, by what Scriptures they can
approve their standing now, who vvittingly and willingly remain without
true baptism, to seal unto them the covenant of God in Jesus Christ.

Finally, if the baptism had in the Church of Rome be not true baptism, then
(as they also said) it is an idol; bearing the show and image of that which
it is not in truth and substance. And so then apply hither that which Mr.
Ains. has observed in his Arrovve against idolatry, how God manifests the
vanity and filthynes of Idols by titles and names given unto them. Page 13.
and 14.
For Idols (says he) are called, things of naught; as it were filths, doung
or excrements; loath some things, or detestable; and abominations; vanities,
lies, unprofitable, false-vanities, leasings, and vayn-iniquitie. Thus he
vvriteth of Idols in that place: so as by their opinion, the Baptism of the
Church of Rome, is a thing of naught, and therefore to be esteemed as nothing
in the world, as it were filth or doung, and therefore to be cast out; a loath
some thing, and therefore to be detested; an abomination, and therefore to be
abhorred; a vanity, a lie, unprofitable, false-vanitie, leasing, and
vayn-iniquitie, and therefore that all who have received it should renounce
it, and cast it away as a menstruous cloth, and say unto it, Get thee hence:
as Esaias teaches, when he shows the way wherein we should walk, even
thus to deal with the monuments and most precious ornaments of idolatry, and
therefore much more with the idols themselves. Esa. 30.21.22. Which till these
men be careful to do with the idols retained among the^, they must be
contented, by their own opinion, to be accounted among those many sorts of
idolaters, which defile themselves with idols, of whom Mr. Ainsw. speaks in
the same place of his book aforesaid.

A great sin it was that they fell into, if there had been no other but it,
that without just cause they brake away and divided themselves from the
Church whereof they were: but seeing that therevvith they have also other
very erroneous opinions, and the sinful usurpation of all the holy things of
God used among the^, what an heavy estate do they stand in, and how greatly
does it import them, to consider their ways in their heart, and to turn
their feet unto the testimonies of the Lord? Otherwise let them remember that
which the Apostle wrote to the Corinthians, Do we provoke the Lord to
jealousy? are we stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22. And thus much I thought here
by this occasion to write about the baptism of the Church of Rome: now I
will come to speak of the Church it self.

As touching the Church of Rome, there being also at that time speech about it
to be the Church of God, I did in deed allege the saying of the Apostle, that
Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God; as the Apostle expressly teaches
2 These. 2.4. And by the Temple of God, understanding the Church of God, it
will follow, that Antichrist should sit in the Church of God: and is there to
be sought and found: and not among the Jews, Turks, Pagans, or the like, as
the Papists and others would persuade us: neither that Antichrist takes away
wholly the Church of God, and every truth and ordinance of the Lord, as
Anabaptists, and such as are herein Anabaptistically inclined, would bear us
in hand.

Observe also here again, that which is said, Rev. 18, 4. Go out of her my
people, and partake not in her sins, etc. where those words, my people,
imply the covenant of God continued among them. For thus is the covenant taught
and set down unto us in the Scripture, I will be your God, and you shall be
my people. And so is Israel often called the Lords people, and is thus spoken
of in the time of their apostasy, by the Prophets: 2 King. 9, 6. and 13.23. 2 Chronicles. 30, 6-9. Hos. 4, 6, 12. and 5.4. and 14.2. Amos, 7.15. and 8.2. etc. And
note here also, how the other clause (partake not in her sins) shows
what we are to leave and renounce, namely, their sins and iniquities,
wherein they transgress the law of God, and not whatsoever is had or
retained by them.

Furthermore, it is undeniable, and we have heretofore urged it much against
the Anabaptists, that the Church of Rome was at first, set in the way of
God, and was not only one of the Churches of God, Romans 2.8. and 16.19.
but for their faith and obedience was also very famous over the world. Since
which time, she is fallen into great apostasy and adulteries, Esa. 1.2. Ier.
2.21. Ezec. 16. and 23. chapter 1 Kin. 12.28-33. and 14.22.23.24. 2 Chro. 13.5. etc.
as Israel did in former times. In all which her adulterate and apostate
estate, she has notvvithstanding still kept (even to this day) sundry truths
and ordinances of God, and mixed with them her own inventions and
traditions, as Israel also did.

Which being observed aright causes, a tvvofold consideration of her estate,
as of Isreal's: one in respect of the truths and ordinances of God still
retained among them; another in respect of the mixture of their own
inventions and abominations vvithall: in regard of the one, to hold and
acknowledge the truth and Church of God there, against the Anabaptists; in
regard of the other, to consider and observe their apostasy and Babylonish
confusion, against Antichrist: and for this cause, namely for this defection
and mixture aforesaid, to separate from them, and witness against the^: being
alvvay careful in our testimony and practice to reteyne and maynteyne every
truth and ordinance of God, which was in that Church before their apostasy,
and is yet continued therein to this day: leaving only and forsaking their
corruptions and mixture of their own inventions therevvith: least otherwise
we should be brought our selves, or be occasion to others to fall, into
Anabaptistrie, and diverse other errors and evils, as by lamentable example of
others we have seen.

Note here also a double consideration about the covenant of God made with his
people: one in respect of the Lord himself, on the one part; the other in
respect of the people taken into covenant by him, on the other part. Deuteronomy.
26.17.18.19. Judge. 2.1, 20. For it often comes to pass, that the people do
on their part transgress and break the covenant: when the Lord does not so on
his part, but still remembering his covenant, counts them his people, calls them
to repentance, follows them sometimes with judgment, sometimes with mereie
and compassion, etc. Levit. 26.15-45. Ezech. 16.59-62. Judge. 2.1-20. etc. Thus
in Israel who were the Lords people, it may be noted, how they go a whoring
after their own inventions, fall into idolatry and false worship, run
into sin after sin, and become an harlot, transgressing the covenant on
their part. Exodus 32. Judge. 2. and 3. with Psa. 78.56-58. 1 Samuel 7, 3, 4. 1
King. 12.28-33. and 14.22.23.24. with 2 Chronicles. 12. and 13. and 1 King. 19.10.
Hos. 6.7. and 8.1. Yet the Lord breaks it not on his part, but sometimes of
himself, sometimes at the entreaty of his prophets and servants, he spares
them, and does not destroy them, or presently give them a bill of divorce,
according to their demerit; but in his mercy (as a loving husband) he calls
them to repentance, and to that end he sends unto them Prophets after Prophets
a long time, to dravve the^ to amendment, and calls them still his people, and
helps them and casts the^ not of: Yet so, as besides his word sent unto them,
he also adjoyneth corrections and punishmments; both for avenging the quarrel
of his covenant upon them, and for procuring their conversion by all manner
means, what may be. As in the books of Moses and history of the Judges,
Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, compared with the Prophets may be seen. And
particularly in the Scriptures here noted before, and the like: as Exodus 33.
and 34. etc. Levit. 26.14.15-25-42-44.45. Judge. 2.1. etc. Psalm. 78. 1 King. 13.
and 16. and 18. 2 King. 5.8.15.17. with Ier. 51.5. and Ezech, 16.59.60. etc.
Hoseas and Amos their Prophecies, etc.

And in these two diverse respects (sometimes having reference to God,
sometimes to Israel) may there many things in the Scriptures be observed to be
spoken diversely. For example, Israel considered in themselves and their
idolatrous estate, are said to be without God, without Priest to teach, and
without law, to forsake and break the covenant of the Lord, to provoke the
Lord to anger by their vanities; not to be the Lords wife, but an harlot,
going a whoring after their own inventions, and having children of
vvhooredomes; yea and that the Lord is not with Israel, or with any of
Ephraim: 2 Chronicles. 15.3. 1. King. 12.28.33. and 15.34. and 16.13.26.31-33. and
19.14. Hose. 2.1-5. and 5.3.4. and 8.1. and 9.1. with Psalm. 106.29.39. Ezech.
16. and 23. chap. 2 Chronicles. 25.7. But again being considered in respect of the
Lord and his covenant (into which they were received, and) which he breaks
not on his part, but calls them to repentance, etc. the Lord is called their
God; and they are called the people of the Lord; and their children, borne to
the Lord; and Israel not to have been a widow forsaken of God; but that the
Lord had mercy on them, and pitied them, and respected them, because of his
covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and that he would not destroy them,
nor cast them off from him as yet etc. And thus continued Israel a long time,
respected of the Lord, notvvithstanding her apostasic, etc. Judge. 2, 1. etc. 1
King. 18, 36. 2 King. 9, 6, Hos. 4.6, 12. and 5, 4. and 7, 10. and 8, 2. and 9,
1. and 14.1, 2. Amos, 7, 15. (with Psalm. 89.30-34. and Ezech. 16, 20, 60. and
Ier. 51.5.) and 2 King. 13, 23.

Yet notvvithstanding in these times, the Prophets taught the people to plead
with their mother, about her adulteries, to separate themselves, and not to
come at the places of their worship; nor to communicate with them, and bring
their sacrifices thither, because in so doing they should multiply their
transgressions. etc. Hos. 2, 1-5. and 4, 12.14.15. Amos 4, 4, 5. and 5, 4, 5.

And all these things are written for our learning, and are to be applied to
the estate of the Churches in apostasy under the Gospel since Christ. Romans 15,
4. with 1 Cor. 10.11.

Moreover, besides that the word Church is taken sometimes more largely,
sometimes more strictly (which about this question likewise may be observed):
there is yet further also a double regard that may be had of apostate Churches
in all ages, according as they are considered and spoken of, in comparison with
other people of diverse sorts. As namely Israel in apostasy, being compared
with the Syrians, Philistims, Moabites, and other nations, are called, and
ought to be accounted the people of God, who have the only true God for their
God, etc. 2 King. 3.8, 15.17. and 9, 6. etc. But being compared with Judah:
which ruled with God, and was faithful with the Saints, she is called an
harlot, not the wife of God, but a vvhoore, committing adultery, and
compassing God about with lies and deceit, etc. Hos. 2.2.5. and 4, 15. and
5.3, 4. and 9, 1. and 11.12. etc.

In like manner the Church of Rome in apostasy, being compared with the
Jews, Turks, and Pagans, they are and ought to be accounted Christians, and
the Temple of God. Where also is verified that which the Apostle spoke of
Antichrists sitting in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2.4. not the Temple of
Jerusalem (as some to turn away the truth, have imagined) but the Temple of
Christians, the Church of God, brought to the says of Christ, and professing
to be Christians: as may appear by these scriptures, and the like compared
together, 2 These. 2.4. with Ezech. 43.7.8. Zath. 6.12.13. Ephesians. 2.11-13.19,
21. 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 11.19. and as it is also under stood by all sound writers
both old and new. But again, being compared with the ancient Church of Rome
and other primitive Churches in the Apostles times, and such as now walk in
their steps and in the good and old way, ruling with God, and abiding
faithful with his saints: she is called, and is to be esteemed an harlot,
the great vvhoore, the mother of the whooredomes and abominations of the
earth, believing and speaking lies in hypocrisy, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and having pleasure in unrighteousnes, etc. Revel. 17.1.5. 1 Timothy
4.1.2.3. 2 These. 2.3-10. 11.12.

And thus there being (in diverse respects) a double consideration had of the
Church of Rome now, as of Israel heretofore, it will appear, how in one
respect it may be said, there is the Church of God or a true Church there, and
in another respect, there is an apostate or a false Church there: as it is said
by the Apostle, of one and the same woman, that she is dead and alive, in
diverse respects, 1 Timothy 5.6. And of the Jews, that they are enemies in one
respect, and yet beloved in another, Romans 11, 28. So John Baptist is Elias, and
is not Elias, in diverse respects, John. 1, 21. with Mat. 11.7-14. and 17.10-13.
Judas is an Apostle, and yet a devil; Mat. 10.2. 4. Ioh. 6.70. The Jews are
the children of Abraham, and yet the children of the devil. Ioh. 8.33.34. As
the Prophets also called the Jews, the seed of the wicked, the seed of the
adulterer, and a false seed in one respect; when in other respects they
acknovvledge them to be the seed of Abraham Jacob and Israel, and so a true
seed and people of the Lord. Esa. 1, 4. and 57, 3, 4. with 41, 8. and 45, 19.
and 58, 1. Hos. 2, 1, 2. and 4, 13. Esa. 63, 16, 17. and 64, 9. Ier. 31, 36,
37. Hof, 4, 6, 12. and 3, 4. and 14, 2, 3, 4. And endless it were to recount
the many speeches and several considerations of things thus spoken of in the
Scriptures. Christ is without Father and without mother, Heb. 7, 3. and yet
he has Father and mother, Luke 2, 48, 49. Ioh. 1, 18. and 2, 3. Christ was
put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit, 1 Pet. 3, 11. Abraham is
unrighteous in himself, but righteous by faith, Romans 4, 3, 5. The apostle Paul,
and all the regenerate serve the law of God, and the law of sin; the one
with the mind, the other with the flesh. Romans 7, 25. Peter is a disciple and
an Apostle, and yet in other respect is by Christ called Satan, Mat. 10, 2,
and 16, 23. A leprous Jew, is a true man and an Israelite, but a corrupt
diseased man, to be put and kept out of the host of Israel, till he be clean.
Lev. 13, and 14, with 2 Chronicles. 26, 20, 21. Number. 12, 10-15. The Temple is the
house of God, and yet is made a den of thieves, Mat. 21, 13. The Emperors of
Rome, Babylon, and the other nations, are Kings and higher powers ordained of
God, Romans 13, 1. with Rev. 17.10 and Dan. 7, 17. yet are they also in other
respect Beasts, Lions, Bears, Leopards, etc. Rev. 12.3. and 13, 1, 2, with
Dan. 7, 3-6. So likewise the beast was, and is not, and yet is. Rev. 17, 8.
And a number the like may be observed in other places of the Scriptures
compared together.

Now to conclude this point, if these things and the like, about apostate
Churches, and the mixture of man's inventions with Gods ordinances in
apostasy, be distinctly and carefully regarded, they may be (through the
mercy of God) some good means to stay people from Anabaptistrie and other ill
courses, by the consideration of the things that are to be observed on the one
hand; and to bring men more soundly to separation from the apostasy of
Antichrist, by the consideration of the things to be observed on the other hand.

Somevvhat (as it pleased God to give me to discern) I observed and vvrote,
tending this way, long since: as may be seen in the Answer to Mr. Jacob,
Where also I noted my wonted using of this caution thereabout, (in respect of
this, or that estate) as also may be seen in the Apology, where I spoke with
the same cautio^. p. 109. lin. 31.32.
page 7. where I spoke of a double consideration of Christians, in one
respect, true, and in an other, false: as also of salvation now had in the
Church of Rome, page 13, and 47. which necessarily implies, the people of
God, and his covenant to be there. For whosoever are saved, they are the
people of God, and under his covenant in Christ. But so much and so
particularly I observed not then, as since it has pleased God to manifest
thereabout. God opens his vvil and the mysteries of his word, when and as
he pleases, that we may still perceive and acknovvledge, we know but in
part, and that we may be earnest in prayer, and by all means endeavor to grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And thus much I thought at this time by this occasion to write unto you
hereabout. By which you may perceive, how they which for these things speak
of us, as if we were going back to England, might by this color also say, we
are going back to Rome. And you may consider with your self, whether the
people that lived in the Prophets times, and were set against them in those
days, might not with such pretenses and collections have said, that the
Prophets had been declining to the apostate Israelites, when they called and
esteemed them to be the people of God, and acknowledged the circumcision had
in the apostasy to be true circumcision, etc. But now I will proceed to
their next objection.

the ninth, and the other three particulars annexed unto it, in the printed
copy): note here as in the other before, that they mention not the answers
that were then given hereabout. As namely, that we would permit it: though
(for some reasons) we absteyned from desiring it, and sending for them about
the matters in hand, or giving our consent so to do. Of which point I shall
write more hereafter. But first I would here know, why they never speak of
this, that we were constent to permit it? Or was our permission of it, a
denying of the practice of it, as now they object in the printed copy? Did
Paul deny that, which he spoke by permission: though (for some cause) he did
it not of commandment? 1 Cor. 7, 6. Or did Moses deny the practice of that,
which he permitted: though (for good cause) he would not enjoyne it? Deuteronomy.
24, 1.

This thing then might have been better observed and regarded of them, then it
has been: specially seeing they know we made question of the lavvfulnes of
doing any more in this case, then only to permit it; and shevved also then
diverse reasons thereabout: some whereof I will now mention. As 1. that now
the other Church and we were in peace together; and if by this occasion the
peace betvveene us should be broken, they should not say of us, that we sent
for them: our care being (what in us laid) to nourish peace betvveen us, and
to prevent and cut off all occasions of division: etc.

2. That the Church of Leyden was in the same error with those of our people,
who desired their help. VVhereupon, we wished it should be considered,
whether we might approve of any to come in such case, but such as we knevv
to hold and maynteyne the truth according to the word of God.

3. That former experience with others might also justly cause us to be well
advised and circumspect what to do in this behalf. Which when we vvrote of
to Leyden, them selves acknowledged that it was such as might justly make us
cautelous: but vvithall, they vvrote how we might esteem better of them then
of the other in diverse respects, as being more studious of our peace, and more
careful of the cause of Christ, and that whereas the other would have brought
in new doctrines and fayths amongst us, they if in any thing they opposed any
of us, Note here the term of opposition thus used.
should do it in defense of the common and ancient faith, both ours and
theirs.

4. That when we vvrote to them again hereabout, we acknowledged great
differences to be betvveene them and the other: but touching the doctrines and
questions controverted, we prayed them to consider, that the faith of this
Church, was that only which is grounded upon the word of God in the vvritings
of the Prophets and Apostles: and that so our faith is the common and ancient
faith which was held by the Church of Israel of old, and by the Primitive
churches of the Jews and Gentiles since the coming of Christ. From which
wherein soever we had swarved in faith or practice, it had been our aberration,
and not our faith indeed. Against which also whatsoever should be brought in,
retained, or defended, it was against our common and ancient faith, both
theirs and ours. And whether therefore it were about the Word, Sacraments, or
Government of the Church (as about all these we had found opposition) it came
to a like end. Also, that in all the three we had resisted the persons spoken
of (being such as would have brought in among us new doctrines and fayths in
them all) though in the last we had done it least of all: and that now still
we purposed by the grace of God to stand against all, that either in all or any
of them should oppose against the truth. And here, by this occasion, we
entreated to know of them, whether they also were not like minded with the
other men aforesaid, agreeing with them in the points of the church Officers
and Government, as they held and vvrote thereof, before they fell to their
errors of Anabaptisme etc. Whereunto we had no answer at all from them.
Which is a thing also to be observed.

5. That in this time, and in the same letters, we wrote to them about a letter
sent unto them by many of our people concerning these matters (as themselves
had certified us) desiring to have a copy of it, together with the names that
were subscribed thereunto, and the things delivered by word of mouth (as was
told us) that we might the better consider of these things, and of our peoples
dealing thereabout. And when thus we could not obtain it of them, we
alleged diverse reasons to persuade them to send it unto us, viz, that the
matters written of were touching our public affairs and estate, whatsoever
might concern any of us more particularly besides; that the persons which
sent it, were members of our Church; that if the thing done were good, it
would abide the light, and they should do well to follovv the Apostles
example, who shevved the Church of Corinth both the parties and the
particulars signified unto him by them, 1 Cor. 1, 11. but if it were evil,
then it behoved them so much the more to give, Genesis 37.2 Exodus 20.12, 16. Job,
29.16 Prove. 18.17. Act. 20.28. etc.
and us to have from them, the full knowledge of the things aforesaid, that it
might be seen they did not partake with them in their evil, and that we might
do our duty according to that which laid upon us in this behalf, etc. that
whereas they vvrote their purpose was to come unto us, according to the
request of the brethren which had moved the^, etc. they gave us occasion to
signify unto them, that till we knew who those brethren were, and what had
passed between them, we could not so well admit thereof, for the reasons before
rendered unto them; that we were constreyned the more to defier them to send it
us, because when the Elders here asked some for it (whom they understood to
be of those parties) they answered, that here they had not either the Original
perfect, or a perfect copy, neither any note of the names subscribed; and
finally, that if they would not send it, but still keep it from us, then they
and the parties here gave us cause to refuse to have dealing with them about
the things spoken of, and that so the hinderance should be in themselves; and
therefore if they would there should be no such hinderance, but that we should
afterward have reasoning with them about the matters aforesaid, and did in deed
seek the peace and good of this Church, they should show it forth by sending
unto us a copy of those things, whereabout we had written unto them three
times: etc. But yet notvvithstanding any entreaty or reasons alleged about
it, we could not by any means get a copy thereof either there or here. What
we heard was in it, and other circumstances and dealing about it, I do omit
now to speak of: and will proceed to other things about the matter in hand.

And next of all, it is to be observed, that to all the letters and matters
aforesaid written by us to Leyden hereabout, M. A. himself subscribed as well
as we. So that if it were evil in us, it was also evil in himself. Which
let him acknovvledge, knowledge, taking away the former reasons, and showing
it by the word of God, that we may do likewise. Or if he can vvarrant his
own doing therein, why does he thus object against us that very thing,
wherein himself joined and subscribed with us at that time? Let him also tell
us, whether therein he denied the practice of that article in the Confession
(about having the counsel and help of that Church): or whether he yielded unto
it by permission, but absteyned from sending for them, or giving approbation to
their coming, for the reasons aforesaid. Let him also call to mind, whether
himself (as I remember) did not say, or (at least) heard some of us say, upon
former experience had with others, that whiles we lived we would take heed,
how we consented to any other in like sort to come publikly into the Church,
whom we knew aforehand to be in error, and so purposed to mainteyne the same.

But be it that we should have desired this, or at least consented to have it
desired, as is employed here: yet though we did it not, the help of that Church
was procured and obtained, as is said here and in the printed copy. So then
the thing it self was had, by their own saying: how ever there wanted our
desire of it or consenting thereunto: Though yet they should not forget, that
we consented to the permission of it, and shevved reasons of our resrayning
from doing more in this case, as is aforesaid. Now therefore when their help
was procured, and that they were come: how were the things then carried? Where
(omitting to speak of that which passed from them, and to keep to those that
concern our selves) they all know, that we reasoned with them publikly about
the matter in question: And that we consulted and advised with them about
some course to be taken for procuring and keeping peace betvveen us. And this
not only at that time, but afterward also both by word and vvriting. So then
we both reasoned with them about the points in difference, and we used their
counsel and help how to come to a good issue thereabout. And thus themselves
will not deny, that the thing it self spoken of in the Confession, was in
this sort observed by us, as is aforesaid. But how did they observe it
themselves, when they brake away and left us, vvhiles we were vvriting one
to another (the other Church and we) concerning the matters propounded and
fallen out betvveen us hereabout? Of which I shall have occasion to speak more
hereafter: when first I have noted a few things further about the former
matter, concerning our selves, and the Article spoken of.

For our selves, besides the other things aforesaid, we signified also, that
we would not refuse to confer and reason with the brethren of Leyden at
any time about the matter in hand, so as their coming were either of them
selves, or by the request of them here that desired it, and without our
approbation, for the reasons spoken of, etc. And accordingly, when they came
hither, Their Elders, with consent of the rest.
we performed it, notwithstanding any thing that had passed before about these
things.

For the Article it self, observe the clauses in it, and the Scriptures cited
for confirmation of it. For the clauses in it, note how it is said, Conf. a^t.
38.
that every particular Congregation is as a compact and knitt city in it self,
and therefore should use all good and lavvfull means, that may further their
compacting and knitting together in the truth and common faith: but not any
such as may cause or at least color the dividing of them asunder. Also, that
the churches should all walk by one and the same rule, and by all means
convenient, have the counsel and help one of another, in all needful affairs
of the Church, as members of the same body in the common faith, under Christ
their only head. If this then be a rule for us, it is so likewise for all
other Churches, that when there falls out question about an error among
the^, they should desire the counsel and help of such Churches thereabout, as
they know to be corrupted with the same error, and not purposed to leave it,
but to defend it, supposing it to be the truth. And what conveniencie it were
(not to speak of the lavvfulnes of it) or how needful, to call such as we
know to be in error, that so our people might either be the more corrupted,
or have the more color for their error and evil dealing, you may consider
with your self. Or if we had sent for them, or approved it, might we not have been accessarie to the means, by which the truth might have been hindered, and
our people more confirmed in error? And where then is the vvarrant for such
vvalking?

For the Scriptures that are cited for confirmation of the Article aforesaid,
first observe (about the point of difference betvveen us) how the Scriptures
of the old Testament are alleged asvvell as of the new: and those also
concerning the estate of Israel, applied to our times and cases now. Secondly
consider, whether those Scriptures intend or will vvarrant a Church, to send
for such or to desire their counsel and help, whom they know to be in error
about the points questioned and dealt in, and by who^ the parties that trouble
the church may be more strengthened in their errors and evils thereabout.
Which if they do, or if any other do it (that are not cited here) then ought
we and all to yield thereunto. Otherwise if the help and courses desired be
not such as are approved in the word of God, we might tempt God in atte^pting
of them: and therefore must be careful to follovv that only which has
warrant from thence, whereby the truth may be furthered, the safety and
liberty of the Church preserved, and occasion cut off from the^ that desire
occasion thereagainst.

And besides the things aforesaid, why did not themselves also desire to have
the counsel and help of the Dutch and French Churches, that were here at hand
round about us? If they say, because they thought they were in error about
the matter in question, and so might have hindered the truth, and have been
against them, and for us: then by it may be perceived what their own
judgment is about this particular (being simply considered in it self) and in
this behalf what the weight of this their exception is against us. If they
answer any other thing, it may accordingly be considered of, as it shall be
found to be. And hitherto concerning the Article aforesaid, and sundry
particulars that passed betvveen us by this occasion, not spoken of by them.

Now touching the three particulars annexed to the ninth objection in the
printed copy: the first is, that before their parting, they offered, that
notwithstanding our differences of judgment, they would continue together, if
our former practice might be retained: Which is as if they should say, they
would have continued with us, if we would have continewed in error and
evil (so found and acknowledged by us): suffering the ordinance of God
(touching the Eldership) to be trodden under foot; the Elders to be despised and
abused by the people; and the whole Church to be continually subject to
contentions and scandals, etc. Besides, why do they not also mention, what
we offered to the^? which seeing they speak not of, we will: namely, that
before their parting we offered to bear with them in their difference of
judgment, if they would be content to walk peaceably with the Church in that
their difference: but this was refused.

The next particular they speak of, is, that then they desired a peaceable
parting; and to be two distinct Congregations, each practicing as they were
persuaded, yet nourishing love and unity. A peaceable parting we grant they
desired in word, but in deed stayed not with us, but departed vvhiles we
were considering and advising whether it could lavvfully be effected or not.
And touching that particular of being two distinct Congregations of us in this
city etc. we showed them diverse reasons, why we could not in this case agree
thereunto. And of those reasons we had speech with the^ here, and vvrote to
the Church of Leyden: signifying vvithall, that if we could otherwise better
discern what were according to the will of God herein, we should (God
vvilling) so receive and walk. Which letter (with the reasons therein
contained) is hereafter noted down. Yet notvvithstanding they stayed not,
till we had an answer thereof from Leyden, but soon after departed from us.
Besides that other means also was used (by writing) which might at least
have persuaded them to stay and do otherwise then they did. Of which I shall
also speak more hereafter.

The third particular is, about their procuring the help of the English Church
at Leyden, without our consent (of which I have spoken here before) and about
a way of peace propounded by us, and agreed unto by the Church of Leyden and
our selves, and yet afterward reversed by us, etc. Touching which they do
here as before, omit diverse things needful to be known and remembered: As
first, what the thing it self is that was propounded by us, namely, that for
such as could not be content with protestation peaceably to walk with either
Church (at Leyden or here) it should be free for them to go from the one
Church and Pastor to the other: so as there were no other cause lying against
them. This was in deed propounded by my self: having much thought and
considered (what I could) of any lavvfull means, by which we might come to
some good end and agreement, after our so long and lamentable troubles and
contentions, as we had been exercised withal. Which when I had propounded,
they of Leyden answered, that they were glad to hear of such a motion, little
thinking that we had been so inclyning to peace and agreement: This to my
remembrance was the effect of the things that passed here about.
which if they had thought, they should have carried themselves otherwise
toward us, then they had done. And for the thing it self, that they would
consider of it with their Church; and if either they or we minded otherwise by
the word of God, that we should signify it. Which caution being thus spoken of
by them, my self then said (as I remember) that I had thought so to have spoken
also concerning it, but had forgotten (when I spoke) to mention it. And so then
it was minded of us both to be considered of and prosequuted with this
condition and limitation, of being found lawful by the word of God. And let
this for hereafter be still remembered, because it will clear all the question
about this matter.

Secondly, at the first treating of this matter between us, the Officers of the
Church of Leyden (then present) did so conceive it, as that our people which
would not walk with this Church, as is aforesaid, should go and remain with
them at Leyden. Which some of them here observing and excepting against it, in
respect of their means of living had here, etc. they were answered by them of
Leyden, that they must be contented to suffer or bear the cross of Christ
with them, or to such effect. Then also concerning the course aforesaid, there
was noted a double consideration about it: The one, about the doing of it so,
The later is the point which they do so much urge.
as to live and remain with the other Church whither they should go: The
other, about the doing of it so, as that having once gone and joined thewselues
to the other Church, they might then return again to the town where they
lived before, and there live apart from the Church, whereof they had formerly
ben. And hereupon, having speech about these two courses: the first was
sooner conceired of and generally liked of all; the latter was less conceived
of and more called in question (as afterward did appear) though for mine own
part I did my self so mind and like of it at that time. And when some among
us propounded, that such as went from us to Leyden and joined to that Church,
should not be dismissed back by them again, to live apart from us in this
town: both my self and the Elders of the other Church (to my remembrance)
answered, that this matter would concern that Church to which they should
join to look unto, and so was to be left unto them. But afterward,
considering yet further of the lavvfulnes of such dismission thither, and
hither again: I showed my mind herein to be altered, and diverse reasons
thereabout. Of which I shall speak hereafter, when I come to that matter.

Thirdly, when the matters aforesaid, which we had propounded, were
communicated with the Church at Leyden, and their Elders returned hither
again, they signified that these things came suddenly upon their Church, yet
for the present (as they could in that time consider thereof) they liked well
of it, or to such effect. So now again at this time we had more speech
together thereabout. The former of the two courses (as I said before) was
generally well approved, and consented unto. The latter was more doubted of
and more question made about it; and in the end more and more disliked by
diverse, the more that it was perceived to be the brethrens purpose so to do.
And this most appeared the next morning, when the likelihood of agreement that
was the night before, was then so changed, upon further reasoning and
consideration thereof, as we could not accord therabout. And so the Officers of
the other Church (signifying that they had great occasion to return home, and
could then no longer stay, departed, and said, it would be heavy to their
Church to hear that the things were come to no better issue between us. Yet
when they were gone, we still continued speech among our selves about these
things, being sorry that they stood thus, and that no better tidings should be
carried to the other Church. And then upon some speech so had together (as we
could in that short time) we came to this issue, that we thought it best to
agree upon the matter aforesaid in this sort, that whatsoever blame should
follow hereupon (if our people were by them of Leyden dismissed to live here
apart from us in this city) it should lie upon them, and we be free of it.
And so thereupon we presently sent three with this message after the brethren
of Leyden (if they could overtake them in time) to signify thus much unto
them, that they might also signify it unto their Church. And this (I think)
is the agreement spoken of. Which when it was in this manner agreed upon,
some of the brethren present (there being then but a sevv at that time) came to
the Elders, showing how they thought it needful that this should be spoken of
the Lords day after: and others say to this day, they never consented unto it:
and some, that they said then, it was unlawful. And these men the^ selves,
it may be, would be loath to stand to their own positions about it, that in a
controversy the greater part should be the Church (whether the Elders be with
them or against them) and that the matters of sin and question touching the
brethren should be heard and ended on the Lords day. But I will proceed on to
other matters that follovved afterward about these things.

Fourthly, vvhiles things stood thus mo^g us, we had the Lords day following
speech hereabout again: at which time there was a new motion made for an
other course to be taken, by which we might keep together, rather then to part
asunder according to the other course spoken of, Which being then propounded,
and not agreed upon, was left to further consideration. And so that week we
wrote to the Church of Leyden thereabout.

By which occasion, after the aforesaid treating of these things had by word
of mouth, there passed also some letters betvveen us concerning them. Which
although in diverse respects we could be willing to keep among our selves: yet
considering in what sort and with what scandal the brethren aforesaid have
since divided themselves from us, and that the reproach of it is spread far
and near not only by others, but even by their own letters and vvritings
thereabout, to the great dishonor of God, and hindrance of the truth: and that
the knowledge of these things will be a good means for all both to settle
their own judgment better, and to deal with them or others concerning these
matters, as there shall be occasion: we have therefore thought it not amiss to
note down here the co^tents of the letters aforesaid that passed betvveene us
hereabout, before the others departing from us. Which we may also the better
do, because they are but few and short. First therefore, when we had afterward
had further speech among our selves, as is aforesaid, and had not yet heard
from the Church at Leyden again what they thought of the matter and message
aforesaid, or whether they consented unto it or not: we vvrote unto them as
follovveth.

Beloved, touching the things that have now lately ben spoken off between the
two Churches, yours and ours, about the dismission of such on cyther part as
are not content with protestation peaceably to walk in their difference of
judgment, we have occasion to entreat the continuance of your consideration yet
further thereabout: 1. because your selves signified it came suddenly upon your
Church: and if either you or we minded otherwise by the word of God, we should
after signify it: Wherefore we expect to hear whether you continue like minded
as heretofore. 2. because there is with us a new motion of our walking together
thus, by bearing one with another, so as for peace to permit of a double
practice among us, that those that are minded either way, should keep a like
course together, as we would do if we were asunder, according as the persons
shall be that have the causes. Which way, if it may be found warrantable by the
word of God, and peaceable unto and among our selves, we hope all that love
peace in holiness will accord. These things as we are to consider of, so pray we
you to do the like with us and for us, that we may do that which is most to
Gods glory and our mutual comfort. Thus etc. Amsterdam November. 5. old style.
1610.

And note here, how we both considered further of these things, and still
limited our consultation and purpose with this caution, if the things
propounded were found warrantable by the word of God. Which is to be observed
for the weight of it against these persons, who have taken such a course,
together with their opinions, as can never be warranted by the word of God.
Next follovveth the letter and answer, which then we received from the Church
of Leyden again: which was thus:

Touching the agreement (Brethren) between the Churches for our mutual peace,
and the relief of the consciences of our brethren, we did and do repute the
same as full and absolute on both sides, except either some better course can
be thought on, or this manifested to be evil, and that then it be reversed
with the mutual consent of both Churches. And for this last motion about a
double practice, as we are glad of the great and godly desire to continue
together, in it manifested, so do we not see, how it can stand either with our
peace, or it self: but that it will not only nourish, but even necessarily
beget endless contentions, when men diversely minded shall have business in the
Church. If therefore it would please the Lord so far to enlarge your hearts on
both sides (brethren) as that this middle way be held, namely, that the matter
of offense, might first be brought for order, preparatation, and prevention of
unnecessarie trouble, unto the Elders as the Church governors, (though it is
like we for our parts shall not so practice in this particular) and after, if
things be not there ended, to the Church of Elders and brethren, there to be
judged on some ordinarte known day ordinarily, the admonition being carried
according to the alteration practiced and agreed upon by all parts, till it
shall please the God of wisdom, and Father of lights, by the further
consideration and discussing of things, either in word or writing, to manifest
otherwise for our joint accord, it would surely make much to the glory of God,
and the stopping of their mouths which are so wide opened upon us in respect
of our daily dissipations, and should be to us matter of great rejoicing, whose
souls do long after peace, and abhor the contrary: and that thus walking
in peace and holiness, we might all beg at Gods hands the healing and pardon of
all our infirmities, and so be ready to heal and forgive the infirmities one
of another in love. And with this prayer unto God for you, and for our selves,
we resalute you in the Lord Jesus, Leyden November 14. 1610.

This was their letter. VVherin observe these things about the matters that
passed betvveen us. First, that here is the answer which they gave us about
the agreement and message aforesaid, as also to the letters which afterward we
sent unto them. Secondly, that touching the agreement they limit their consent
unto it and their account of it with a double exception: For though they say
they repute the agreement to be full and absolute on both sides, yet they speak
it with limitation and exception: as in deed was good and needful to do,
both in respect of the thing it self, and seeing at the first propounding of
the matter, it was so minded by them and us to be considered of with
limitation, of being found lawful by the word of God. Thirdly, that the
exceptions which here they made, were these, except either some better course
could be thought on, or this manifested to be evil. So then by this it is
evident, that if either a better course could be shevved, or this manifested to
be evil, they did not yield or repute the agreement to be full and absolute.

Now touching the showing of a better course, it appears by both of these
letters, theirs and ours, that both of us were thinking of it, and therefore
propounded other courses (each to other) to be considered. To which end may be
observed here, their propounding of another way unto us for peace and
agreement, with diverse reasons to persuade thereunto. Which had been
altogether in vain, for them to propound or us to think of, if the other had been absolute without exception, and irrevocable without alteration, though it
were found never so evil or unlawful.

And for the manifesting of it to be evil, the more we thought of it, the
worse we found it to be: and minded diverse reasons against it: which first we
signified here to the brethren themselves, and had some reasoning with them
thereof, but could not agree thereabout: and then we vvrote of them also to the
Church at Leyden, as by the next letter here follovving will appear. And we
need not doubt, but if the thing which they purposed here, had gone forvvard
with our consent, it would afterward have been much abused against us by
others, if not also by themselves: specially as it appeared still more and more
to be in deed intended by them: the thing being such, as although it had never been thought or spoken of among us, yet it would (in a matter of this weight)
have been found a great oversight. But it being spoken of, and manifested, that
they would but go to the other Church to join unto them there, and then
presently return hither again to remain and live here in the same town,
apart from us, of whom they were: what would this have proved in deed, but
scandal and collusion, and have been turned upon us with the more reproach,
because we consented unto it?

As for that other clause in their letter, where they write that the agreement
should be reversed with the mutual consent of both Churches: note that this
was their propounding thereof unto us, which we were to consider of,
whether we would assent unto it or not. And that in all such cases, wherein
it may fall out that either sin may be committed, or the truth hindered, or
the liberty of the Church impeached, it behooves all carefully to take heed
what they consent and yield unto: yea that if any conditions or agreements are
made, which can not without sin be performed, it is better to break then
to keep them.

Lastly observe here, how the course about dealing in matters propounded in
this letter, and not yielded unto by the others, Ex^ept some of them.
shows plain enough, how greatly these me^ oppugned the ordinance of God
touching the Elders hearing and judging of causes and persons, and how highly
they lift up the people therein: specially when the things noted before about
this question, are joined and compared herevvith. Now it follovveth, that we
set down our next letter sent unto the other Church about the matter
aforesaid: which also was the last that passed betvveen us, before the others
parting from us. And it was thus:

Your letter (brethren) we received and read publikly. Corcerning which, we
have occasion to signify some things unto you thereabout. And first touching
the agreement treated of between us, that for such of us as will not come
thither to remain with you, but purpose still to live here, in this city,
apart from us: albeit there be some that could be content notwithstanding so to
dismiss them, yet there are others of us, that having more considered of it,
think it not lawful to have any hand in consenting thereunto, and mean
therefore to reverse our former agreement unto it, besides that diverse of us
say, they never consented hereunto. And further, some of us also begin to
think that it will be found unlawful to keep spiritual communion with them
in such estate, how ever we may still reteyne with them civil society.

The reasons minded, why not so to dismiss them, nor to have spiritual
fellowship with the^ in such estate and walking, are these: 1. Because we can
not find warrant for it in the word of God. 2. Because they refuse disobey and
speak evil of the truth and way of God. 3. Because they refuse to continue
and keep communion with us, though they may be suffered to walk with us in
peace with protestation in their difference of judgment. 4. Because some of
them profess they will not deal in causes (as may fall out between us) by way
of protestation, neither when they are with us, nor when they are from us. 5.
Because they go not from one Church and Pastor to another, so to live and
remain: but purpose (when they have come and joined unto you) then presently
to return, and to live here in this town apart from us. 6. Because by such
walking of theirs, great reproach will come upon us all, with much dishonor to
God, and hinderance to the truth, what in them lies. 7. Lastly, because we
think there should always be somewhat in such cases used, as whereby the Lord
may work upon their consciences, to consider their estate, and to repent and
yield to the truth and way of God which they have hitherto refused and
oppugned, etc.


Thus we thought to acquaint you with these things, and the reasons thereabout.
Which yet are so minded of us, as if either among our selves or by others we
shall hereafter better discern what is according to the will of God herein, we
shall (Godwilling) be ready so to receive and walk.

As touching the the double practice, misliked by you, although in deed it may
seem somewhat strange and difficult, yet for the present some of us could
like better of it, then of a parting: but the brethren differing from us will
not admit of it. Neither will they yield to that middle course propounded in
your letter. Yet have we left it, with the former things, to their further
consideration. And how soever it pleases the Lord to dispose of us, our trust
is that he will work all in the end to the furtherance of his truth, and peace
of his Church in Jesus Christ. To whose gracious protection and guydance we
commend you, etc. Amsterdam. November. 19.1610.

This letter being here publikly read, was then sent to the Church at Leyden.
VVhereabout let these things also be observed here. First, that we reversed
not our agreement concerning such, as would go and live with the Church at
Leyden: but only about such as would not remain and live there, but purposed
to return, and live here apart from us in this city.

Secondly, that for this also we showed diverse reasons moving us so to do: and
that, both here by word of mouth, and by vvriting to Leyden, before they went
away from us.

Thirdly, that whereas two courses were propounded for the keeping of us
together, the one by us here, the other by the Church at Leyden, they would
not admit of either of them: neither remained with us, till we had from
Leyden an answer of this letter, and of the reasons contained therein: but
were so set upon parting from us, as before we heard from them, they divided
them selves from us; and so have continued to this day. Yea notvvithstanding
that before this their parting, and besides all the other means formerly used,
we offered also to try out in vvriting the matter betvveen us, touching our
difference about the Churches government, and understanding of Mat. 18.17.
which likewise they refused. Whereof I shall speak more particularly
hereafter.

Fourthly, that when they left us, they went not to Leyden, there to join
them selves to that Church, according to the agreement before spoken of: but
went apart from us here, forsaking the fellowship which they had with us,
and met together in another place of this town. Which is much to be
observed, not only for the thing it self, but because that thus them selves in
their going away followed not the agreement betvveene the other Church and us,
whereof they speak. And so that which they did, was both without our
agreement, and the Churches of Leyden, for ought we know. Neither have they
here set down the cause that moved them, not to go to Leyden first and join
there (according to the former agreement) before they had taken this course of
meeting apart from us here. If they would have this taken for a declaration of
that which they intended indeed, that if they had gone to Leyden, and joined
there, it should have been, but for the satisfying of our minds, whom they
savve to be troubled about the dismission of them; and that in deed they meant
not to live and remain with that Church and Pastor there, but when they had
so done, then to come and live apart from us, as now they do: we and others
may accordingly esteem thereof, and take it as a further confirmation of the
reasons alleged for the reversing of our consent to the agreement aforesaid.

There is also a clause inserted by them in their third particular now treated
of, where they say, that in the treaty of the Agreement it was testified by
the Elders of the Church of Leyden, that unless it were to the apparent
undoing of the^, and of their families, they should not be dismissed again to
dwell here: which whether it did any way move them in this behalf to do as
they did, themselves know best. My self cannot say, that it did. But this is
sure, that some have gone from this Church and city to live in the other, in
respect of their outward estate, and in hope of bettering of it: though none of
them did so, upon the former agreement, and in respect thereof, that I can
remember.

And (to note it here by this occasion) well may it be that this speech of the
Elders of that Church was a means to persuade us much to the agreement
aforesaid: and that when it appeared, how them selves were purposed not to
live with the other Church and Pastor there, but to return and live apart
from us here, that then we did the more think of it, whether it were
lavvfull for us to consent thereunto: and thereuppon showed the reasons
aforesaid for the reversing of our former agreement unto it. Which reasons
also together with their own purpose of living here apart from us; they
should have done well to have spoken of in their vvriting, and not to have
said only, that although in the treaty of the agreement it was testified by
the Elders of that Church, that unless it were to the apparent undoing of
them, and of their families, they should not be dismissed again to dwell here:
yet because they would not absolutely promise to leave this city, we would not
stand to the agreement which our selves had made. For they know both their
own purpose aforesaid, and that we showed diverse reasons, why we thought it
not lavvfull for us to continue, but to reverse, our consent to the dismission
of such as would not remain with the other Church, but purposed still to live
here in this city apart from us.

And in deed in such cases, if things should concern our selves, even with
certain loss and hurt to us and our families, yet should we not make our
outvvard estate the ground or rule of our religion or religious actions, but
we should alvvay first look and consider what is lavvfull for us by the word
of God to consent unto in others, or to practice our selves: and then in faith
to walk before the Lord, being upright, and committing our way unto him, who
will bring it to pass. Psalm. 37.3, 4, 5. with Genesis 12.1. and 17.1. Note also
here, how in the two last particulars of the printed copy, they have this
clause thrice, that we would not agree to stand to the agreement, unles they
left this city; and have not once any where, unless they went from one
Church and Pastor to another: the very naming whereof is such, as caryeth
weight of reason with it against them, and for us.

Moreover, concerning the point and Article spoken of, about having the counsel
and help of other Churches, note also that hovvever they speak much of it, yet
in deed they did not follow it them selves; in that whiles the other Church and
we were treating and vvriting about the matters aforesaid, they stayed not
till we had done, to see what would be the end of our consultation, as it
should please the Lord to dispose: but when they knevve we had written unto
Leyden, and vvhereabout, and that yet we had received no answer from them
again, they brake away from us; and took also another course then that which
was agreed upon, as is aforesaid. And so themselves herein observed not that in
deed, which they speak in word, about having the counsel and help one of
another, in all needful affairs of the Church, etc.

And be it that either we or the of Leyden (from who^ we heard not in this
time) should be vvanting or failing in any thing hereabout: (as who in such
difficulties and troubles are not subject to be?) Yet what will they allege
for vvarrant of their separation from us which they have made? Themselves
know that every want or failing in Churches or actions, will not bear out
such divisions. Good vvarrant it had need be that should uphold such
disbounding and separating of themselves, as they have run into.

If they allege the matters that are mentioned in the foresaid letters which
they sent into England, and in the other vvriting of theirs, which is printed:
for them you see the answer now given thereunto: and let them remember also,
that howsoever they speak of other matters, yet they made their division
only for the question, about Government and the understanding of Mat. 18.17.
vvhereabout we differed and could not agree. And if then in the matter it self,
for which they left communion with us, they be found themselves to be in
notable error: what vvarrant may it be that they can allege herein, which
will not return upon their own heads in the end, as that Scripture does
which they allege for and at their dividing of themselves from us? Romans 16,
17.

As for the long disputing of these matters, whereof they speak, that also
makes the more against them, because that although such care and continual
pains was taken for them and with them, yet it prevayled nothing at all with
them neither. And where they say, no way of peace could by us be found to
continue together in the truth and holiness, they should turn their eyes upon
themselves, upon their errors, and upon their stubberne contentious and unruly
vvalking: besides that they stayed not to see what issue it would please God
to bring of the matters in hand betvvee^ the other Church and us: and refused
also to try if by writing among our selves, we could have come to better
accord in our differences, then we could by speech and word of mouth. Which
although it be a means seldom used when parties are present together, and
carefully to be regarded when and how it is so used: yet I suppose now that
they have better bethought themselves, they will acknovvledge it had been
better to have admitted of any lavvfull means they could, rather then to have
divided themselves as they did, and to have brought so great reproach and many
evils upon themselves and others as they have done, Or if they will not so
acknovvledge themselves, yet I doubt not but others will for them.

For that which they speak of the lamentable dissipation of the Church and
members beginning to grow, if they had named any particulars thereabout, they
might accordingly have been spoken of. Which seeing they have not done, I will
leave to the consideration of themselves and others, whether their dealing and
departing from us might not only have begun, but even have caused to grow
and go forward, a most lamentable dissipation of this Church, and the members
thereof, had not God disappointed them, and in mercy sustained and kept us
together, when they made their division and committed so great offense in this
Church: Romans 16.17.
contrary to the doctrine, which we have learned of the Prophets and
Apostles; which we also shevved unto the^ many times, before they parted from
us; and which (now that they have left us) must end all the question and
controversy that is betvveen us.

And here it is to be remembered, that alvvayes and in all our vvritings and
occasions we still profess to have the word of God alone for the light of
our feet and direction of our vvayes, in all things. Which we should
therefore be the more careful to follovv, as it pleases God of his goodness to
manifest his will unto us more and more. And likewise about these matters,
and in the last letter aforesaid, we limited our dealing and the reasons
alleged, with the same caution still, of follovving that which we should among
our selves or by others best discern to be according to the will of God
therein: Which though it had not ben expressed, should alvvay be understood.
But being purposely and so often mentioned from time to time, about these
things, it should the more be remembered and regarded of us all: that by it we
may examine and determine all the matters betwee^ us. For neither may we
reteyne any thing in the Church, nor yield to any agreement with others, that
is not warrantable by the word of God: neither should they urge the
continuance of any thing among us, nor follow themselves any course in their
practice, that cannot by it be approved: but we should still grovve in
knowledge and obedience of the will of God, leaving that which is evil, and
following that which is good, in all things.

Moses, when he was informed by Iethro that the course of government, which he
took in judging the people and hearing their causes so as he did, was not
good, but vvearysome both to him and the people, and had another way showed
unto him, to be received with the approbation of God: he willingly hearkened
unto it, and changed his former course, the Lord also approving the same.
Exodus 18.13-26. When David in a godly desire was careful to bring the Ark of God from Kirja^h-jearim to Jerusalem, he put it in a nevve cart, and began
to carry it with singing and playing on instruments and great solemnity:
thinking that he had done well and right therein: but the Lord made a breach
upon them by the death of Vzza. VVhereupon David stayed the further removing of
it a while: and perceiving that it was, because they did it not in the due
order thereof, he then afterward took another course, appoynting the Levites
to bear it, whom the Lord had chosen to carry the Ark of the Lord, and
minister unto him. 1 Chronicles. 13. and 15.2-13. etc.

Now what breaches, contentions, and continual troubles, had been at that
time in this Church among us, they are not ignorant of: besides the exceeding
great and heavy one, which about the same time befell that other Congregation
of our countrymen here, who about the question of the Churches government,
pleaded also against the Eldership, for their popular course, with some of the
very same arguments, and other like, as these have done; and run into
sundry Anabaptisticall opinions and courses, not unknovven unto them: And the
brethren of Leyden in their letter here before make mention of our daily
dissipations which then we had. Which things I note here by this occasion,
that it may the better appear, both what great cause we had now to look
hereunto, and that these things also befell us, vvhiles we held that course of
government pleaded for by these men, and before they made this schismatic
departing from us, as now they did, because we would not still continue and
hold on the same course, as before.

Besides these examples of Moses and David, I could also allege the Apostles,
who upon experience of evils that came by having younger widow in the
service of the Church, took afterward another course, and appointed that none
should be taken into that number under threescore year old, etc. 1 Timothy 5,
9-15. And for changing of things purposed and determined, when there is just
cause, we have likewise the example of David again, who when he had
purposed and solemnly vowed the death of Nabal and all his family, yet
afterward upon the persvvasion and reasons used by Abigail, changed his
purpose, and blessed her, and the Lord, for her counsel and persvvasion given
unto him: 1 Samuel 25.21-35. And of the Prophet Nathan, who having both
consented to David's purpose of buylding an house to the Lord, and encouraged
him thereunto, yet when as the same night the Lord showed him, that he did not
require it of David, neither would have him to do it: he thereupon went and
shevved it to David; who also rested therein, with praise and thanks unto God.
1 Chronicles. 17. chap.

And these things are written for our learning, which I do the rather note
here, considering the persons and matters spoken of: The persons being Moses,
David, Nathan, Paul: some Prophets, some Apostles: The matters being touching
the government of the people, the worship of God, the service of the Church,
and helping one of another, etc. Yet such persons in such matters altered their
courses and purposes, and were ready and vvilling so to do, when either by
the counsel of others, or by their own experience, or by the word or work of
God, they perceived any error to be committed, or some other evil to ensue, in
the courses taken or purposes intended by them. They knevve and were careful
as (all should) that in all things, whether concerning the worship of God, or
government of the Church, or other duties and actions, that only should be
received and retained, which is approved of God: and whatsoever is evil or
unvvarrantable by his word (though formerly had and observed) that it should
be corrected and amended.

According to which rule, and examples of the godly in former times, if these
men would now (without prejudice) examine their opinions and courses
aforesaid, they should find it high time for them to make a stand, to observe
the work of God upon them, and to give themselves no rest till they have
forsaken their errors and redressed their crooked ways: be they otherwise
never so pleasing unto the^ or ancient with the^. So should they in deed keep
the ancient faith, and walk in the old and good way prescribed of God. Let
them therefore hearken to the instruction and counsel given unto them: Let the
way of God be in their heart, and his fear before their eyes: Let them
think on their own ways, and turn their feet unto his testimonies: Let
them make have, and not delay to keep his co^mmandements. Psalm. 119.59.60.

And to this end, let them about the things spoken of, consider well, of these
two points: 1. of the questions themselves that have been and are betvveen us;
and therein especially of those differences vvhereabout they severed themselves
from us; 2. of the charge laid upon the Pastors and Elders over the flock
committed unto them by the Lord; and of the duty required of the people again
toward the Governors, whom the Lord sets over them in his stead.
Of the first I have treated here, and in another treatise before, written
about the exposition of Mat. 18.17. For the latter, see these and the like
Scriptures, throughout the book of God; Exodus 20, 12. 2 Chronicles. 26.16-21. Act.
20, 17, 28. Romans 12, 3-8. 1 Cor. 12, 28. Ephesians. 4, 11-16. Col. 4, 17. 1 These.
5, 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5, 17-21. and 6, 13.14. Tit. 2, 15. Iam. 5, 14. 1 Pet. 5,
1-4. Rev. 2, and 3. Heb. 13, 17.

And now to conclude, besides all the former things, we entreated them also
that seeing the same matter was then in hand both betvveene Mr. Amsworth and
Mr. Bernard, and betvveene Mr. Robinson, and Mr. Bernard, that therefore they
would stay, to see what this way might come to pass for the more clearing
of the points in difference betvveen us, and our better accord thereabout: But
they would not be persuaded so to do. And then finally, after a years
dispute publikly had by word of mouth, Once a week commonly.
and all the other means used among us, I offered in the end (as I said
before) to try out the matter in vvriting betvveen us, and gave forth unto them
the observations which then I had collected about Mat. 18.17. Which since are
printed.
Which they both heard publicly read, and had them to copy out, before they
went away from us: yet would they not yield hereunto: But when we had
appointed another day in the week about these things, then had they some
speech of diverse particulars in the foresaid vvriting, vvhereabout also we
spoke again: and so some speech passed between us thereabout: but to give
answer unto it in vvriting they would not be persuaded. Neither would they
continevve any longer with the Church: but with great sin and scandal
divided themselves from us (which they professed that day, December 15. and
16. 1610.
and practiced the next, and so have continued ever since) alleging the saying
of the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 16, 17: Which is so direct against
themselves, and for us, as I will now allege no other Scripture at all,
against the division and scandals caused by them, but leave them even by this
to be judged of their own mouth. Which they shall do well to lay to
heart, and to ponder seriously with themselves; seeing that by the very
Scripture which themselves alleged, all are bound to mark them, and avoyde
them, as having made division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which we
have learned of the Prophets and Apostles of the Lord. Romans 16, 17.

Thus have I more largely then I thought, written hereabout: and do now
leave it to your wise and godly consideration, as it shall please the Lord by
his word and spirit to direct and persuade you therein. Farevvell in the
Lord; who remembers his people in their base and distressed estate, and
gives an issue with every tentation; who also will deliver us from every
evil work, and preserve us to his heavenly kingdom, by Christ our Redeemer:
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. His grace be with you, and his
strong consolation in your spirit for ever. Amen.

Yours Francis Johnson.

THus (good Reader) I have set down M. Iohnsons Answer to the objections
contained in M. A. letter, and the printed copy, about the division aforesaid.
Now I will here also annexe a note that was printed heretofore, concerning
these things: which being first discussed, were then agreed upon by the
Church. The note is this, as follovveth.

A NOTE OF SOME THINGS CALLED into question and controverted in the exiled
English Church at Amsterdam.
By this course we had much contention and trouble, etc.
It being held among us, that such as were to be dealt vvithall publikly for
sin, should not be admonished by the Elders, vvhereupon the proceeding
against them, if they persisted therein, might follow: but that the peoples
consent was first to be taken, before the Elders did so admonish any such
persons: This point about admonition was handled, and thus agreed upon, from 2 Chronicles. 19, 8, 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 17, 8-13. 1 These. 5, 12. etc. to this effect, viz.

THat it is the duty of the Elders in the public administration of
government, and in matters brought to the Church, to admonish the sinners and
unrepentant (without requiring the people their consent first): Which
admonition of the Elders being despised, the parties upon it are to be
excommunicated. Our bounden duty, in the Lord: and freedom according to his
word: Both are to be respected, and observed aright.
And all the brethren are bound to consent unto such just rebuke or admonition
given by the Elders, as to the public doctrine of the Church: And consequently
they are to assent unto all other the just administration of the Governors,
they being able to justify the same by the word of God. And again, the people
have liberty to except against and evince wherein the Elders do unjustly
without warrant: As also in all good order without disturbance and under
correction, they may ask resolution of their doubts. And so by this means all
popular confusion is avoided, and liberty in the truth retained.

Also after much and often reasoning about our practice and understanding of
Mat. 18, 15, 16, 17. it was agreed by the Church, That we etred in the
understanding of that Scripture, and namely in these particulars follovving:
First, in that we have so understood those words (Tell the Church, etc,) that
they may not be understood of the Jews Synedrion, nor of the Christian
Presbytery or Eldership. And this moreover so, as some among us will by the
word (Church) in that place have understood, men women and children in there
own persons; meaning by children, such of them as are able to rejoice and
sorrovve with others. And we note this to be, of telling men women and
children in their own persons: because otherwise it is granted, that the
Congregation is told according to order and rules of government, in the
telling of the Elders. (And here it is to be remembered, how it has often ben
signified, that whether we understand those words (of telling the Church)
thus, Tell the Congregation, to weet, according to the rules and order of
government appointed by God in his word; Note here that the Elders sit in a
public place, where all that will may come and be present, etc.
or thus, Tell the Congregation of Elders not hindering or infringing any right
or liberty of the brethren; these come both to one end, being rightly
understood. And about these things have been alleged these and the like
Scriptures: Mat. 18, 17. compared with Mat. 5, 22. Deu. 21, 18-20. Number. 35, 12,
24.25. with Deu. 19, 11-18. Josh. 20, 4-6. 1 Samuel 2, 25. Psalm. 82, 1. Prove. 26,
26. in the LXX. compared with the Original. Deuteronomy. 1, 9-17. and 16, 18. and 17,
9-12. and 25, 7, 8, 9, with Ruth 4, 1-11. 2 Chronicles. 19, 5-11. Act. 6, 11-13. and
20, 17, 18. Romans 12, 4-8. Luke 12, 42. 1 Cor. 4, 1, 2. and 5. chap. with Lev.
20, 11. and Deuteronomy. 17, 4-7. 1 Cor. 6, 1-5. and 12, 28. 1 These. 5, 12-14. 1 Timothy
3, 5. and 5, 17-21. Heb. 13, 17. 1 Pet. 5, 1-4.) Secondly, we have erred in
that we have so understood those words (Tell the Church, and if he hear not
the Church, etc.) that the party offending should not, without taking consent
of the people, be admonished by the Elders, whereupon to proceed against him:
And that the sinner was not to be excommunicated, Viz. the admonition so given
by the Elders as is before said.
for despising the admonition given by the Elders only. Touching which we
have agreed heretofore, that we erred, from these Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 19,
8.9.10. and 1 These. 5, 12. compared with Deuteronomy. 17.8-12. etc. (And here again
it is to be remembered, how it has been shevved that the speeches of telling
the Elders, and of the casting out of persons for despising the admonition
given by the Elders only, are to be understood in respect of ministration and
government committed unto them by Christ and the Church, and not so to be
taken, as to exclude the Church or Christ the head, for whom they do
administer: but that we should alvvay understand and observe these things,
according as in Israel (in the due proportion and perpetual equity thereof)
and according to the Scriptures here alleged, in this and the other particular
aforesaid: and therefore not to abridge the brethren of their assent or any
right that does apperteyne unto the^ by the word of God: but to do all things
according to the rules prescribed therein, as before has been shevved. To
which end likewise it is to be remembered, how it has been often signified
and declared, that the power of the holy things of God given to the Church, is
properly and primarily Christ's; secundarily and by communication the Churches;
instrumentally and ministerially the Officers, who are the Ministers of Christ
and the Church. And that thus we would still be understood. As also, that thus
the admonition, being given as is aforesaid, may be said to be the admonition
of Christ, of the Church, and of the Elders, in diverse respects, according as
is said before.) Thirdly, concerning that rule in general, we have had this
error among us, that it has been understood to be a new rule for the time of
the Gospel, which Israel had not. VVhereabout may be considered and compared
together these and the like Scriptures, as follows: Mat. 18.15. with Lev. 19,
17. Prove. 25.9.10. Also, Mat. 18.16. with Deu. 19.15. and 17.6. Ioh. 8, 17. 2
Cor. 13, 1. And, Mat. 18, 17. with Mat. 5.22. Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20. Numb.
35.12-30. with Deuteronomy. 19.12-17. etc. together with the other Scriptures
mentioned here before in the other particulars, as in them may be seen.


And for all these things, if any can show us better or otherwise by the word
of God, we shall (God willing) be ready to yield unto it.

THus was the Churches agreement about these things. Where note, that the
first of these about admonition by the Elders, was sooner agreed upon, there
being but fevv (in respect) that excepted and stood against it, when some of
the chief of them yielded unto it. The latter, about our practice, and
understanding of Mat. 18, 17. was very long debated among us: and after much
reasoning had thereabout, we were often and earnestly urged by the Opposites,
to give sentence and come to an issue about it. So in the end we agreed
concerning it, as here before is set down. Which when we had done, they
signified their dissent, and that they could no longer walk with us,
practicing accordingly. And so afterward they went away and left us. And
this is the very cause of their departing from us, whatsoever other thing be
alleged by them or any other thereabout.

And this I entreat the Reader well to observe, because otherwise, reading
their foresaid differences and objections in the letter and printed copy,
(vvhereabout they have busied themselves so much) he may take them for causes
of their separation, which in deed were not. And whereas thus it pleases the^
to trouble men's minds with their positions, and intend in the setting of the^
down to cause disgrace to this poor Church (which they so unjustly have left,
as if we had apostated and left the ancient says) it shall be good for them
to try and warrant those their positions and differences, as also their
separation from us, by the touchstone of the word of God, as now by the answer
thereunto given, they are occasioned to do.

And vvithall, let them show out of the Scripture, how it can be warranted,
that a minister who has not himself received true baptism, may administer
the Lords Supper; or that a people not having true baptism, may receive the
Lords supper (as these have done): seeing themselves deny the baptism of the
Church of Rome, By this opinion the Martyrs of later years had not true
baptism, etc.
and so consequently of other Churches in Apostasy, to be true baptism. If
the example of Christ be considered, who first instituted and ministered the
Lords supper himself, he had received true baptism before. Mat. 3, 16. with
26.26.27.28. The like may be observed about his Apostles, and namely about
Paul, who was first baptized, before he received or administered the Lords
supper: Act. 9.18. with 20.11. and so in others from time to time. By which
themselves may perceive what a continual profanation of Gods holy things is
among them, that so minister or receive, not having true baptism: and the
Reader may discern how needful it had been for them, better to have thought
of their positions and objections against us, before they had thus written and
given them forth. And this I thought good here to mention (together with that
which is before noted about it) that both themselves and others may by this
occasion duly consider of their estate and dealing. Pa^. 54 etc.


And here for this purpose also, it will not be unfit in this place to annexe
the judgment of Mr. Iunius concerning the Church of Rome; as I said here before
I would. Which the Readers shall do well duly to consider, both for their
own better information, and for the better discerning and judging of the
opinions and differences that are at this day-thereabout, not only among the
Anabaptists, and such as are affected Anabaptistically, but even among
Protestants also, our selves and others, differing in some things about this
matter. Thus therefore it is as follows:

THE IVDGMENT OF M. FRANCIS JUNIUS concerning the Church of Rome.
Lib. singulari de Eccles. contra Bellarminum, cap. 17. And in his works
printed in fol. p. 1018.1019. etc.
Of the Church of Rome.
BEing to treat of the Church of Rome, we will first unty the knot of the
aequivocatio^ of the word, before we determine of the thing it self; that all
men may better perceive, what it is, that is at this day called in question
amongst us. For very many are deceived with the homonymie or aequivocation of
the very word, and unavvares ensnare themselves and others, by the ignorance
of the deceitfulnes in the speech.

The church of Rome therefore is properly so called, or abusiuely, by the
misterming or abusing of the name; both as it is called a church, and as it is
called the Roman church. For as it is called the Roman church, sometimes it
properly signifies the company which is at Rome, as Paul spoke, vvriting to
the Romans: sometimes it signifies abusiuely, all the churches on the earth,
that cleave to the Roman church, according to the form of doctrine, and
constitution thereof. But we will treat of the church as it is indeed the
church of Rome: and the things which we shall speak of this church, the same
may the godly reader by proportion understand of the church so called by abuse
of speech.

Now as it is called a Church (which thing chiefly is in controversy) it is
so termed three manner of vvayes: as a subject; as an accident growing to the
subject; and as the subject together with that his accident. As a subject, it
is the simple or single Church of Rome; As an accident growing upon the
subject, is the papacy, or the papal hierarchy, which they call
ecclesiastical. As a subject compounded with his accident, it is the church of
Rome become papal, or under the Pope, that is to say corrupt, as I may so
speak, by that lavvles or unnatural shoot of the Pope, springing out of the
stock. Now of each of these we will consider so briefly as may be, one after
another.

The Church of Rome when it is considered as a subject, it has two parts; the
pastors and the flock of Christ: Romans 1, 8. And for which we also daily ask
of God in our prayers, that he would inform it to worship him by his spirit
in the Gospel of his son, and to establish it in faith. Neither do we deny
this subject to be at Rome, by the mercy of God, even at this day, because we
trust there is God calling, persons called, and the calling it self yet in her:
the meeting of which things together in one gives being to a church, Chap. 8.
etc.
as before we showed.

But touching the papacy, or the papal hierarchy, ecclesiastical, we do
not say that it is the church properly so called, but an accident growing unto
the church, and such as covertly works against the life, and health of the
Church. That it is not the church properly, is proved by the very definition of
the papacy, and of the Church of God. For the papacy according to his
general, is an order: the church is a company or an assembly. The papacy by
his difference, is an order positive, humane or from men, and naught; The
church is an assembly divine or from God, by divine authority, with reason
united together. Now those things which differ both in their general, and in
their essential difference, and in their necessary conditions or properties,
they cannot be one and the same thing. And that the papacy is an accident
growing upon the Church, experience it self speaks. For the subject is
before his accident, which is contigent and separable: The church was many
ages when the papacy was not: The papacy came to the church contingently
(beside the being of the Church) and so may be separated from it, as at this
time also there are churches, where the papacy is not, and there will be
churches still hereafter without the papacy. Therefore the papacy is not the
church, but it is an evil growing up in the church, a pestilence, a dropsy,
the gangrene in the body, deceiptfully working against the life and health of
it, and therefore most noysomely eating up the lively and wholesome moisture of
the church. But of this whole matter, we have spoken in the 3. Controversy,
and in this fourth we are to speak of it hereafter.

of the Scripture, do put a difference. The nature of the thing does teach,
that the church is one thing, and that the papacy is another, as we spoke a
little before. The authority of the Scripture teaches the church, but it
teaches not the papacy: therefore they are diverse things. For they delude
undoubtedly, I say they delude, which require at our hands one definition of
the subject and of the accident, as of one singular thing, or obtrude it on us.
For thus must we say, The papal church, as it has that in it which
belongs to the definition of a church, it is a church; but as it has in it
the evil grown unto it, which we call the papacy, in that respect it is
not a church, but a faulty, defloured and a corrupt church, and dravving on to
destruction.

Let us make it plain by a similitude. The body it self is one thing, the
corruption or putrefaction in the body another thing, and the corrupted or
puttrefied body another thing. The body is the subject, the corruption or
putrefaction is the evil accident cleaving unto the subject, the corrupted or
putrifyed body is compounded of them both. There is both the body, and
putrefaction in the putrified body. So is a body that is svvolne with the
water, causing the dropsy. Both are together, and yet so together, as either
one of the two, or both together must needs perish. If the nature of the body
be stronger, the corruption and dropsy water decays: but if the corruption
or dropsy prevayle, there is most certain destruction of the^ both. So is the
church of God: for in it self it is the body of Jesus Christ. If a deadly
disease grovve upon it, both are then together, the body and the disease in
the body. If the purging medicine of the grace of God (for nothing is here
natural) be of the more efficacy, the disease then is vanquished and
decays: but if the disease prevayle, then both of them (the body and the
disease) must needs come to an end. For such is the condition of the disease:
it both feeds it self on the dodie decaying, and destroys it self together
with the body.

After this manner therefore do we esteem of the church of Rome, which they
call the papal or popish Church. There is the Church, there is the papacy,
and there is the papal Church. As there is the Church, it is the subject of
God: as there is the papacy, there is the disease of man: as it is the papal
church, there is a fight betvveen the church and the papacy, that will destroy
either one of them apart, or both together. If God shall give it the purging
medicine of his grace, by means whereof the papacy, the accidentarie evil
decay and perish; it is well: but if the papacy, that most faulty and
corrupt order, and deadly accident prevayle, it will bring destruction to both
of them, both to the church and to it self, by the judgment of God.

And this now in the memory of our fathers and our own we see to have
befallen many churches, which claue fast unto that Roman church. For when it
seemed good unto God more clearly to inkindle the torch of the gospel, and to
scatter the papal smokes by his spirit, there remained churches returning by
his grace to a better constitution and stronger health, and that which is of
the pope departs vanishing away through his own corruption: but when as
God sent not that purging medicine of his divine grace into the body of any
church, then the popish corrupt blood got strength more and more, which will
be to that church deadly destruction, unles God of his mercy provide a
remedy. In the remembrance and conscience of this benefit, do our churches
fitly sing with the Prophet, Blessed, be the Lord which has not given us for
a pray unto their teeth. Our soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare
of the foulers: the snare is broken, and we are delivered. Our help is in the
name of the Lord, etc. Psalm. 124.

Wherefore in my judgment they speak preposterously, who ask whether the
church be in the papacy: because on the contrary it should be asked, whether
the papacy be in the church. For the subject is not in the, accident, but the
accident in the subject, whose being, is an in being, or to be in a thing, as
men commonly speak. And that the papacy is in the church, as the order or
estate of apostasy in the house and city of God, is as certain, as that of
the Apostle is certain, 2 These. 2. that the man of sin, the son of
perdition sits in the temple of God, with his whole order or rank of
apostates: and not on the other side, that the temple of God consists in that
order and number of apostates, which is a thing most strange and furthest
off. But the term of the papacy taken doubly and aequivocally, deceives them
in such fort as here before we shevved concerning the Roman popish Church.
For under the name of the papacy (which is a foul corrupt order) they
comprehend the subject it self, which is annoyed with that corruption, not
distinguishing aright between these things.

As therefore, if any should deny that to be a body, which lies in a deadly
sort svvollen with the water of the dropsy, or should affirm that water
which choketh the body, to be the body it self, should in both these be
deceived in his judgment: so also are both deceived, as well they which deny
it to be the church, because the papacy is in it, as they which avouch the
papacy to be the church it self, which we have before disproved. The papacy
is a poison in the church, which poison must needs be vomited out, if it will
be preserved: or else the church will be extinguished by it, if it suffer that
poison to prevayle, and possess all the veins of the body.

But how can she be the church, (will some say) in which the papacy is? To
wit, as there is the body, in which a disease works. But because the
papacy is a deadly corruption, the more that the papacy gets strength, the
more the church is weakened: the increase of the one, is the decrease of the
other. And hence it comes to pass, that in the churches which are called
popish, some are more healthie, and some more unhealthie then others: the more
healthie are those, which have less of the papacy, and more of the church:
and those are the more unhealthie which have more of the papacy and less of
the church: and of this kind, I doubt not that church to be, which at this
day is at Rome. For it had long ago given up the ghost, if God by the
imposition of his grace and long suffering had not nourished and kept it vvarme.

Notvvithstanding that we may give content unto their minds, which do not
yet reach unto these things, or think that they are more subtily then truly
spoken of the church which they call the papal or popish church: let us
answer this question in fevv words, from the regard of all particular
churches, as they are among men, or in consideration of things humane. Every
church, which in deed is a Church, is considered two vvayes, on Gods behalf
(as they speak) and on our behalf. On Gods behalf, it is altogether a church,
wheresoever there is found a company called of God, with his calling by the
spirit and the holy Scripture, and the ministry of persons ordained for
holy things, and divine actions. On our behalf there is no Church at all,
(although it be so of God, as we have said) to which there does not cleave
corruption, concerning the persons, things, actions, and finally the whole
ministry of man ordained by God. And that which is on Gods part, is not
taken away by our default, so long as it seems good unto the Lord, to
acknovvledge it for his Church, and call it with his calling, by the spirit,
and holy Scripture, and the ministry. For shall the unbelees of me^, (says
the Apostle, To. 3.3.) make the says of God without effect? shall the weakness
of man make void the truth of God? or his imperfection the perfection of God?
Far be it off: yea let God be true and every man a liar, says the Apostle
in the same place.

We will make the matter plain by an example and similitude out of the
words of Jeremy, chap. 3. A wife being filthy with adulteries, if her
husband will pardon her, and consent to receive her, and to dvvell with her,
she abides still the wife of her husband, not by her own deed done (for
she has broken wedlock, what in her was) but by the benefit or goodness of
her husband. So a Church overflovving not only with lighter infirmities, but
also with heavy adulteries, on her part in deed should cease to be a wife,
but she cease not on her husbands part. For touching the election, as the
Apostle says, Romans 11.28. she is beloved for the fathers sakes, speaking of
the church of the Jews. It is a church so long as God calling her proclaymeth
that which is in Ier. 3.13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God, and have scattered thy ways to the
strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, says the
Lord. Turn, o backslyding people, says the Lord, for I am married unto you,
and I will take you etc. It is so long a church, as God protesting calls upon
it departing from him and being rebellious, as it is in Esa. 50, 1. Where is
the bil of your mothers divercement, wherewith I put her away? or who is there
of my creditours to whom I sold you? etc. The church then at length cease to
be a church, when God cease to call it back, and takes away the evidence
of that holy marriage, that is, the holy Scripture, out of the hand of the
adulteres, and her that is stubburne, testifying that the matrimony is
dissolved on his part, and so receives the covenant of grace unto himself. It
is not for any man, to deny that to be a church, which God calls a church.
Neither is it for any man, to call that a church, which God, having given the
bil of divorce, and taken away the draught of the marriage contract, denies so
to be.

And after this manner do we esteem of the Church in which the papacy is.
God calls her with his calling, by his spirit, and word, and the public
records of that holy marriage (which we call the holy Scripture) and the
ministry, and things, and holy actions, which before we have briefly
reckoned up. These things do remain to that church most manifestly, on Gods
behalf. But in that on the behalf of men all these things and holy actions,
together with the very persons themselves, abound and overflovve, with most
grievous and deadly corruptions, that is the sin of men, not the fault of
God; whose grace and truth is perfected in infirmity. On Gods part, she is
yet called Hammi, my people, and Ruchama, finding mercy, which most truly on
her part, might be called Lo hammi, not my people, and Lo ruchama, not
obteyning mercy, as we read in Hosea the Prophet. But we rely upon the
mercy of God, and according to his grace revealed, we speak our mind, or
we give our sentence concerning a church erring and going astray.

But this Church has every thing in it corrupt. I confess it. But in that it
has all the divine things in the Scritures, it is of God: in that it has them
all corrupt, that is of it self: in that it has all the divine things, it is a
church, in that it has the same all corrupt, it is a corrupt church. The
church is not taken away by corruption, unles it be total (as they speak)
which they call destruction. A corruption that is in part does not take away
a Church, but weaken it. The Church of Rome has all things corrupt, but not
altogether: this is not a destruction, but is to be called a corruption of it
in part.

For (to prosecute these heads particularly, which we have briefly noted in
the consideration of the Church) God by the alone presence of himself calling,
does lay the foundation of the Church, in Christ the head thereof. The church
of Rome adds another foundation to this foundation, and to this head another
new head (vvhereupon it is called papal or popish) wherein it may likewise
rest. The calling is to God alone; in the church of Rome there is calling to
others with God, and the calling upon them. Here is calling by the spirit and
Scripture alone, whence it receives the ministry, and delivers nothing
more, the^ that which it has received from the Lord: there it receives a
ministry from the spirit of Christ, and of the Pope, from the Scripture, and
the ragged traditions of men: here finally the persons, things and actions are
carried, according to the doctrine of the Spirit, and the Scripture only: there
all things are taken and exercised out of the Popes changeable shop, and at
his beck (as they say) they stand and fall. So all the marks on Gods behalf are
in it: but for it self, on it own part (as they say) there is no mark
entire, no mark that is not corrupt by the papal poysonfull sorcerie, and the
order of all things most miserably perverted. For which cause in Lions in
France, a certain Friar did merrily preach to the people, when he said the
Hugonots (for so they are called in France) did consent with the church of
Rome in all their articles of faith, but there was one shrevvd word, the word
Only, at the crack whereof war was inkindled, for they believe only
what the rule of faith has out of the holy Scriptures: but the church of
Rome requires more unto faith then is either contained in the rule of faith,
or in the holy Scriptures, because such is the authority of the Church.

These things being well understood, all men will easily perceive how that
church, in respect of God or on Gods part, is yet a church; but of it self is
most corrupt, and very nere to destruction. But here do arise two doubts and
difficulties, by which the minds of many are troubled. The first doubt is,
what we are to judge of the members of that church: The latter what the
duty of them is who are in that church, and see the great corruptions thereof.

To the first question we answer on this manner. A threefold judgment had
need meet together in this cause: the first, of truth; the second, of
charity; the third, of prudence or vvisdome. The judgment of truth is of the
common condition of the church, by which we judge from the calling of God,
that as yet she is a church. The judgment of charity is of the several
members of the church, by which we presume they be members of the church,
whilst they are called with the calling of God, and are in this way as David
calls it Psalm. 2. The judgment of prudence or vvisdome, is that by which
we discern and distinguish persons, things and actions divine from humane,
good ones from evil, true ones from false, and the degrees of these also
amongst themselves. For as of things and actions, so also of persons some are
corrupting through ignorance infirmity, or malice wholy, or in part; others
are corrupted, even in the simplicity of their hearts as the Scripture
speaks: and of these there are a great number, of whom it were ungodly to
esteem that they were not of the church of God. Of such as do corrupt we
must take heed, Mat. 7. of the corrupted, who yet are still corrupted we must
have compassion. But the Church verily is not to be judged of the manner of
either of these. for Christ says not, ye shall not know the Church, but by
their fruits of doctrine and life ye shall know them, Mat. 7.20. And without
doubt, they do very unvvisely who judge of the truth of a church, by the
particular life or doctrine of any men, who ever they be, especially of
private men: for the calling of God makes the church, not the assenting
answer of the men that are in it: as on the other side the church cease not
to be a church for the refusal, or denial of men, wheresoever the calling of
God is. Now let us come to the second demand.

What is the duty of those (vvilt thou say) that are in the Popish Church,
and see the grievous corruptions of it? Their duty is such as of those
children, which dvvell together with their adulterous mother: for God used
this similitude in Esaie and Jeremy, as we have seen before. A wise son
will even from his heart abhor the sin of his mother, he will with
speech and sign call back his mother from evil, and he will absteyne himself
from it: and in all things he will cleave to his father, he will stand to his
judgment, he will obey his vvil: and while he can by reason of his mother,
he will cleave unto her, next after his father: but vvhiles by reason of her
he can not do it with good conscience, for the spiritual and bodily injury
of her, Closet or Inner room.
he will betake himself into the chamber of his father, where also the church
is the mother of us all. Gal. 4.26. For this is not a good consequent, if one
depart from this or that church, therefore he does altogether depart from the
church. He but trifles who does so from a particular, conclude universally. A
part of the flesh if it be divided or cut asunder from another part by a vvound
received, is not straight way to be thought to be separate or cut off from the
whole body: for it is cut asunder, and the mouth of the vvound opens, but
neither part is therefore disjoined from the body. A godly son therefore
ought to cleave to his father and mother jointly, so long as with good
conscience he can: but because he cannot with sound faith and conscience have
fellowship with the unfrutefull works of darkness, Ephesians. 5, 11. he rather
leaving his mother, cleaves to God his father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, then
that he will defile himself with those foul deeds of his mother.

And this did our ancestors religiously, whom the popish tyranny for some
ages has exercised. The godly which were at Rome, and other where in the
church which they call the Roman church abusiuely, first learned to abhor
even from their soul, the sins of their mother, when once they began to
have right understanding; by words and signs they modestly called her back
from her naughty deeds, vvhiles she would bear them, they carefully
absteyned themselves from all communication of evil, yet in all things
cleaving to their father, from whom, in whom, by whom, and for whom are all
things, standing to his judgment, and obeying his will: finally they did so
long cleave to their mother next after their father, whilst by her they could
so do with entire faith and conscience, and their own salvation. But when
they could not longer with good faith and conscience so do, by reason of the
violent tyranny, and the spiritual and corporal injury of their furious
mother, then being ashamed with her shamefulnes and resting silent, they
betook themselves into their fathers bosom and his inner room, albeit that
she pursued them outragiously: least they being ashamed of her, should be said
to shame her, as strumpets are usually wont to do.

For which causes, I do humbly beseech God the Father of our Lord Jesus, that
he would both by his saving calling inform, direct and care for his church,
and whatsoever belongs to his church, and that he would also teach every
one that is in it his truth, and the truth of his church: and that he would so
work, as they vvisely absteyning from all evils, especially from those which
the son of perdition, and author of the apostasy has brought in, and taking
heed of the spirit of lies, and the efficacy of his error, they may
religiously cleave unto the Father and his good things, in every of them, and
to their mother next after the father (or so far as she accords with the
Father): that increasing in his truth, piety, faith and love they may bestow
and employe all their studies to the edification of the church, the salvation
of all, and the glory of that our heavenly Father. etc.

God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, by that eternal spirit of his
eternal truth, bring to pass, that the wiles of Satan being driven away,
we may all grovve daily in Christ, in the church, and in the truth of Christ
and the Church, and that we may more and more confirm one another in love
unfayned, to his glory and the common salvation of us all. Amen.

HItherto Mr. Iunius. With whom agrees Amandus Polanus, noting some errors
of Bellarmines about Antichrist) in his Co^mentarie upon Ezech. 39. at the end
thereof, page 733. Where he says thus, The Messiah of the Jews is not
Antichrist, but a false Christ, whereas the great Antichrist, of whom the
Scriptures foretell, shall profess himself to be a Christian, and under the
name of Christ fight against Christ, because he must sit in the Temple of
God, 2 These. 2.4. in the Temple (I say) not Jewish or at Jerusalem, but
Christian, that is, in the Christian Church: as Chrysostom teaches, and
Theophylact, Ambrose, Hilarious, Hierome, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Augustine, and
Thomas Aquinas also. See the testimonies (says he) in our Catholic Symphonie,
chap. 23. These. 3.

And Bartholomeus Keckermannus, speaking in a treatise of his, of the
properties of the church, infers thus thereupon, and says: Now if we
examine the Popish church according to these proprieties, it will appear that
it is not a pure Church, but very corrupt, like as a rotten apple is in deed
an apple, but corrupt: and as a man corrupted with the plague is a man, but not
a sound man. Keckerman. Praeparat. ad sacram synaxin. page 83.

And diverse other the like sayings out of these and other writers of this age
might be alleged, but these may suffice: specially seeing we build not our
says on man, but only on the word of God. Yet we thought it not amiss to
show what others at this day think of this matter: not only for the reason
noted herebefore at the beginning, but because also we doubt not, but by this
means the light of the truth will be more cleared, for the better information
of such as love the truth in sincerity; and the folly of others more
repressed, who (being carried with praejudice or malice against us) open their
mouths vvide not only against us, but even against the truth it self that is
testified by us. Whom we desire that even for their own good they will be
persuaded now at length better to examine and ponder all the matters
aforesaid, then as yet they have done.

ANd thus have I hitherto noted down such things, as concern our public
estate, and the foresaid division so much spoken of in this book. Now although
for the personal injuries and reproaches abounding in the same book, I had
thought to have passed them over with the Advertisement formerly given
thereabout: yet seeing we understand, that both here and in our own country
we are greatly abused about M. Studley in particular, and some matters
concerning him, vvhereabout himself also is much traduced: I have therefore
thought it not amiss to insert somewhat here concerning him more particularly.
And this I do the rather, because that which I do annexe hereabout, is his
own Answer, made (at our earnest entreaty) by himself, who said that
otherwise he would have rested in silence, possessing his soul with
patience, and committing the matter to the Lord. And this it is as follovveth.

M. STVDLEYS ANSWER TO THE ACCVSATIONS AND objections printed against him by
Lawne and his fellows in the book aforesaid.
A Wicked man diggeth up evil, and in his lips is like burning fire. Prove.
16.27. Mine enemy has sharpened his eyes against me. Job. 16.9. They have
opened their mouths upon me, and smitten me on the cheek in reproach: they
gather the^s^lues together against me. Job. 16.10. All which malicious carriage
and unsufferable dealing, (of some heretofore, and these four persons (Lawne,
Fowler, Saunders and Bulward) now lately against me also, I could have borne
in silence, and committed my cause and their dealing to God, the judge of all
men's actions, and the revvarder of every one, according to their deeds. Yet in
some other respect, as heretofore I have given my answer to others, so do I
now here again, to some special things, written by these men in reproach of
me: And namely, to those eight articles, which were given for the deposing of
me from office: other particulars scattered in their book besides these, I
will not trouble my self nor the Reader about them with any particular
answers to them: neither would I with these, had they not ben brought into
our congregation and there handled. And for ought I yet mind, I purpose
hereafter, not to make any reply to such wicked carriage and raylings of men,
but stand to the rules ecclesiastical, appointed by Christ in his Church, and
the ordinance of God, which he has set up in the power and authority of
Magistracy in the common wealth, and there make my answer to whatsoever men
have against me: For who that bears the heart and mind of a man, would not
rather dye by the sword of the Magistrate, then to be smitten with the
Machivilian tongues of base companio^s, whose vile dealings by this odious
carriage of theirs, makes as if there were no lavvfull authority to examine and
judge the actions of men, by good and wholsome laws, but as though things
were left in confusion, to be svvayed after the lusts of envious persons for
the devouring one of another. And what unsufferable abuse these men offer unto
sacred thrones by such disordered courses of theirs, I leave to be judged of
those that are prudent. And for whatsoever these men have spoken and written
of me, were it no prejudice to the truth I profess, nor to my self for
holding the same, I would willingly adventure into my own Country, (whether
some of these my adversaries are gone and where they printed this their book)
to call and entreat for law and justice about these matters: but things
standing as they do (which God when he sees good can reform) let men in
the mean time ride upon my head, by making book after book to my reproach and
infamy, I will bear them on my shoulders, and repenting of my sins, with
amendment of life, I will in faith and patience, look up to Christ my
redeemer, the author and finisher of my faith, who for my sake and the rest of
his elect, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right
hand of the throne of God: from whence I expect him, to receive me with all
his into eternal glory, and to recompense these men (except they repent)
with shame and confusion, according to their deeds. Now follow their
articles, and my answer to them.

For his filthiness used to his wives daughter, Article 1.
with that most ungodly allegation for the defense thereof. etc.

The first part of this Article, I did long ago confess, and also by this
occasion, I do here again acknovvledge, touching the allegation, is false.
The author of it, being now none of us, was yet sent unto (when I was dealt
vvithall in public about these things) to come and prove this his accusation:
which if he refused so to do, it should be upon himself as a false charge;
and he refused and would not come; which if he had, I could, and (through
Gods assistance) I can prove it to be a slander.

For writing a most ungodly letter, containing in it many vile and ungodly
speeches, Artic. 2.
some of it being in most abominable verses. etc.

I vvrote to N. three letters: to two of them he replied, the third which is
this here spoken of, answer to it, therefore he is content to bury it in
silence. And touching those verses which so maliciously they speak of; and
which were but a few; I have (for the evil in them laid unto my charge) made
my acknovvledgment for the same, and that in public. But as these men have set
them down, with as much odiousnes as their corrupt affections could afforde,
and as others may gather thereby, I can not so acknovvledge, without great
vvronging of my self: for some have been with me, who also in the like
general terms (as is used by these adversaries) have spoken very hardly of
those verses. VVhereupon I asked them, if they had seen or heard them: they
said no, but by the report of others. I prayed them tell me what particular
evil they thought to be in them: they shook the head, and with sighing said,
they thought they were filthy vile verses. I asked again, if they thought
them vile and filthy, in cursing, blaspheming, and such like: they said no,
but in ribaldrie and unchaste speeches; hereupon I did repeat them, and then
asked what now they thought of them: they demanded of me, if they were no
other then as I had related; I told them that so they were and no other. At
which, they pausing a while, with admiration said; undoubtedly then are you
exceedingly abused. Wherefore it lies me upon, to be wary what answer I
give upon general terms, knowing it is no new thing, by wringing the nose to
force out blood, nor to use and love so to use all words that may destroy;
wherein these my four adversaries, with their contrivers and composers of
that their malicious railing book, have shevved themselves Satan like
skillful. VVilling I am always to acknowledge my sin, as it is indeed: and
otherwise to do, is neither pleasing to God, nor comfort to my own soul:
And this I know, that the subject and ground, vvhereupon my letters with
these verses were written, and whereof some of themselves at Leyden, have
thus written also, as is to be seen under their their own hands; viz. that
the matters between N and Ms. N are very weighty, and apparent it is, that
either he or she are in grieveous iniquity: therefore I know as before I
have said, when these matters between N. and Ms. N. are tried out, which are
the ground of all my letters to him, my vvritings will be either worse
censured (if so it were possible) then now they be, or more favorably
construed by unpartiall judges, then yet they are. My desire then is, there
were an end hereof; which till there be, little flies and knats, may hang fast
in the spiders vvebbe, whilst great flies and vvaspes break through and get
away; but when there is an issue of these things, the apparent grievous
iniquity above mentioned, which yet lies smothered and hid, will follow
after to be found on some, as my sins about the handling of these matters
have gone before and ben urged on me. Wherefore if no other will take in hand
to find out in vvho^ that grievous iniquity is, which lies but betvveen two
persons, what if my self do assaye once again to do it? alvvayes provided
(through the grace of God) to take more heed to my words and speeches then
heretofore I have done. What (I say) if thus I do? will any be offended
with me, seeing the truth or falsehood of the reproach (that about these
matters lies upon me) can not be rightly known, till these things be ended.
And besides, the woman her self, when she departed from Amsterdam, to return
to England, did require of me (as before the Lord) not to let these matters
rest, till the truth were found out: also seeing I can shevve under writing,
both of his and hers, touching these affairs, more I am persuaded then any
others also; I see not why any should mislike of my purpose to have yet
further dealing in these things. If any can show me sufficient reasons why I
should not, I am vvilling to forbear; otherwise I purpose (God assisting me)
to go on as I have said, having those reasons for my ground which above I
have all edged.

For teaching many wicked and ungodly songs and rimes unto children, Artic. 3.
when he kept school, in stead of catechizing the^. etc.

When I kept a school of some few small children, many (no, nor yet any)
wicked ungodly songs and rimes, as here is falsely alleged. And one of these
men themselves repeating one (and I suppose the vvorst he could) which he said
some of the children affirmed I taught them, I told him as the truth is, I
never heard it till it came out of his mouth: the party was Robert Bulvvard.

For disclosing the counsel of the Eldership to Marie May in some prrticulars,
Artic. 4.
as we can plainly prove in time and place, etc.

This being false,

For his many lascivious attempts, to a young maid now of late, Artic. 5.
with his beastly behavior, to entice her to satisfy his own lust, unmeet to
be named, etc.

For my evil carriage to that maid (about two years since) I confess to my
own shame, I have done foolishly once, yea twice: but I trust, through Gods
grace, I shall never do so again; yet as these enemies, both here and
elsewhere in their book have set it down, it is a false calumniation; for
(speaking of it with sorrovve and grief of heart, and unfaynedly repenting for
it) I do acknowledge, that though my behavior to her was bad and unsee^ly,
yet not with any intention of the act, as these men intimate, neither spoke I
so much as one unchaste word to her at any time. That which I did, and only
intended to do, was clapping her only. Therefore as I have often spoken, and
here now set it under my hand, as the truth is? by any thing that ever I did
unto her, I know not whether she be male or female: And concerning the act
it self, this I say further, which all the world could not compel me to
speak, neither would I have it a president, that any should be pressed to do
the like, (no not any of these my four adversaries, least some of them who
know what I say, should fall into a greater sin then the act it self): for
that which here I utter, it is of my own accord, which I need not to do,
yet I do it, and this it is; That in all my life to this present day, I have
not known any woman, young nor old, married wife, vvidowe, nor maid, save
only my lavvfull vviues (having had two) and not them neither, till I was
lavvfully married to them: nor to any other had I ever thought or word, in that
respect: and for the truth hereof, I take the Lord to witness, who only
knovveth the heart, and will bring the way of the wicked upon his head, and
justify the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness. Let these
men now, and all others, who have either written or spoken herein, most
unjustly, know they shall give account for the same unless God give them
repentance, which I desire may be given, to my greatest adversaries. Moreover,
whereas here they insinuate, and in other places of their book have spoken more
plainly, of the discovering of my nakedness, and the maids seeing it; I
testify, it is more then I can say for certain, whether she did see me or
no; but considering how our houses stood, with the vvindowes and doors one
over against the other, and knowing in what case, my self sometime by occasion
was in my own house, it might be she did so see me, and it might be
otherwise: yet for any word or deed, that passed from me to her, I could (were
it not for the circumstances aforesaid) directly affirm, she never so saw me.
But notwithstanding all this I have said, I do yet freely confess, that what
was wanting in me, to have had more heed and care unto my self, for the
avoiding of her or any other so to have seen me, was my great transgression,
praying God to forgive me it, as all other my sins whatsoever.

There were brought sixteen articles against him, to prove the tenor and
course of his life to be partial, Artic. 6.
whereof two were proved, and acknowledged by him, and the residue of sixteen
were confessed in general, etc.

There were fifteen persons, that factiously had their meetings sundry times,
sixteen as these men untruly say) matters against me, some of seven years
old, others of less time, some of them either ended in the church, or past by
of the church, and others of them private matters, never dealt in by any ^^le:
which cari^^d and dealing of heirs, being observed, and for the further finding
out of their evil herein, it was demanded of them, who were the authors of
these their meetings, and how often, and where they met, which they
refusings to shevve, were therefore, and for these their meetings and evil
carriage in these matters, rebuked by the church, and they willed that had any
thing against me; to deal with me by order and rule; which yet they never
did: One of the^ there was (who since is departed this life) that came unto
me and acknowledged his fault, affirming that himself had nothing against me,
but was chawen by the rest, only to give his consent to their proceedings,
which he the more willingly yielded unto, having (as he manifested) a spleen
against me: which he said, some of these men knovving, did by urging the same,
work upon him to do that he did: and he said moreover, that if a scholar had
reproved him as I did (which was of unsound doctrine of somevvhat he spoke in
public) he could well have borne it, but I that was none, to reprove him
that was one, this made him to stomach me, which he confessed was evil in
him, and so said he (as now he plainly savv) was the dealing of those men
toward me, which he perceived to be rather of malice, then any just cause
they had against me. Further, who^ these men were rebuked, and willed to deal
with me as is aforesaid, I prayed the^ to give me a copy of the things they
had framed against me, promising, that when I had considered of them, if I
savve any thing in which I had offended, I would freely of my self
acknovvledge the same: but this which was so reasonable a request, I could
never get of them: which plainly shows both the evil dealing of the
refusers thus to do, and the falsehood of these men, who have printed that two
of the matters brought against me, were proved and acknowledged by me, Page 15
and 16.
and the rest in general manner I confessed: That which I confessed, was
only this here follovving; There was one particular about Judith ^^^^der,
which they pressed as hard against me, as their hatred was toward me, which
was to the uttermost of their power, and I as well as I could, stood for my
own defense, and thus, much time, and many words being spent, one of the
brethren spoke to this effect, A.P.
viz. that a man might be said to be partial, either by being nor able to
judge or discern aright the cause he handles, and so err in the sentence he
gives: Or being well able to judge of a matter, yet through negligence, and
not using that care and diligence to search into it as he ought, the matter is
shut up with that unequal judgment, which otherwise would not so have been:
To which I ansvvered to this effect, That if the word partial (for to get
this word from me was now all their strife) would in any of those respects,
satisfy the^, I would not stand to justify my self, but that in such regard I
might be partial. Hereupon, my accusers were quiet, and rested in this my
acknovvledgment; and no other, nor otherwise, were any of their fourteen
articles either proved by the^ or confessed by me. There was also an
exliortation, given to my self by the Pastor, that I should take heed to the
office, which I had received in the Lord, to fulfill it, etc. And this is the
very su^me and effect of the handling of these matters, and the end and issue
whereunto they were brought: and by which manner of ending them, my adversaries
had more favor then they were worthy, and my self susteyn greater reproach
then in these things I have deserved: but it is part of my manifold crosses
wherewith the Lord has exercised me in this world, and I will bear it. And
thus having made my answer to this sixth article in their book objected, I leave
to indifferent judges, to weigh how falsely and enviously these four men have
dealt with me also herein.

Also, Article 7.
at the same time, it was proved, that he took part with Judith Holder in
known evil, etc.

(...) this article,

For counseling Marie May to lie with her husband before they were married,
Artic. 8.
etc.

These turbulent and outrageous persons, have taken counsel of Machivel, And
these unconscionable men cannot be ignorant, how the woman her self has in
our public congregation, affirmed, I never gave her that counsel: besides
Clement Saunders, (if not all the rest of them) does know for certain, that
another of the Elders with my self brought her to the Church, for her
transgressing in that action.

And now that these my deadly adversaries have showed their malice against me
to the full, as their detestable and abominable book (so esteemed and spoken
of by many) does proclaim unto the world: let them not think, but that
themselves are such, whose sins are with and before the Lord, the alseeing
God, and most just judge: to whom for all their wicked speakings I leave them
either for mercy or for judgment, according to his good will and pleasure. And
touching all and every one of the particulars both little and great, with
their long and loathsome comparison between me and another, wherewith they have
reproached me in their book, they are either mere lies, or falsely related, or
wickedly perverted, and not one of them otherwise: save only those my sins,
which I have in this my answer confessed. Which sins of mine, as I know
and am assured, the Lord has forgiven, so do I humbly beseech all those to
whose ears the offense of my sins past are come, that they also would
forgive me, as themselves do expect in faith, to be pardoned of God, for all
their sins and trespasses.

Blessed is the man that judges wisely of the poor: the Lord shall deliver
them in the time of trouble; etc.

Psalm. 41.1. etc.
Daniel Studley.

THus (Christian Reader) I have showed thee M. Studleys answer, drawn by
himself. By which thou may perceive the ungodly dealing of these men
against him. As for others among us, whom they have also abused in like sort,
see the Inquiry and Answer of Thomas Whites book, Page 28.29.30.36
37.39.40.43.44.45 46 50.51.61. etc.
who published diverse of the same things and other the like, as are here now
printed again. And what should I do then repeating the same and like answers
to the same or like objections? seeing also Thomas White was so plainly
convinced of sclander and bad dealing therein, as he could never after open his
mouth to reply or disprove the answer given: Yet these men would make the
world believe, that he had sufficiently answered the matter by his attorney,
and brought proof of the things by witnesses and depositions before the
Magistrates, for which himself was never able to stand and reply again after
the answer aforesaid was published.

And therefore whereas they insert here ( page 26. and 27.) certain things
extracted out of Whites book: Lawnes discovery. etc.
thou art to know that they are the very things, for which some of us so
abused, did bring him before the Magistrates for justice: by whom how he was
rebuked is as well known to us, as it is unto all that he was left
unpunished and unprosequ^^ed otherwise then he deserved. page 28.
And where they bring out a court roll (as they say) that the judges gave
default for not appearing against Francis Johnson and Henry Ainsworth, The
opposant was Tho. White.
and in regard thereof discharged the Opposant of the Arrest done on his
person, condemning the Arresters in costs and charges of the suit. etc. I am
certainly informed by the parties themselves yet living here (namely M. Johnson
and M. Ainsworth) that they never arrested Th. White: and so neither were nor
could be condemned in costs and charges of the suit. And that such others of us
as did indeed arrest and bring him for justice before the Magistrates (as is
aforesaid) did never hear of being condemned in costs and charges, before they
saw it in this printed book. By which such as are wise will observe the
dealing and carriage of those things. Which we lean unto God: omitting to
speak what we could further of these and other matters in this book of theirs.

Thus (gentle Reader) I have given thee this advertisement concerning the book
aforesaid, which my self and others of us thought good at this time to be
done. Which we would not have thee so take it, as if we would still follovv
such persons with answer after answer, as now we have done the second
time. We must remember both those Proverbs of Solomon, which he has, Prove.
26.4.5. one for answering, and an other for not answering: as I noted here
before in the beginning.

Neither let any that love the truth be moved or discouraged with the
contumelies, oppositions, or other persecutions that we or other the people of
God are still subject unto. If such reproachful courses should have been taken
against Jacobs family, against the people of Israel, against the Churches of
Corinth, Galatia, and others heretofore or at this day, what volumes and
invectines might be written and spread over the world from age to age? And if
sins and sinners of all sorts, should not fall out and be found in the
Church, why appointed God such laws and punishments for sinners in Israel,
and why has he given censures to his church still to be had and continued
therein from time to time? Finally, if when men have sinned, neither the
repentance of the penitent, nor the censures upon the impenitent shall be
regarded or rested in, but that both the persons and churches that are careful
so to walk shall be thus abused, besides all the lies and sclanders annexed
with all; what may we think, but that we have to deal with beasts rather
then men, or with Chams, Doegs, Schemeis, Rabshakees, Sanballats, and the
like. And what can such look for if they repent not, but that (as Peter said)
they shall utterly perish in their own corruption: and (as David said) that
God will take and pluck them out of the Tabernacle, and root them out of the
land of the living? Selah. 2 Pet. 2, 12. Psalm. 52.5.

The Lord our God the God of glory and father of mercy work all our things to
his praise and furtherance of his truth, make us partakers of his grace and
mercy in Christ; turn all the enmity and cursing of men into a favor and
blessing upon us; increase in us the knowledge and obedience of his will in
all godliness; strengthen us in and for his truth unto the end; and after we
have suffered here a while, bring us to his heavenly rest and kingdom for
ever. Amen.

1 Timothy 4.10. For this cause we both labor and suffer reproach, because we
trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, specially of those
that be leeue.

Iam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that indureth tentation: for when he is tried,
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him.


ERRATA
Page 17. l. 11. read Othervvhere. and l. 24. and in all other places of the
book, where there is speech of the printed copy of the Articles or Objections
about the division, understand or put in the margent, Lavvnes discovery of
schism, page 79. etc. Page 21. l. 1. themselves. Page 28. l. 19. more members.
Page 30. l. 20. Mat. 21.42. and lin. 21. Ephesians. 2.12. P. 36. l. 28. and 21.19.20.
and 22.15-19, and 25.7, 8, 9. Ios. 20. P. 37. l. 16. and Psa. 82.1. Deuteronomy. 19.
P. 44. l. 7. questions. P. 59. l. 17. and 14.1. and in the margent, Romans 1.8.
P. 64. l. 10.33.44, and l. 17.14.1. and l. 22. 1 Pet. 3.18. P. 65. l. 3. Ezec.
29, 3. Rev. 13.1, 2. P. 76. l. 3. co^ceived. P. 94. l. 26. by the Church,
whereupon afterward they divided themselves from us. P. 102. l. 14. contingent.


