A cruel murder committed lately upon the body of Abraham Gearsy, who lived
in the Parish of Westmill, in the County of Harford; by one Robert Reeve, and
Richard Reeve, both of the same Parish: for which fact Robert was pressed to
death, on Monday the 16. of March, and the Tuesday following Richard was
hanged; and after both them were hanged up in chains, where now they do
remain, to the affrightment of all beholders. 1635.
To the tune of Fortune my Foe.


I Pray give ear unto my tale of we,
Which i will declare that all may plainly know.
Near Harford lately was a murder done,
O it was a cruel one, as ever was known,
The good with evil herein was repaide,
Him that did good the evil has betrayed,
The world is lately grown to such a pass,
That one may fear another in this case.
This money is the cause of manies death,
As it was the cause that one late lost his breath,
The devil and the money works together,
As by my subject you may well consider.
With tears of woe I am inforst to write,
That which may cause a tender heart to sigh,
And sighing say, this was a woeful case,
That men should be so much void of all grace.
Two brethren were there that did do the same,
The first called Robert Reeve, the others name
Was Richard Reeve, these did a horrid deed,
As in my following verses shall proceed.
Behold these lines, you that have any care,
And from bloodshedding always do forbear;
Though murder be committed secretlye,
Yet for revenge to God it loud does cry.
And that sin goes not long unpunished,
Therefore let all men of this sin take heed:
Many are daily for such crimes accused,
And yet alas too commonly it is used.
One of these brothers was in debt I hear,
Unto that man, which was his neighbor near,
But he repaid him with a envious mind,
As in the story you shall plainly find.
Abraham Gearsie was his name, that was killed,
By those two brothers, as the Devil wild:
He on a day demanded money due,
I pray give ear and mark what does ensue.
They wished him to come home for to be paid,
But for his life it s^^mes they wast had laid:
For one day it was his chance for to come there,
Not dreading that his death had bin so near.
Now these two brothers killed him instantly,
No neighbor was there that did hear him cry:
And being dead floung him in a sawpit,
And coverd him with such as they could get.
Now having hid this murder in that kind,
Great search was made, but none this man could find
His friends lamented for him very sore.
And made inquiris all the country ore.
The second part,
To the same tune.


SIx weeks it was ere it was plainly known,
And many were examined hereupon:
But these two brothers much suspected were,
And at the last the truth it did appear.
Some murmured and said that they did owe
Him money, and desired for to know
Whether they had given him satisfaction,
Who said, they had, and they did owe him none.
About this money all did come to light,
Now being put for to approve this right
They could in no wise justify the same.
When they to true examination came.
Now they were asked for a quittans made,
But they had none, then others present said,
Where is your bond or witness of the same?
This must be proved, or you will suffer blame.
They being taxed on this wise confessed,
How they in bloody murder had transgrest:
Then were they sent to Harford gaile with speed,
Where they did answer, for this wicked deed.
This lent on sises last their fact was tried,
Where they were cast, condemnd and for it di'd,
Robert was pressed to death because that he
Would not be tried by God and the country.
Richard was hanged by his own Fathers door,
Which did torment and grieve his friends full sore,
Now he and's brother both do hang in chains,
This is a just reward for murders gains.
I would entreat all men sor to beware,
Of ^hue this crying sin and still for bear,
Good Lord, me thinks it is a cruel thing,
Of all sins else this may each conscience sting.
This being done, what is he can forbear,
With troubled conscience to shed many a fear?
It Is fearful sure for to be thought upon,
Although that it be ners so secret done.
Our God is love, and he does charg us all,
To love each other, but we often fall
From love and unity, to envious evil,
Thus leave we God, and run unto the Devil.
This may be warning for all other men,
That do but hear of those vile brethren:
And more consider it is a fearful sight
To see them hanged, it would our hearts afright*
Yet some there are that will not frighted be
At all, the warnings that they daily see:
Too many do esteem such things as naught,
Or else there would not be such murder wrought.
Thus to conclude, pray lets to God for grace,
And always have his fear before our face:
Fly bloody murder, and such horrid sins,
Then God will keep you from such shameful ends.
FINIS.
R. C.

Printed at London for John Wright JUNIOR, dwelling at the upper end of the Old
Baily.


