THE HAVEN OF HEALTH. Chiefly gathered for the comfort of Students, and
consequently of all those that have a care of their health, amplified upon five
words of Hippocrates, written Epid. 6. Labor, Cibus, Potio, Somnus, Venus.
Hereunto is added a preservation from the Pestilence, With a short censure of
the late sickness at Oxford.

By THOMAS COGHAN Master of Arts, and Batcheler of Physic.

Ecclesiasticus Cap. 37.30. By surfeit have many perished: but he that dieteth
himself prolongeth his life. The fourth Edition, corrected and amended.

LONDON, Printed by ANNE GRIFFIN, for ROGER BALL, and are to be sold at his,
shop without Temple-barre, at the Golden Anchor next the Nags-head Tavern.
1636.

TO The Right Honorable, and my very good Lord, Sir Edward Seymor Knight,
Baron Bewchamp, and Earl of Hertford, Thomas Cogan wishes perfect health with
increase of Honor.
THe art of Physic (right honorable) by the judgment of the learned, has
two principal parts: Two principal parts of Physic, preservative and
curative.
the one declaring the order how health may be preserved, the other setting
forth the means how sickness may be remedied. Of these two parts (in mine
opinion) that is more excellent, which preserves health and preventeth
sickness. For as much as health is the most perfect state of man's body in
this life, The end of Physic is to maintain health.
and the only end or mark whereunto the Physician directs all his doings;
which state to continue, which end to enjoy, which mark to hit, is much better
then after we are fallen and erred, and missed, eftsoons to recover the same.
Even as it is better to stand fast still, than to fall and rise again; better
keep still a Castle or City, than after we have suffered the enemy to enter, to
rescue it again. For as the Poet says, Aegrius eijcitur quam non admittitur
hospes. And for this cause (as I think) Asclepiades that famous Physician,
leaving in a manner the use of medicine, bent all his study to the order of
diet: As though diet were of such force, that by it diseases might be cured
better than by medicines. Or, as Cornelius Celsus says: Quia omnia fere
medicamenta stomachum laedunt, Cor. Cel. li. 5*
malique succisunt. And no doubt but that mean and temperate diet, in the
fear of God, is more commendable than all the delicate fare in the world, and
ought of the godly to be esteemed as a thing that best contenteth nature, and
preserves health. Which is not only confirmed by Solomon in his Proverbes,
Ca. 15. ver. 16. and ca. 27.17. Daniel* 1.12. Eccle. ca. 31.1^.
and by the example of the Prophet Daniel, but most manifestly by
Ecclesiasticus in these words. How little is sufficient for a man well taught
and thereby he belcheth not in his chamber nor feels any pain. A wholesome
sleep comes of a temperate belly. He rises up in the morning and is well
at ease in himself. But pain in watching and chollericke diseases, and pangs
of the belly are with an unsatiable man. And again, he says: Be not greedy in
all delights, and be not too hasty upon all meats: Eccle. ca. 37. ver.
28.19.30.
for excess of meats brings sickness, and gluttony comes into
choleric diseases. By surfeit have many perished: but he that dieteth
himself prolongeth his life. Whether diet may prolong life.
But some will say: may diet prolong a man's life? Why, Jesus Sirach says so.
And it is a common case defended by the Physicians, that Medicina vnam
prorogare potest. Because Physic is the ordinary means that God has
appointed for the preserving and recovering of health, and consequently for the
prolonging of life so long as his good pleasure is. Eccle. ca. 38 to the 13,
verse.
And though Physic cannot make a man immortal, nor surely defend him from
all outward harms, nor assure him to live out all his days, yet it makes us
sure of two things (as Avicenna says) in that it keeps the body from
corruption, and defends that natural moisture be not lightly dissolved and
consumed. But it is a common saying: Qui medice vivit, The force of Physic.
misere vivit. And a great punishment it is for a man to refrain his appetite.
As, for your youth to forbear fruit: for one that has the gout, to forbear
wine and women. Whereunto I answer, To keep a good diet is great happiness
that to live after the rules of Physic is to live in health. And to live in
health is great happiness: for health and strength is above all gold (as says
Jesus Syrach. Cap. 30.15.16.
) And a whole body above infinite treasure: so that for the inestimable
commodities of health, some have supposed that V^letudo is Summum bonum, as
Aristotle declares in his Ethiques. Lib. 1. cap. 4.
Now what a reproach is it, for man whom God has created after his own
likeness, and endued with reason, whereby he differs from beasts, to be
yet beastlike, to be moved by sense to serve his belly, to follow his appetite
contrary to reason? for as much as by the very order of nature, reason ought to
rule, Reason ought to rule appetite.
and all appetites are to be bridled and subdued, as the Philosopher notably
teaches in these words: Vt enim puer ex pedagogi praescriptione, Ethic. Lib.
3. c. 13
sic vis haec concupiscendi convenienter rationi debet vivere: Quocirca debet
in moderato viro ac temperante, rationi congruere ea pars animi, quae
cupiditatum est seeds: utrique enim propositum est id quod deceat. Nay, if a
man be naturally inclined (as the most part of men be) to one thing or other
contrary to reason, yet he should strive against that inclination, and do as
they do, which would make crooked things straight, that is, to bend them as
much as may be to the contrary. For, as the Poet Ovid says: Ethic. Lib. 3.
ca. ult.
Est virtus placidis abstinuisse bonis. and Fortior est qui se quam qui
fortissima vincit.

Whereof we have a worthy example in the Philosopher Socrates, Eras. in apo.
Socrates a singular example of abstinence and continence
who of set purpose oftentimes exercised and enured himself to endure hunger
and thirst: which be more hard to suffer than to feed moderately, and to
forbear that which reason forbids, although our appetite desire it. And
when he was demanded why he did so, that I may not accustom my self, (quoth
he) to follow my sensual appetites, lusts, and desires. Also the same
Philosopher affirms, that such as had well broken themselves to virtuous
living and temperate diet, did perceive and take of the same, both much more
pleasure and less pains, than such as with all high care and diligence did on
every side make provisio^ to have all things of pleasure. And I my self have
known some that have taken as must delight in drinking of small drink, as
others have by drinking of the strongest. And no marvel, Vera voluptas quid.
for true delight is best perceived, when appetite is ruled by reason, and not
contrariwise, as the Epicures imagine, who make voluptas summum bonum. As that
Philoxenus Erixius in Aristotle, who wished that nature had made his neck
longer than the neck of a Crane, Ethi. Lib. 3. Cap. 12. Philoxenus the Epicure.
to the end that he might have felt a long while the sweetness and pleasure of
meat and drink going down the throat. But he that has the Gowt will say, as
I have heard many Gentlemen say ere now: Drink wine, and have the Gowt:
Whether or no keeping of a diet do eas^ our malady
drink none, and have the Gowt. As who should say, that it makes no matter
what a man eats or drinks, for all is one so his stomach be to it. But this
opinion is both repugnant to reason and common experience. For who so has
commonly an aching head, if it proceed of a hoate cause, shall feel that by
drinking strong drink, the pain will be increased. And who so has a hot
stomach or inflammation of the Liver, shall plainly perceive that by hot wines
and spices it will become worse. And who so has a wound or sore to be healed,
shall find that by eating fresh Beef, Goose and garlic, Pigeons and Eeles,
and such like, the cure (...) not come so fast forward, as otherwise it (...).
What means this, but that meats and dri^kes do alter our bodies, and either
temper them or distemper them greatly? And no marvel seeing that such as the
food is, such is the bloo^* and such as the blood is, such is the flesh.
Wherefore I say to the Gentleman that has the Gout: (for poor men seldom
have it, because for the more part it grows through excess and ease) I say
that although the forbearing of wine and women, Surfeit and ease great causes of
the Gowt.
and other things noisome in that disease do not utterly take away the Gowt,
yet it will abate, qualify and abridge the pain, and make it much more
tolerable. And so I think of all other diseases whatsoever. And to prove that
good diet may preserve a man from sickness, I need to use no other example
than of Galen himself, who by the means of his temperate diet, (as he
witnesses) after he passed the age of 28 years until the time of his death,
(...). 5. cap. 1. de (...) good (...) of diet (...).
he was never grieved with any sickness, except the grudge of a Fever of one
day, and that happened only by too much labor, and lived, as Sipontinus
writes, 140 years, and dyed only through feebleness of nature. His diet
stood chiefly in three points, which I will here declare, that such as would
live long in health may endeavor to follow it. The first point was, Nunquam ad
satietatem comedere aut bibere. The second, Crudum nunquam gustare. The third,
Odorificum semper anhelitum spirare. ^hese three points, Galens diet stood
chiefly in three points.
whosoever will carefully (...), if he be of a ^ound constitution, may live
(...) in perfect health. I say, if he be of a ^ound consti^ution, for some are
so corrupt from their (...), that if Esculapius (as Galen speaks) were ever
at their elbow to advise them in their diet, ye^ could they not live out half
their days. And some that be of a ^ound constitution by nature, Intemperancy
corrupts the original complexion.
do yet through intemperancy so corrupt their complexion, that either they
live not until they be old, or else their old age is most fulsome and
loathsome. Whereof has risen that saying not so common as true, Intemperanter
acta inventus, effaetam parit senectutem. In this number chiefly be Courtiers,
Lords, Ladies, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, though not all, yet many more than of
the common people. For these commonly live not so long as the inferior sort. As
for learned men, (if they be Students indeed) through rest of the body, and
immoderate musing of the mind, they are not commonly so long lived (the more
it is to be lamented) as the vulgar sort. Wherefore that noble Philosopher
Theophrastus, Cice. 3. Tus. Theophrastus complaint of nature.
when he dyed, is reported to have accused nature, for that she had given long
life to Ravens and Crows, whom it nothing availed, and had given but a short
time to men, whom it behoved to live much longer, to the end that man's life
might be perfectly instructed with all manner of arts and disciplines. But I
trust your honor being chiefly moved by a special gift of Gods grace, and
partly following these and such like advertisements, will so diet your self,
that you may live long to the glory of God, to the benefit of the
commonwealth, and to the comfort of your friends: which God grant according to
the good pleasure of his will. And so I end, beseeching your honor to take
this my dedication in good part. And although the work be most unworthy of so
worthy a Patron: yet because it is an exercise of learning, whereof your honor
has been always a special favourer, my trust is that you will vouchsafe to
give it your protection, and the rather for that it is the fruit of your own
soil, I mean the testimony of a dutiful mind of the tenant toward his Lord
and Master. 1584.

Your Honors most humble Orator, Thomas Coghan.

Authoris carmen Sapphicum ad Lectorem, depromptum ex Ecclesiastico, Cap. 30.
verse. 14, 15, 16, 17.
QVisquis optata fruit^^ salute,
Sit licet pauper, tamen hic potenti
Diviti praestat, mala quem flagellat
Invaletudo.
Praestat argento superatque fulvum
Sanitas aurum, super atque censum,
Quamvis ingentem, validaeque vires
Omnia praestant.
Vita languescens pr^perant^ morte,
P^i^r est multo: requiesque dulcis,
Anteit long miserum dol^rem
Corporis aegri.
Si sapis, quaeres igitur salutem.
En tibi portus patefit salutis.
Hunc ^^ne, (...) ^^uere and salute:
Viv^ valeque.
To the Reader.
BEcause this Treatise chiefly concerns the diet of our English nation, I
have thought good, (most gentle Reader) first to declare the situation and
temperature of this our country of England, and next to set down the reason
and order of the whole book. Touching the situation, if we consider the
division of the whole earth habitable into four parts, that is, Europe,
Afric, Asia, and America, then is England a parcel of Europe, and situated
on the West side thereof, yea, so far West, as of old time it has been
thought, ( Cornelius Tacitus witnessing the same in the life of Julius
Agricola) that beyond England dwelled no Nation, Nihil nisi fluctus and saxa.
And as the Poet Horace speaks, ultimos orbis Britannos. Whereas now through
the providence of God, and travail of men there is found further in the West,
as it were a new world, a goodly country named America, or new India, for
largeness, plenty, wholesome and temperate air, comparable with Affrike,
Europe, or Asia. Again, if we respect the division of all the earth into five
parts called in Latin Zonae, correspondent to the division of the heavens by
five circles, that is to say, the Equinoctial circle, the two Tropickes, the
one of Cancer, the other of Capricornus, the circle Articke, and the contrary
Antarticke, which are briefly and plainly set forth by the Poet Ovid in the
first book of his Metamorphosis, in this manner: Vtque duae dextra coelum,
totidemque sinistra
Part secant Zona: quinta est ardentior illis:
Sic onus inclusum numero distinxit eodem
Cura Dei, totidemque plagae tellure premuntur.
Quarum qua media est non est habitabilis aestu.
N^x tegit alta duas, totidem inter utramque locavit
Temperi^mque dedit mixta cum frigore flamina.


Then I say of five parts of the earth, those two which lie about the Poles,
within the circle Articus and Antarticus, through extremity of cold, are
inhabitable: (as of old time has been thought,) howbeit now certain Islands
are discovered within the circle Articke, and found to be inhabited. The third
and greatest part which lies in the mids between the two Tropickes, by
reason of the continual course of the Sun over it, and the direct casting of
the Sun beams upon it, named Torrida Zona, as burned or parched with
overmuch heat, has likewise been thought inhabitable, yet now found
otherwise: considering the greatest part of Africa well inhabited, and no small
portion of Asia, with sundry Islands adjoining do lie within this compass, yet
by the judgment of Orontius a man very expert in Cosmography, right under the
Equinoctial is most temperate and pleasant habitation: for so he says:
Torrida inprimis quanquam assidua Solis irradiatione arescere videatur, Lib^ 2.
sph. ca. 8.
sub ipso tamen aequatore, faelicissima a^ris temperatura c^teras omnes
antecellit. The other two parts only, of which the one lies Northward,
between the circle Articke and the Tropicke of Can^er, the other Southward
between the circle Antartick and the Tropicke of Cap^icorne, are counted
temperate and habitable regions, because they are tempered with heat on the
Southside, and cold on the Northside. Howbeit these parts also about the
midst of them are most temperate. For toward their utmost bounds they are
distempered with heat or cold according to the Zones next adjoined. Now in the
temperate Zone Northward lies our country of Britain. After Appianus,
England within the eight Clime called Dia Ripheon, and Scotland in the ninth
called Dia Darvas, or after Orontius, whose judgment I rather allow, England
in the ninth Clyme, and Scotland in the eleventh: for the old division of the
earth, according to the latitude into seven Climates, Orontius utterly
rejects, and thinks the famous universitie and City of Paris in France, to
be placed about the end of the eight Clime, because the latitude of the earth,
or elevation of the pole Articke (for both are one in effect) is there 48
degrees; and 40 minutes. The same reason do I make for England, because the
pole Articke is exalted at London 51 degrees and 46 minutes, and at Oxford 51
degrees and 50 minutes, that therefore England should be the ninth Clime,
because the distance of parallels from the Equator is after Orontius in the
ninth Clinie, all one with our elevation. England then lies in the temperate
Zone Northward, and the ninth Climate, having on the South-East side France, on
the North-East, Norwey, on the South-West Spain, on the West Ireland, on the
North Scotland. Now concerning the temperature of the air in England, whether
it be in a mean, or do exceed the mean, in heat, cold, dryth or moisture,
shall best be perceived by comparison of other countries. Hippocrates in the
end of his third book of Prenotions, sets down three Countries for example
of temperate or untemperate air in heat or cold, that is Libya, Delos and
Scythia, Libya or Affricke* as over hot, Scythia or Tartaria as over cold, and
the Island Delos of Greece as mean and temperate betwixt both. The like
comparison is made of Aristotle in the 7. book and 7. Chapter of his
Politikes. Those nations (says he) which inhabit cold countries, are
courageous, but they have little wit and cunning. Wherefore they live in more
liberty, and hardly receive good governance of the weal public, neither can
they well rule their borderers. And such as dwell in Asia, excel in wit and
art, but they want audacitie, for which cause they live in subjection to
others. But the Graecians as they have a Country in a mean between both, so
have they both qualities. For they are both valiant and witty. Whereby it
comes to pass that they live at liberty, and have good government, and such
a state as may rule all other. Hereunto I will add the judgment of Galen that
famous Physician, written in the second book de San. tu. and 7. Chapter, which
may be as an interpretation of Hippocrates and Aristotle. The best temperature
of body (says he) is as a rule of Polycletus, such as in our situation being
very temperate, you may see many. But in France, Scythia, Egypt or Arabia, a
man may not so much as dream of any like. And of our Country which has no
small latitude, that part which lies in the midst is most temperate, as the
Country of Hippocrates: for that there VVinter and Summer has a mean
temperature, and at the Spring and fall of the leaf much better. So that
Greece by the judgment of these men is most temperate, and France distempered
with cold by the opinion of Galen. And if France exceed the mean in cold, then
is not England in a perfect temperature, but more declining to cold, because it
is three degrees and ten minutes farther North, comparing Oxford and Paris
together in the elevation of the Pole Artick. Howbeit Julius Caesar in the fifth
book of his commentaries, thinks the air to be more temperate in Britain,
(in those places where he was) than in France, and the cold lesser. And
Polidorus Virgilius in his Chronicle of England seems to be of the same
mind. The country (says he) is at all times of the year most temperate, and
no extremity of weather, so that diseases be rare, and therefore less use of
Physic than elsewhere. And many men all abroad do live a hundred and ten
years, and some a hundred and twenty, yet he thinks the air for the most
part to be cloudy and rainy, which also is confirmed by Cornelius Tacitus in
the life of Julius Agricola, saying: The air of Britain is foul with often
storms and clouds, without extremity of cold. But to reconcile these sayings
of ancient authors, I think that England may be called temperate in heat in
respect of Spain, and temperate in cold in respect of Norwey, yet to be
reckoned cold notwithstanding and moist, because it declineth from the mids of
the temperate Zone Northward. And this is the cause why Englishmen do eat
more, and digest faster than the inhabitants of hotter countries ( videlicet)
the coldness of air enclosing our bodies about. And therefore we provide
that our tables may be more plentifully furnished oftentimes, than theirs of
other nations. Which provision, though it proceed chiefly of that plenty which
our country yields, is yet notwithstanding noted by foreign nations, as of
Hadrianus Barlandus in a dialogue between the Inholder and the traveller,
saying in this manner: Ego curavero ut Anglice, hoc est opulentissime pariter
ac lautissime discumbant. Thus much touching the situation and temperature of
England.

Now concerning the order of the book: Hippocrates in the sixth book of his
Epidemies sets down this sentence, Labor, Cibus, Potio, Somnus, Venus,
omnia mediocri^: as a short sum or form of a man's whole life touching diet.
By the which words (if we mark them well as they be placed in order) not only
the time most convenient for every thing to be used, but also the measure in
using is plainly signified in the word ( Mediocri^) according to that saying
of Terence, Id apprime in vita esse vtile, ut ni quid nimis. Every man
therefore that has a care of his health as much as he may, must not only use
a measure in those five things, that is to say, in labor, meat, drink,
sleep, and venus, but also must use them in such order as Hippocrates has
proposed them, that is, to begin the preservation of health with labor,
after labor to take meat, after meat, drink: after both sleep: and venus
last of all. And not contrariwise, using Hysteron Proteron, to begin with
venus, and to end in labor, like as I have heard say of a gentleman who had
been a traveller in foreign countries, and at his return, that he might
seem singular, as it were despising the old order of England, would not begin
his meal with pottage, but instead of cheese would eat pottage last. But wise
English men I trust will use the old English fashion still: and follow the r^le
of Hippocrates approved by Galen, and by common experience in men's bodies found
most wholesome. Such as have written of the preservation of health before me,
for the most part have followed the division of Galen of things not natural,
which be six in number: Air, Meat, and Drink, Sleep and watch, Labor and
rest, Emptiness and repletion, and affections of the mind. Which be called
things not natural, because they be no portion of a natural body, as they
be which be called natural things, but yet by the temperance of them the
body being in health, so continues by the distemperance of them, sickness is
induced, and the body dissolved. This division Sir Thomas Eliot knight, no
less learned than worshipful, in his Castle of Health has precisely
followed, and has set forth every part right according to Galen, as plain as
may be, in the English tongue. Yet (in my judgment) this Aphorism of
Hippocrates, which I purpose (God willing) to declare, is more evident for the
common capacity of men, and more convenient for the diet of our English Nation.
For who is so dull of understanding that cannot remember these five words,
Labor, Cibus, Potio, Somnus, Venus, and in using them apply Omnia Mediocria.
Yet I know that the division aforesaid being well scanned may be found in a
manner wholly comprehended in this short sentence. For exercise is to be used
in an wholesome air, and affections of the mind do commonly follow the
temperature of the body which is chiefly preserved by the moderate use of
those five things. Then whether we follow in diet Galens division into six
things not natural, or this rule of Hippocrates comprehended in five words,
there is no great difference, saving that in writing for the instruction of
others, that Method is to used which is most brief and manifest. And this is
the cause gentle Reader, why I have taken another order than such as have
written of this matter before me, even that order (as I think) which of all
other is the best: Herein to give a watch word as it were, or occasion to
others that be better learned and more at leisure to handle these points more
perfectly. And in the mean time I trust every well disposed person will
thankfully accept this my good intent, considering that none other cause has
moved me hereto but only the good will I bear first to the learned sort, who
have most need of wholesome counsayles, and consequently to all those that love
to live in health. And as the words are placed in order, so shall in order
prosecute them. Yet one thing I desire of all them that shall read this book:
If they find whole sentences taken out of Master Eliot his Castle of Health,
or out of Schola Salerni, or any other author whatsoever, that they will not
condemn me of vain glory, by the old Proverb ( Calvus Comatus) as if I meant
to set forth for mine own works that which other men have devised: for I
confess that I have taken Verbatim out of others where it served for my
purpose, and especially out of Schola Salerni: but I have so enterlaced it with
mine own, that (as I think) it may be the better perceived. And therefore
seeing all my travail tends to common commodity, I trust every man man will
interpret all to the best. Candide lector, etiam atque etiam vale.

THE HAVEN OF HEALTH.
CHAP. 1. What labor is, the commodity thereof, the difference of labors,
the preparation to labor, the time, the measure of labor.
THE first word in order of that golden sentence proposed by Hippocrates, is
labor, Epid. ^.
which in this place signifies exercise. For so is the word Labor commonly
taken of Hippocrates, as Galen witnesses, saying: Epid. 6. com. 6.
Hoc nomen labor saepius consuevit Hipp. pro exercitatione accipere. Labor
then, What labor is.
or exercise, is a vehement moving, the end whereof is alteration of the breath
or wind of man. Of exercise do proceed many commodities, but especially
three. The benefit of Exercise.
The first is hardness and strength of the members, whereby labor shall the
less grieve, and the body be more strong to labor. And that exercise or labor
does strengthen the body, beside the witness of Galen, where he says, Li. 1. de
Sa. tuen*
Exercitationibus etiam firmitas quaedam membris accidit, cum and naturalis
ipse (...) accenditur, and ex partium inter se attritu duritia quaedam
indolentiaque comparatur, it is proved by experience in laborers, who for the
more part be stronger than learned men, and can endure greater toil. Whereof
we have a notable example in Milo Crotoniates, Milo Crotoniates.
who by the use of carrying a Calfe everyday certain furlongs, was able to
carry Ovid: C^rnis ut ignavum corrum pantotia corpus*
Lib. de ponto.
Vt ^apiant vitium ni moveantur aquae.


Cor. C^l. lib. 1.
Which also is affirmed by Cornelius Celsus, saying: Ignavia corpus hebetat,
labor firmat. Illa maturam senectutem, hic longam adolescentiam reddit. Yea
Galen himself is of the same mind, for thus he says: Siculi quies corporis
deses prorsus maximum est ad tuendam sanitatem incommodum, Lib. de Suc. ^on.
and vitio. cap. 3.
sic plane maximus fuerit in medio^ri motione usus. Difference of exercise.
But there is great difference of exercises. For some are swift, as running,
playing with weapons, throwing of the Ball. Some are strong or violent, as
wrestling, casting the bar. Some are vehement, as dancing, leaping, football
play. Again, some are exercises only, as those now rehearsed, and other
mentioned of Galen, not used among us. Some are not only exercises, but works
also, as to dig or delve, to ear or plow land, or to do any other work
appertaining to husbandry, or whatsoever Crafts men of any occupation are
wont* to do for the use and commodity of man's life. For these as they are
labors, so are they exercises, and make a good state or liking of the body, 1.
Aphoris. com. 3.
as Galen declares, and is found true by common experience in England. For
Husbandmen and Craftesmen, Laborers more healthful than learned men.
for the more part do live longer and in better health, than Gentlemen and
learned men, and such as live in bodily rest. Wherefore Galen himself sometime
used rusticall labors, especially in winter: as to cleave wood, Lib. 2. de Sa.
Tuen. cap. 8.
to punne Barley, and such like. Again, The proper exercises of all parts of
the body.
some exercises are appropriated to the parts of the body, as running, and
going are the proper exercises of the Legs, Moving of the arms up and down,
or stretching them out, as in shooting and playing with weapons, serves most
for the arms and shoulders. Stooping and rising oftentimes, as playing at the
Bowls, as lifting great waights, taking up of Plummets or other like poyses on
the end of staves, these do exercise the back and loins. Of the bulk and
lungs the proper exercise is moving of the breath in singing, reading, or
crying. The Muscles and together wi^h them the sinews, veins, arteries,
bones, are exercised consequently, by the moving of the parts aforesaid. The
stomach and entrals, and thighs, and reins of the back are chiefly exercised
by riding. As for sitting in a boat or barge which is rowed, riding in a horse
Litter, Coach or Waggen, is a kind of exercise which is called gestation: and
is mixed with moving and rest, and is convenient for them that be weak and
impotent, or in long and continual sickness. Tenis play is the best exercise
of all other. Galen de pravae pilae exercitatione.
But above all other kinds of exercises, Galen most commends the play with
the little ball, which we call Tenise, in so much that he has written a
peculiar book of this exercise, and prefers it before hunting, and all other
pastimes. Because it may be easily used of all estates, as being of little
cost. But chiefly for that it does exercise all parts of the body alike, as the
legs, arms, neck, head, eyes, back and loins, and delights greatly the
mind, making it lusty and cheerful. All which commodities may be found in
none other kind of exercise. For they strein more one part of the body than an
other, as shooting the arms, running the legs, etc. wherefore those Founders
of Colleges are highly to be praised, that have erected Tenis-courts, for the
exercise of their Scholars: and I counsel all Students as much as they may to
use that pastime. Notwithstanding I restrain no man from his natural
inclination, Eglo. 2. (...). 2. Ser. Sa. 1.
for I know that to be true which Virgil writes, Trahit sua quemque voluptas.
And as Horace says, Castor gaudet equis ^vo prognatus eodem
Pugnis* quot vivunt capitum totidem studiorum
Millia --


^he games of (...)
For in the Mount Olympus in Greece where the most principal plays and
exercises of all the World, were solemnlie kept and used every fifth year,
first ordained by Hercules the Champion (as it is thought) all men did not
practice one only kind of activitie, but every man as he was minded so he
applied himself. There was wrestling, running with Horses, and on foot,
turning, leaping, coarsing with Charriots, contentions of Poets, Rhetoricians,
Musicians, disputations of Philosophers and others. So I restrain no man from
his natural inclination, but I show what exercise is best by the judgment of
Galen. But least that by the violence of heat kindled by exercise, (...)
preparati^^ to exercise.
any of the excrements should hastily be received into the habit of the body,
also least some thing which is whole should by heaviness of excrements or
violent motion be broken or pulled out of place, or that the excrements by
violence of the breath should stop the Pores or Conduits of the body, the old
Greeks and Romans were wont to use fricacies or rubbings before exercise, in
this manner. First, Frications.
to rubb the body with a course linen cloth softly and easily, and after to
increase more and more to a hard and swift rubbing, until the flesh do swell
and be somewhat ruddie: then to anoint it with sweet Oil, stroking it every
way gently with bare hands. Three sorts of rubbings.
And of fricacies they have made generally three sorts, first hard rubbing to
bind or consolidate, then soft rubbing to loose or mollify, and lastly mean
rubbing to augment and increas^ flesh. But this kind of preparation whereof
Galen has written abundantly in his second Book De Sa. Tuen. is not used in
England, and therefore I will end it with a merry tale of Augustus the
Emperor, and an old Soldier. On a time as the Noble Emperor Augustus came to
a Bath, A merry tale of rubbing.
he beheld an old man that had done good service in the Wars rubbing
himself against a Marble Pillar, for lack of one to help him. The Emperor
moved with pity gave an annuity, to find him a servant to wait upon him. When
this was known, a great sort of old soldiers drew themselves together and
stood where as the Emperor should pass by every one of them rubbing his back
against the stones; the Emperor demanded why they did so, because Noble
Emperor say they, we be not able to keep servants to do it. Why (quoth the
Emperor) one of you might clawe and rub another back well enough. So wisely
did he delude the practice of Parasites, according to the old Proverb, ^^li
^ut^um scabunt. Notwithstanding Master Eliote reports of himself, that he
found great commodity in one kind of fricacie, which is thus: A kind of
rubbing good for all men.
In the morning after we have been at the stool, with our shirt sleeves or
bare hands, (if our flesh be tender) first softly, and afterward faster to rub
the breasts and sides downward and overtwhart, not touching the stomach and
belly, and after to cause our servant sembably to rub overtwhart the shoulders
and back, beginning at the neck bone, not touching the reins of the back,
except we do there feel much cold and wind and afterward the legs from the
knee to the ankle, last, the arms from the elbow to the hand-wrest. And for
those that cannot exercise their bodies at convenient times, either because
they are let with necessary business, or else by reason of utter weakness,
this kind of rubbing may well be used in stead of exercise. Supplet enim
fricatio exercitium, as Georgius Pectorius writes. But leaving all kind of
fricacies to such as have leisure, Exercitatio (...) praerequirit.
I prescribe none other preparation to be used before exercise, but only
evacuation of excrements from all such parts as nature has appointed
thereunto. That is, when you are risen from sleep, to walk a little up and
down, that so the superfluity of the stomach, guts, and liver, may the more
speedily descend, and the more easily be expelled. That done, to wash your
face and hands with clean cold water, Washing of the face, and bathing of the
eyes.
and especially to bath and plunge the eyes therein: For that not only
cleanses away the filth, but also comfort, and greatly preserves the
sight, (as Avice^ writes) whereof Students should have a special care.
Moreover to extend and stretch out your hands, and feet, and other limbs, that
the vital spirits may come to the utter parts of the body. Also to comb your
head, Caput pe^tore a front^ cervicem versus optimum est.

Rubbing of the teeth.


that the pores may be opened to avoid such vapors as yet by sleep are not
consumed. Then to rub and cleanse the teeth. For the filthiness of the teeth
is noisome to the Brain, to the breath, and to the stomach. They may be
cleansed (as Cornelius Celsus teaches) by washing the mouth with cold water,
Lib. 1. cap. 2.
putting thereto a little Vinegar. And with the same (if you list) you may
gargarize or guddle in your throat, and after rub them hard with a dry
cloth. Some use to rub their teeth and gummes when they wash, with a Sage
Leaf or two, which is good to preserve them from corruption and abateth the
rank savor of the mouth. All these things (which are six in number) are
briefly comprehended in Schola Salerni, as follows* Lumina mane, manus
surgens gelida lavetunda,
Hac illac modicum pergat, Cap. 2.
modicum sua membra
Extendat, ^rines pectat, dentes fricet, ista
Confortant cerebrum confortant caetera membra.


After this preparation, as occasion shall serve, you may fall to exercise* yet
first you must diligently consider where and when (that is to say) the place
and time. The place and time of exercise.
The place where exercise is to be used does chiefly concern the air, which
among all things, not natural, as in habitation, so in exercise is greatly to
be regarded, for as much as it does both enclose us about, and also enter into
our bodies, Air.
especially the most noble member which is the heart, and we cannot be
separate one hour from it for the necessity of breathing. Four properties of
wholesome air.
Wherefore exercise must be used in a good and wholesome air, which
consists in four Schola Saler^i: Lucid^^ and (...) habitabilis der,
Infectus neque sit, nec deus faetore cloa^^.


The fittest time of exercise. Epid. 6. Sect. 4.
Now for the time when you should exercise, that Divine Physician Hippocrates
teaches us plainly saying, (...). Whose authority Galen following says;
Sanitatis tutelam ^ labor est auspicandum, quem excipere debe^t, Lib. 2. de
Sa. Tuen. cap. 2.
cibus, potio, deinde somnus, mox venus, in iis videlicet quibus venere est
utendum. We must begin the preservation of health with labor, after that
take meat, drink, and so forth. The time then most convenient for exercise, is
when both the first and second digestion is complete, as well in the stomach,
as in the veins, and that the time approaches to eat again. For if you do
exercise sooner or later, you shall either fill the body with raw humors, or
else augment yellow choler. The color of the Urine shows when we should
exercise.
The knowledge of this time is perceived by the color of the urine; for that
which resembles unto clear water, betokens that the juice which comes
from the stomach i^ (...) in the veins, that which is well colored not too
high or base, betokens that the second digestion is now perfect. Where the
color is very high or red, it signifies that the concoction is more than
sufficient: wherefore when the urine appears in a temperate color, not red
nor pale, but as it were gilt, then should exercise have his beginning. By this
means does Galen try out the time most fit for exercise. But because every
man has not skill to judge of urine, or has not leisure or opportunity to
view his water in a glass as often as he would or should exercise, for the
time most convenient, it shall be sufficient to remember that golden sentence
of Hippocrates, Inst lib. 2. cap. ^.
Labores cibos antecedant. Let exercise be used before meat. Which rule (as
that famous Physician Fuchsius notes) is unadvisedly neglected in the Schools
of Germany. For there the Scholars never exercise, An abuse of exercise
touching the time.
but forthwith after meat either leaping, or running, or playing at the ball,
or coyting, or such like. And the same abuse is ripe among us here in England,
both in Universities, and in the Grammar Schools. Wherefore it is no marvel
if Scholars oftentimes be troubled with scabs, and other infirmities, growing
of corrupt humors, because by that means great store of raw humors are
engendered and brought forth to the skin: (according to the saying of
Hippocrates) Si impurgatus laboraverit, ulcera crumpent. Wherefore I counsel
all Students not to exercise immediately after meat, Epid. 6. Sect. 5. Apho. 33.
for by that means the meat is conveyed into all the members, before it be
concocted or boiled sufficiently. Yet to rise up after meat, and to stand
upright for a while, Rise up after meat.
or to walk softly a little is very wholesome: that so the meat may descend to
the bottom of the stomach, where (as Avicenna writes) rests the virtue of
concoction, and is one of the first lessons in Schola Salerni, Surgere post
epulas. But hasty moving drives the natural heat from the inward parts, and
causes ill digestion. As for craftsmen, and laborers, if any demand the
question, how they can have their health, and fall to work straight after they
have eaten, I answer with Virgil; G^^r. 1. De San. Tu. lib. 1.
Labor omnia vincit improbus. And as Galen writes; Nos neque Germanis, neque
aliis agrestibus, aut Barbaris hominibus haec prodimus, non magis equidem quam
Vrsis, Apris, aut Leonibus aut aliis id genus: sed Graecis, and iis qui tametsi
genere sunt Barbari, Graecorum tamen aemulantur studia. So I write not these
precepts for laboring men, but for students, and such, as though they be no
students, do yet follow the order and diet of students. The exercise of the
Emperor Antoni^^.
Antoninus the Roman Emperor, who lived in Galens time, and had a special
care of his health, was wont to come to the wrestling place about Sunne-setting
when days were at the shortest, and about nine or ten of the clock when they
were at the longest. Palestra.
Whose example if any list to follow (as Georgius Pictorius does interpret) he
should exercise in Summer six hours before noone, and in the Winter, in the
afternoon at Sun going down, and in the Spring time near by noone. But I
restrain no man to the hour, so it be done according to the rules aforesaid,
Three things to be observed touching the time of exercise.
that is, briefly to conclude, Excrementis expulsis, In aere salubri, and Ante
comedendum. Yet it is not sufficient in exercise to observe the time, the
place, the things proceeding* except we keep a measure therein: which also is
taught by Hippocrates in the word ( mediocria.) And although every man does
know (as Cicero says) that In omnibus rebus mediocritas est optima, Offic. 1.
that measure is a merry mean, yet few can hit that mean, as well in other
things, as in this, unless they be directed by a certain rule. Wherefore
Galen, who leaves nothing unperfect, Lib. 1. de San. Tuen. cap. 12. The
measure of exercise.
sets down four notes by the which we may know how long we should
exercise, and when we should give over. The first is, to exercise until the
flesh do swell. The second is, until Hippocrates shows; In exercitationibus
signum extenuationis est sudor, guttatim emanans, Epi 6. Sect. 3: Aphoris. 4.
qu^que tanquam a rivulis egreditur, aut a tumore contractio. As who should
say* sweat and abating of the flesh, are two of the chiefest signs to know
when we should give over exercise. This measure Pythagoras, that was first
named a Philosopher, though no Physician has yet defined in his golden verses.

(...),
(...)
(...).
Thus Latined by Vit^^ Amerlachius: Corporis and debes non intermittere curam,
Inqu^cibo p^^^que modus sit, gymnastisque.
Hoc ^ie^ lass^^ si te non illa gravabunt.


The same in effect is uttered by the excellent Greek Orator Isocrates, in his
Oration ad Demonicum. (...). Thus Latined by V^ol^^^, Eas corporis
exercitationes ampl^ctere, quae valetudini potius quamquae ad rob^^ pro^unt:
quod ita consequere, s^la^orare de^ina^, dum adhuc laborare quea^. The remedy
of immoderate exercise.
Now as I have showed what time we should give over exercise, so here I will
end my treatise of exercise, if first I shall declare what remedy is to be
used against weariness which comes by immoderate labor, either voluntary or
necessary, for we cannot always keep the mean, but we must do as cause
requires. Weariness, as all other infirmities of the body, is cured by the
contrary: that is to say, Lib. 2. Apho. 42.
by rest. According to the saying of Hipp. In omni corporis motu, quum fatigari
coeperit, quies confestim lassitudinis est remedium. For when the body is tired
through overmuch labor, and the strength fails, and natural moisture
decays, then rest for a time recovereth the strength, reviveth the spirits,
and makes the limbs able to endure labor, whereas otherwise they would soon
languish and pine away. Which thing Ovid well perceived, as appears where he
says; Quod car^^ alterna requie, durabile non est. Lib. 2. Epist. ^.

Haec revocat vires, fessaque membra levat.


Where the Poet has worthily added the word ( A^^erna) that is to say (done by
course) for as it is not convenient always to labor, so is it not good always
to rest. For that were idleness or slothfulness, which corrupts both the
body and soul. For in the body through immoderate rest, i^ engendered cruditie,
and great store of noisome humors. Lib. de morb. cau. ca. 3.
Wherefore Galen reckons Idleness or immoderate rest, among the causes of cold
diseases. And what inconvenience does grow to the soul thereby, Christ
himself does teach in his Gospel, where he says* It is better for a man to
rip his Coat and sow it again, than to be idle. But moderate rest does
comfort both the body and mind, Li. 1. de pont*
as Ovid writes: (...) corpus alu^^ animus quoque pascitur illis:
Immodicus contra, carpit utrumque labor.


Wherefore I will conclude with that notable sentence of Galen* De Suc. bo.
and vi. ca. 3.
as sluggish rest of the body is a very great discommoditie to the preserving
of health, so no doubt in moderate motion there is very great commodity.

CHAP. 2. Of study or exercise of the mind in what order we may study without
hinderance of our health.
AS man does consist of two parts, that is of body, and soul; so exercise is
of two sorts, that is to say, of the body, and of the mind. Hitherto I have
spoken of exercise of the body, now I will entreat of exercise of the mind,
which is Study: that is (as Hugo de Sancto Victore defines it) Assidua ^^
sagax retractatio cogitationis aliquid involutum explicare ^ite^s, What study
i^.
vel scrutans penetrare occultum. This kind of exercise (as Tullie writes) is
the natural nourishment of the mind and wit, Acad. 4.
for so he says, E^t animorum ingeniorumque nostrorum natural quasi quoddam
pabulu^, considerati contemplatioque naturae, doctoque homini and ^rudito
cogitare est vivere. And likewise, Tantus est innatus in nobis cognitionis amor
and scientiae, ut ^^mo dubitare possit quin ad eos res hominum natura (...)
invitata ra^iatur. Which thing may well be perceived eve^ in little children;
for as soon as they have gotten strength to go of themselves, they are as
busy as flees, and they devise a thousand toys to be occupied in. Which
motions no doubt proceed from the mind: For (as Tullie says) Agitatio mentis
nunquam acquiescit. Offi. 1. Idleness is against nature.
Idleness therefore is not only against nature, but also dulleth the mind,
as Ovid worthily writes: Lib. 5. de Trist.


Add, quod ingenium longa rubigi^e laesum,
Torpet, and est multo quam fuit ante minus.
Fertilis assiduo si non renevetur aratro
Nil nisi cum spinis gramen habebit ager.
Wherefore notable is that counsel of Isocrates ad Demonicum, (...). Thus
Latined by Vol^ius: Da operam ut corpore sis laboriosus, animo studiosus: Nam
ut moderatis laboribus corpora, sic honesta doctrina mentes augeri solent.
Which lesson Publius Scipio who first was named Ap^ricanus, well followed, as
Tullie alleges by the witness of Cato; whose saving, because it is worthy
and most fit for students, Offic. 3. Scipio his saying to be followed of
students.
I will recite verbatim: Dicere solebat Scipio, Nunquam se minus otiosum esse
quam cum otiosus, ne^ minus solum quam dum solus esset. Of this saying Tullie
speaks as follows; Magnifi^^ ve^o v^x ac magno viro ac sapiente digna, quae
declarat illum and in o^^o de negotiis cogitare, and in sol^tudine secum loqui
solitum, vt neque cessaret unquam, and interdum colloquio alterius non egeret.
Itaque duae res quae languorem afferunt caeteris, illum acuebant, tium and
solitudo. Leisure then and solitariness are two of the chiefest things
appertaining to studi^; which two who so has obtained, and is (...)* (as
Isocrates speaks) that is to say discendi cupidus, let him him observe these
rules following: Mane cito lectum ^uge, mollem discute somnum:
Templa petas supplex, and venerare Deum.


Those things presupposed which I have spoken of in the preparation of exercise
of the body, How to begin our study.
this golden lesson of Lilly is next to be observed. And if you go not to
the Church, yet forget not ( venerare Deum.) And for this purpose no time is
more convenient than the morning. The morning most fit for prayer.
Which the Prophet David every where witnesses in his Psalms, namely Psalm
5. saying: Quoniam ad te orabo domine mane exau^ies vocem meam, mane astabo
tibi, and videbo, quoni^m non Deu^ volens iniquitatem es tu. And for study how
much better the morning is than other times of the day, the reasons following
may declare. First of all there be three Planets (as the Astronomers teach)
most favorable to learning; that is, Sol, Venus and Mercury; these three in a
manner meeting together when night approaches, depart from us, but when day
draws near, they return and visit us again. The best time for study is the
morning.
Wherefore the best time for study is early in the morning, when the Planets
be favorable to our purpose. Again, when the Sun arises, the air is
moved, and made more clear and subtle, and the blood, and spirits of our
bodies do naturally follow the motion and inclination of the Air. Wherefore
the morning or sun rising, A good counsel for students.
is most fit for study. Aristotle therefore in his Oeconomikes, not without
great cause bids us to rise before day, and says that it prevails greatly
both to the health of the body, and to the study of Philosophy. Whose counsel
that famous Orator of Greece Demosthenes, diligently followed (as Tullie
reports of him) Dolere se ^iebat Demosthenes, Tuscu. 4.
si quando opificum antelucana victus esset industria; whose good example I
wish all students to follow* having always in mind this short sentence*
Aurora Musis amica: and not to imitate the practice of Bonacius a young man, of
whom Poggius the Florentine makes mention. This Bonacius was wont to lie long
in bed, and when he was rebuked of his fellows of so doing, An example of a
slothful Scholar.
he answered smiling, that he gave ear to certain persons who contended and
disputed before him. For as soon as I awake, said he, there appears in the
shape of women, Solicitudo and Pigritia; Carfulness and slothfulness:
Carfulness bids me to rise and fall to some work, and not to spend the
day in my bed. Contrariwise slothfulness bids me lie still, and take mine
ease, and keep me from cold in my warm Couch. Thus while they vary and
wrangle, I like an indifferent judge inclining to neither part, lie harkening
and looking when they will agree: and by this means the day is overpassed or I
beware. This young man's practice I leave to loytering Lurd^ines, and return
again to diligent students, How long we should study without intermission.
who having used the preparation aforesaid must apply themselves earnestly to
reading and meditation for the space of an hour: then to remit a little their
cogitation, and in the mean time with an Ivory Comb to kembe their head from
the forehead backwards about forty times, and to rub their teeth with a coarse
linen cloth. Then to return again to meditation for two hours, or one at
the least, so continuing, but always with some intermission, until toward
noone; and sometimes two hours after noone, though seldom, except we be
forced to eat in the mean season, for the Sun is of great power at the
rising, and likewise being in the midst of the heavens: And in that part also
which is next to the midst, which the Astronomers call the ninth part and the
house of wisdom, the Sun is of great virtue. Now because the Poets do
account the Sun as Captain of the Muses and Sciences, if any thing be
deeply to be considered, we must meditate thereon especially the hours
aforesaid. As for the residue of the day is convenient rather to revolve things
read before, than to read or muse of new: Afternoon study not very good.
Always remembered that every hour once at the least we remit a little while
the earnest consideration of the mind; neither should we meditate any longer
than we have pleasure therein; for all weariness is hurtful to health;
weariness of the body is evil, but weariness of the mind is worse, and
weariness of both worst of all: For contrary motions draws as it were a man
in sunder and destroys life. But nothing is more hurtful than studying in
the night: Lucubratio nocturna studi^sis inimica.
for while the Sun shines over us, through the power thereof the pores of
the body are opened, and the humors and spirits are drawn from the inner
parts outward. And contrariwise, after the Sun sets the body is closed up,
and natural heat fortified within. Wherefore to watch, Why study is better by
day than night.
and to be occupied in mind or body in the day t^me is agreeable to the
motions of the humors and spirits; but to watch and to study in the night, is
to strive against nature* and by contrary motions to impair both the body and
mind. Again by continual operation of the air, opening the Pores, there
follows exhalation and consumption of the vital spirits, whereby the stomach
is greatly weakened, and requires a renewing and repairing of the Spirits, which
may best be done in the season when natural hea^ returns from without to the
inward parts. Wherefore whosoever at that time shall begin long and difficult
contemplation, shall of force draw the spirits from the stomach to the head,
and so leave the stomach destitute: whereby the head shall be filled with
vapors, and the meat in the stomach for want of heat, shall be undigested or
corrupted. Well therefore says Erasmus* Nocturnae lucubrationes long
periculosis^imae habentur. Notwithstanding I know that such as be good
Students indeed, having always in mind that notable saying of Plinius, Omne
perire tempus quod studio non impertias; do spare no time neither night nor
day from their books. Whereof Pliny himself has given a goodly example*
Pliny his diligence to be followed of Students.
in that by his own testimony, he wrote that most excellent work called the
History of nature, Noctibus et succisi^is temporibus. Yea Galen in his old age
(as he writes) was fai^e to care Lettuse boiled; Lib. 2. al^sa^. cap. 40.
of purpose to make him sleep, Quod in juventute (says he) meap^e sponte
vigiliis a^uever^m. And again he says, Vrgebam ego studia supra condiscipulos
omnes non interdiu solum* De. Succo. ^on. and vi. cap. 1.
sed etiam noct^^. As for poor Students they must follow the example of
Cleanthes, who in the night time, by drawing of water, got wherewithal to
find himself in the day to study Philosophy under Chris^p^us, or the example
of that Noble King Alared or Alfrede, the first Founder of the University of
Oxford, who divided the day and the night into three parts, and spent eight
hours in eating, drinking and sleeping, and eight hours in hearing and
deciding of causes, and eight hours in study: Or as that excellent Poet
Plautus, Plautus painfulnesse.
who was feign for his living to serve a Baker in turning a Querne or Handmill,
that he might yet sometime apply his study. Wherefore let not poor Students
disdain to do service in the day, that they may yet employ sometime in the
night. Better to be pale with study than love.
And if they wax pale with overmuch study, it is no reproach but a very
commendable sign of a good student. Yet would I have none to study so much,
that thereby they should fall into sickness, or become melancholic, as Homer
writes of Ajax and Bellerophon: Mediocritas s^mper optima: satietas enim
omnium rerum.
But I would have all students always to remember (...), as Isocrates writes.
And if it happen that we be cloyed with study, then must we fall to
recreation and use some honest play or pastime, yet so as Tullie prescribes,
Offic. 1. How play is to be used.
Ludo et joco uti illis quidem licet sed sicut samno and quietibus caeteris tum
cum gravibus seriisque rebus satis fecerimus. Ipsumque jocandi genus non
profusum, nec immodestum, sed* ingenuum and fa^etum esse debet. Whereof we
have have a notable example in Valerius Maximus, of Scevola that learned
Lawyer, Lib. 8. cap. 8.
who being wearied with law matters, was wont to recreat his mind with
Tenis-play, and therein is said to have excelled: Yet sometimes he played at
Dice* and Tables, when he had bin long busied in well ordering the laws of the
Citizens, and Ceremonies of the gods. For so he says, Vt in rebus serii^
Scevolam, ita and in scurrilibus lusibus hominem agebat, Scevol* optime (...)
lusisse tradunt. Cic. 1. de. Orat.
quem rerum natura contiunt laboris patientem esse non s^uit. Likewise we read
of Socrates the Philosopher, who notwithstanding he was adjudged by the Oracle
of Apollo, to be the wisest man in the world, yet for recreation he blushed
not to ride upon a Reed among his little children: And when he was laughed to
scorn of Alcibiades for so doing, A witty answer of Socrates made to
Alcibiad^s.
he answered him very prettily, tell no body (says he) that thou saw me,
until thou have children of thine own. As who should say, Such is the
affection of Parents toward their children, that they are not ashamed
oftentimes to play the children with them. But of recreation of the b^dy I have
spoken sufficiently before, and now I will speak somewhat of recreation of the
mind: for there be some pastimes that exercise the mind only, Unlawful
games.
as Dice, Tables, Cards, and such like, which because they are accounted
unhonest games, and forbidden even by heathen writers, as by the sage Cato in
his moral precepts, Troco lud^, alias ^age.
I will omit them; and if any Student will use them, he shall not do it ( me
authore:) yet I will rehearse one example of Dice playing, because it is
famous. Caligula the Emperor (as Erasmus reports) when he played at Dice,
^^b. 6. Apoph.
got more by lying and forswearing, than by true play; and upon a time yielding
his turn of casting unto his next fellow, The dice play of the Emperor
Caligula.
going forth to the door, he espied two rich gentlemen of Rome passing by,
whom straightway he commanded to be taken, and their g^ods to be seized to
his use: And so returning again into the house very joyful, he boasted that
he never had a more luckie cast at the Dice. As Caligula got those Gentlemen's
goods, so think I all is gotten that is won by dicing. Therefore I let it
pass, and return to my purpose. There is an ancient game called the Chesse,
which was invented after P^lidorus Virgilius, in the year of the world* 3635*
by a certain wise man called Xerxes, Play at the Chesse.
to m^tigate the minds or hearts of Tyrants. For it declares to a Tyrant, that
Maje^stie or authority, without strength, help, and assistance of his men and
subjects, is casual, feeble, and subject to many calamities. This game is an
earnest exercise of the mind, and very commendable and convenient for
students, and may easily be provided to be always ready in their chambers. But
for a mind wearied with study, and for one that is melancholic, (as the most
part of learned men are) especially those that be excellent, as Arist.
witnesses, Probl. Sect. 30. quest. 1. Omnes homines qui ingeni^ claruer^nt,
melancholici fuerunt.
there is nothing more comfortable, or that more reviveth the spirits than
Music, according to that saying of Hessus; Nam nihil humanas tanta dulcedine
mentes
Afficit, ac melicae nobile vocis opus.


And because it is one of the liberal sciences, it ought the more to be
esteemed of students. And that for good caus^. For by the judgment of
Aristotle, Politi. 8. cap. 3.
Music is one of those four things that ought to be learned of youth in well
governed Commonwealths: and in the fourth chapter of the same Book, The
commodities of Music*
he declares that Music is to be learned, not only for solace and recreation,
but also because it moves men to virtue and good manners, and prevails
greatly to wisdom, quietness of mind, and contemplation. But what kind of
Music every student should use, I refer that to their own inclination.
Howbeit the examples following may declare, The Harp the most ancient
instrument.
that the Harp of all instruments is most ancient, and has bin in greatest
price and estimation. Orphe^s that (...) Poet, and Harper most excellent, (as
the Poets surmised) did with his music delight wild beasts, as Lions and
Tigers* and made them to follow him, and with his sweet harmony drew stones
and woods after him, that is to say, moved and qualified the gross hearts, and
rude minds of men. The Prophet David delighted in the Harp, and with the sweet
melody thereof, delivered King Saul from the vexation of the evil spirit. Sam.
1. Cap. 16. Lib. 1. de S^u. Sa. tuend.
Mars^lius Ficinus speaking of himself* says, Ego etiam si modo ^^sinia
(...) componere summis, quantum adversus atrae bilis amaritudinem, dulcedo
lyrae cautusque valeat, domi frequenter experior. And if every student could
play upon instruments, it were the more commendable. T^scu. 1.
For Themistocles (a^ Tully writes) Quod in con^ivio recusaret lyram est
habitus ind^ctior. And Socrates when he was old, so much esteemed of Music,
^ras. 3. Apoph.
that he was not ashamed being old, to learn among boys to play upon
instruments. And how comfortable Music is to all sorts of men, we may
plainly perceive by laborers; for the Gally-man, the Plough-man, the Carter,
the Carier, ease the tediousness of their labor and journey with singing and
whistling: yea, the brute beasts be delighted with songs and noyses, as Mules
with bells, Horses with Trumpets and Shalmes* are of a fiercer stomach to their
appointed ministry. Wherefore I counsel all students oftentimes to refresh
their wearied minds with some sort of melody. For so shall they drive away the
dumps of melancholy, and make their spirits more lively to learn. And so I end
this Treatise of labor.

CHAP. 3. Of Meat.
AFter labor; there follows in the sentence of Hippocrates, Cibus, whereby
he gives us to understand, that meat must be taken after we have exercised.
The necessity whereof needs (...) proof* considering that nature has taught
all living creatures to seek by sustenance to maintain their lives* The
necessity of meats.
The infant newborn seeks to suck. The Lamb, the Calfe, the Colt, yea, the
whelpe yet blind, gapeth for the dugges of the Damme. For such is the state of
man and beast touching the body, that the spirits, humors, yea, the sound
substance of all parts do continually waste and wear away; so that unless by
nourishment other like be restored, of necessity the whole must shortly be
consumed. For life may well be compared to the match of a Lamp, which if it
be not continually fed with sufficient oil, is soon extinguished. (...) this
necessary and natural (...) and mortality of mankind. God of his infinite
providence and goodness has provided food whereby to repair, to restore* and
countervaile* so long as his good pleasure is, the continual impairing and
decaying of our flesh. Wherefore it behooves us to have a special care and
regard that we use such meats as may best nourish our bodies, and in no wise
hinder our health. Which to perform, it is necessary, that in meats we
consider six things: First, Six things to be considered in meats.
the substance. Secondly, the quantity. Thirdly, the quality. Fourthly*
custom. Fifthly, time. Sixthly, order. These six are briefly set down in
Schola Salerni, though not in like order as follows: Quale, Quid and Quand^,
Q^ant^m, Quoties, vbi dando:
Ista notare cibo debet medicu^ been doctus.


These six I shall briefly handle as they are proposed.

The substance of meats.
Concerning the substance of meats, some are good, which make good blood, and
some are ill, which engender ill blood. Which difference may easily be
perceived by the view of the Treatise following divided into three parts, Lib.
1. de Ali. fa.
according to Galen First I shall speak touching Corn or Grain; next
touching Herbs and Fruits; lastly, touching living and sensible creatures, and
their parts pertaining to di^^.

CHAP. 4. Of Wheat.
OF all Corn or Grain used in diet, Wheat is the chiefest. Triticum.
Theophrastus describes diverse sorts of Wheat, but the greatest difference in
my judgment is in the color, for some is browner or blacker, and other is
whiter and fairer. The best kind of Wheat was called in old time Siligo,
whereof was made the finest bread, called Panis Siliginius, which we call
Manchet, and was plentiful among the Romans and other Nations also subject to
the Roman Empire. And although Pliny prefer the Wheat of Italy before all
other, Ga. li. 1. de Ali. ^a. ca. 2.
confirming the same by the saying of the ancient Poet Sophocles, Et fortunatam
Italiam frumento ca^ere candido: Lib. 18. cap. 7.
yet as I think, we have as good Wheat in England, both red and white, as may
be found in any Country in all Europe, and as good bread is made thereof,
especially that of York, which they call Maine bread. Wheat in nature is
manifestly hot, Maine bread of York. Ga. li. 1. de Ali. ^a. ca. 9.
and being laid to outwardly as a medicine, is hot in the first degree, without
any manifest moisture. And touching the choice of Wheat, which is best to make
bread withal, Matthiolus perfectly describes, Lib. 2. Dios. 1. cap 78. What
Wheat is best.
Triticum ex quo omnium optimus fit panis, eligi debet fractu contumax, densum*
grave, color aureum, lucidum* leve, trium mensium, maturum, mundum, pinguique
terra or^um. And if we cannot conveniently provide Wheat that has all the
foresaid properties, yet let it be such as Galen requires. Lib. 1. de Ali.
fa. cap* 2.
Let it be hard Wheat that will not easily be broken between the teeth, let it
be thick or close together, not loose or open: Let it be heavy or weighty;
let it be of yellow color. Of such Wheat as this may be made that bread which
is best and most wholesome for youth and age, Wheat bread ought to have five
properties. Gal. li. 1. de Ali. ^a. ca. 2.
which ought to have five properties First, it must be well leavened, Nam panis
qui fermento caret, nemini prorsus est accommodus. Howbeit in England our
finest Manchet is made without leaven. Next it ought to be light, for thereby
it is known that the clamminesse thereof is gone. Thirdly, it ought to be
well baked, for bread that is ill baked is of ill digestion, and sore grieveth
the stomach. Fourthly, it must be temperately salted* for bread over sweet is
a stopper, and bread over-salt is a drier. The fifth thing is, that bread
should be made of the best Wheat, such as I have spoken of before. These five
properties are briefly comprised in two verses in Schola Salerni; Panis non
calidus, nec sit nimis inveteratus,
Sed ferinantusque oculatus; sit been coctus*
Et salsus modite, and frugibus validiselectus.


But the first verse contains two other notes touching bread. The one is,
that it ought not to be eaten hot, The smell of new bread very wholesome.
because it stops much, and swimmeth in the stomach* by reason of his
vaporous moisture, yet is the savor of new bread very wholesome, and reviveth
one out of a swoone, as Arnoldus says. The other is, that we ought not to eat
bread that is very stale or mouldie, for it dries the body, and ingendreth
melancholy humors. What bread is best.
Whereupon it follows that bread to be best, which is made of pure flower of
good Wheat, sufficiently leavened, somewhat salted, well molded, well baked,
neither too new nor too old: that is to say, after Doctor B^ord, that it be at
least a day and a night old, and not past four or five days old, except the
loaves be very great, which definition Galen himself utters in these words;
Lib. 1. de Ali. ^a. ca. 2.
Concoctu inter panes sunt facillimi, qui plurimum sunt fermentati, and
pulcherrime subacti, quique in Cli^ano igne moderato fuerunt assati. Whereby it
appears that all kind of bread made without leaven is unwholesome, Lib. 1. de
Ali. fa. cap. 4: Unleavened bread is very unwholesome.
and after Galen, descends slowly from the stomach, engenders gross
humors, causes oppilations of the liver, increases the weakness of the
spleen, and breeds the stone in the reins. Wherefore cakes of all forms,
Simnels, Cracknels, Buns, Wafers, and other things made of wheat flower, as
Fritters, Pancakes, and such like, are by this rule rejected. Ga. li. 1. de
Ali. ^a. ca. 7.
Quando ne tritici quidem sumpta farina, concoctu sit facilis, nisi per salem,
fermentum, misturam, triturationem, clibanumque elaborata fuerit. Process of
time does alter men's stomachs*
Howbeit now adays common experience proves in men's stomachs, that bread much
leavened is heavy of digestion, and no bread is lighter than Manchet, which is
made of fine flower of Wheat, having no leaven. And by the foresaid definition,
all loaves that are not baked in an Oven, but upon irons, or hot stones, or
upon the hearth, or under hot ashes, are unwholesome, because they are not
equally baked, but burned without, and raw within. And of such loaves as are
baken in an Oven, the greatest loaves do nourish most, after Master Eliot, The
greatest loaves do nourish most.
because the fire has not consumed the moisture of them But whether bread be
made in form of Manchet, as is used of the Gentility, or in great loaves, as
it is usual among the Yeomarie, or between both, as with the Franklings, it
makes no matter so it be well baked. Burned bread, and hard crusts, and
Pasticrusts, Burned crusts ill.
do engender adust choler, and melancholy humors, as says Schola Salerni:
Non comedas crustam, choleram quia gig^it adustam.

Wherefore the utter crusts above and beneath should be chipped away.
Notwithstanding, after Arnold, Crusts good for some.
the crusts are wholesome for them that be whole, and have their stomachs
moist, and desire to be^ lean, but they must eat them after meat, for they
must enforce the meat to descend, and do comfort the mouth of the stomach.
Brown bread, made of the coarsest of Wheat flower* having in it much branne,
Brown bread.
and that bread which Galen calls Autopyros, that is, when the meal wholly
unsifted, branne and all is made into bread, fills the belly with excrements,
and shortly descends from the stomach. And beside, that it is good for
laborers, ( Crassa enim crassis convenient,) I have known this experience of
it, Brown bread loses the belly.
that such as have been used to fine bread, when they have been costive, by
eating brown bread and butter, have been made soluble. But Wheat is not only
used in bread, but being sodden, is used for meat, as I have seen in sundry
places, and of some is used to be buttered. Buttered Wheat. Lib. 1. de Ali. ^a.
Ca. 7.
And Galen himself (as he writes) traveling into the Country, for want of
other food was feign to eat sodden wheat in an husband man's house: but the
next day after, he and his mates that had eaten with him, were much grieved
thereby both in the stomach and head. Whereby he concludes that it is heavy
and hard of digestion* but being well digested, nourishes strongly, and
strengthens a man much: wherefore it is good for laborers. Of wheat also is
made Alica and Amylum mentioned of Galen, things not usual among us. Yet
Amylum is taken to be Starch, the use whereof is best known to Launders.
Frumentie.
And Alica Saccharata is taken for Frumentie, a meat very wholesome and
nourishing, if it be well made, yet in digestion much like to sodden Wheat. As
for Turkey Wheat, French Wheat, and such like strange grain, I will over-passe
them, because they be not usual in our Country of England. Yet of French
Wheat I can say thus much by experience, French Wheat.
that in some parts of Lancashire and Cheshire they use to make bread thereof
for their household, being mingled together with Barley, but for the Winter time
only. For when the heat of the year increases, it waxes rank of savor.
Also therewith they fat their Swine, for which purpose it is greatly commended,
and in my judgment it is more fit to feed Swine than Men. More of bread shall
be spoken hereafter, when I entreat of other grain.

CHAP. 5. Of Rye.
SEcale, commonly called Rye, a grain much used in bread, Rye bread.
almost thorowout this Realm, though more plentiful in some places than in
other: yet the bread that is made thereof is not so wholesome as wheate-bread,
for it is heavy and hard to digest, and therefore most meet for laborers, and
such as work or travail much, and for such as have good stomachs. There is
made also of Rye mixed with Wheat, a kind of bread named misseling or
masseling bread, What Misseling or Masseling is.
much used in diverse Shires, especially among the family. Which being well made
after the order prescribed in the Treatise of Wheat, is yet better than that
which is made of clean Rye, but that which is half Rye and half Barley is
worse. Rye laid outwardly to the body, The temperature of Rye.
is hot and dry in the second degree after Dodonaeus, whose authority I
allege, because Galen has written little or nothing thereof, except Typha be
Rye, as Master Eliot judges it; then is it in a mean between Wheat and
Barley.

CHAP. 6. Of Barley.
HOrdeum, Barlie, whereof also bread is used to be made, but it does not
nourish so much as wheat, and after Matthiolus, troubles the stomach, makes
cold and tough juice in the body, In li. 2. Dios. ca. 79. Barlie bread good for
gowty folks. Ga. li 7. de simp. li 1. de Ali. ^a. cap. 9.
nourishes little and ingendreth wind, yet some affirm that it is good for
such as have the Gout. Barlie is cold and dry in the first degree, and (as
Galen says) howsoever it be used in bread, or p^isan, or otherwise, it is of
cooling nature, and makes thin juice, and somewhat cleansing. And in the
tenth Chapter of the same book, he says, that Barley bread passes very soon
from the belly. As of Wheat, so likewise of Barley there is great choice to
be had, for some is better and some is worse. Mal^^.
Yet all Barley generally considering the nature thereof is more meet for
drink than bread, What Malt is made of.
and thereof is made the best Malt to make Ale or Beer. And though Barley be
cold, yet it makes such hot drink, that it sets men oftentimes in a fury.

CHAP. 7. Of Oats.
AVena, Oats, after Galen, have like nature as Barlie, Lib. 6. Simp.
for they dry and digest in a mean, and are of temperature somewhat cold,
also something binding, so that they help a laske, which I my self have
proved in Cawdales made with Oatemeale: Lib. 1. de ali. ^a. cap. 14.
Yet Galen affirms, that Oats are Iumentorum alimentum non hominum, whose
opinion in that point must be referred to the Country where he lived: For if
he had lived in England, especially in Lankashire, Chesshire, Cumberland,
Westmerland, or Cornwale, he would have said, that Oats had been meat for
men. For in these parts they are not only Provender for Horses, but they make
Malt of them, Malt made of Oats.
and thereof good Ale, though not so strong as of Barley Malt. Also of Oats they
make bread, Oate bread.
some in Cakes thicker or thinner, as the use is; Ianock bread.
some in broad Loaves which they call Ianocks of which kind of bread I have
this experience, that it is light of digestion, but something windy, while it
is new it is meetly pleasant, but after a few days it waxes dry and
unsavorie, it is not very agreeable for such as have not been brought up
therewith: for education both in diet and all things else is of great force to
cause liking or misliking. Oats are bread, drink and meat.
In Lankashire as I have seen, they do not only make bread and drink of
Oats, but also diverse sorts of meats. For of the greats or groats, as they call
them, that is to say of Oats, first dried, and after lightly s^aled, being
boiled in water with salt, Sundry sorts of meats made of Oats.
they make a kind of meat which they call water-Pottage, and of the same boiled
in Whey, they make Whey-pottage, and in Ale, Ale-potage: meats very wholesome
and temperate, and light of digestion; and if any man be desirous to have a
taste of them, let him use the advice of some Lankashire woman.

CHAP. 8. Of Beans.
FAba, Bean, Ga. lib. 7. Simp.
in cooling and drying is very near in a mean temperature. Green Beans before
they be ripe are cold and moist, but when they be dry they have power to bind
and restrain. The substance of Beans is something cleansing, The nature of
Beans.
and the Husk is somewhat binding. Pythagoras the Philosopher gave forth this
saying: Faba abstineto, as some interpret, abstain from Beans; because they
make the sight dull, and raise up ill dreams (as Pliny says.) But howsoever
Pythagoras meant it, true is that saying of Galen, Lib. 1. de Ali. Fa. cap. 19.
Flatulentus est cibus etiamsi elixatus diutissime fuerit, ac quovis modo
paratus. And again he says, Lib. 7. Simp. Beans are windy and hard of
digestion.
Faba ut ed ulium flatulenta est, ac coctu difficilis si quid aliud. Wherefore
they are meat for Mowers, as the Proverb is, and for Ploughmen, but not for
Students. Being sodden they are used to be eaten as well green as dry: the
green Beans they use to butter, the other they eat with salt unbuttered. Of
green beans Galen gives his judgment, Green Beans.
Si virides priusquam maturae ^i^t atque exiccatae edantur, idem eis accidet
quod fructibus omnibus, Lib. 1. de Ali. fa. cap. 19.
quos ante perfectam maturitatem mandimus: humidius scilicet alimentum corpori
praebebunt, obidque excrementosius, non in intestinis modo, sed in toto etiam
habitu. Also of Beans in Leycester shire they make bread; I mean not
hors-bread (which is commonly done throughout England) but for their family:
but it can in no wise be wholesome, because it fills the body full of wind:
Notwithstanding I know that such as have been brought up therewith do like it
well. Adeo a teneris assuescere multum est.

CHAP. 9. Of Pease.
Lib. 1. de Ali. fa. cap. 21. Pease are better than Beans.
PIsum, Pease, after Galen, are like in substance to Beans, and eaten after
the same manner, yet they differ in two things. First in that they are not so
windy as Beans: and next because they be not so abstersive or clensing, and
therefore they pass more slowly from the belly. There be three sorts of Pease
common among us in England. Three sorts of Pease.
The first Garden How Pease or beans should be eaten. The seasoning of windy
meats.
salted, and peppered. But if any student list to eat green Beans or green
Pease, let him spare no pepper upon them, for this is a general rule in Galen,
for meats that be windy, Quicquid in omnibus cibabariis inest flatulentum, id
per calfacientia and tenuantia corrigitur. Pease are commended in Schola
Salerni, on this wise: Pisam laudandam delegimus ac reprobandam:
Pellibus ablatis sunt bona pisa satis.
Sunt inflativa cum pellibus atque nociva.


That is, they be wholesome to eat when the Husks be taken away, for if they be
eaten in the Husks, they be hurtful, and do inflate. But how they should be
eaten without the husk I do not know, except it be in pottage; for they are
not wont to be blanched as Almonds, but there is made of them a kind of broth
or pottage called Pease-pottage. Pease pottage.
Some make it with Pease boiled whole, but that is not good; Other strein the
pease after they be boiled, and that is best. Pease pottage good.
And this kind of pottage is commended of Arnoldus, upon the said verses, for
it makes (says he) the belly laxative, and procures urine, and unstoppeth
the veins; wherefore it is wholesome at such times as folks use gross and
oppilative meats, as on fasting days; At what time pease pottage is most
wholesome.
and in England it is used accordingly, for commonly pease pottage is most
eaten in Lent. If pease be unwholesome, then the bread which is made of them is
unwholesome, yet it is much used in Leicester shire. But I leave it to rusticks,
who have stomachs like Ostriges, that can digest hard iron; and for students I
allow no bread but that which is made of wheat, as before is mentioned.

CHAP. 10. Of Rice.
O Risa, Rise, after Galen, is something binding, Lib. 8. Simp.
and therefore stops or binds the belly. And again he says: Ga. li. 1.
de Ali. ^a. ca. 17.
All men use this grain to stop the belly; and they boil it as Alica, yet is
it more hardly digested and nourishes less, and is not so pleasant in eating.
But we use to make a kind of Pottage with Rise called Rise-pottage, Rise
pottage, and their property.
which being well made with good Milk, and spiced with Sugar and Cinnamon, is
very pleasant and easy of digestion and restorative. For thus writes
Matthiolus, Sunt qui Oris^m quoque dicunt genitale augere ^eme^, Lib. 2. Dios.
c. 88.
in bubulo lacte decoctam, additis Saccaro and (...). And in the same place he
says, that it is very good to be eaten in any kind of la^k or flixe,
especially being first dried and after boiled in Milk wherein hot stones have
been quenched. (...) pottage good for a flix, how they (...)*
But if any list to make Rise pottage properly for a flix, they may be made in
this manner. Take a good handful of Oaten bark and boil it in a gallon of
running water to the half or more; then streine it and let it cool, then take
half a pound of Jorden Almonds, and beat them in a Mor^er with the h^l^ and
all on, after streine them with the foresaid water, and so with Rice make Rice
potage. Rise may be eaten also with Almond Milk, and so it does restore and
comfort nature. Hitherto I have entreated of such grain as is usual among us
in bread and meats as for other sorts named of Galen legumina, The Preface to
the herbs.
in English Po^^se, as Fitches, ^ares, Fengreeke, and such like, I overpasse
them, because they are not used as sustenance for man* but for medicine, or
else as fodder for beasts. And now shall I speak of herbs and fruits, I mean
of those that appertain to diet, and as they be used pro alimentis, and not
pro medicamentis. For that belongs to another part of Physic* though I know
that there may be, as Hippocrates says ( i^ cibo medicamentum) which thing as
occasion shall serve, I will briefly touch for the behalf of Students. And of
herbs I shall declare first such as be hot, and after those that be cold.

CHAP. 11. Of Sage.
OF all garden herbs none is of greater virtue than Sage, in so much that in
Schola Salerni, Hot herbs.
it is demanded, Cur moriatur homo cui salvia crescit in horto?

As who should say, such is the virtue of Sage, The nature of Sage.
that if it were possible* it would make a man immortal. It is hot and dry in
the third degree, and has three special properties, contained in these verses
following: Salvia confortat ^ervos, ma^^umque tremorem
Tollit, and ejus open, febris acuta fugit.


Now because it is good against palsies and comfort the sinews and Brain,
Sage is good for students.
it must needs be good for Students, who are commonly cumbred with diseases of
the head: It may be used in way of meat, as in the spring time with bread and
butter, especially in May: An old man's diet.
as I my self have known a man of 80. years and upward, who for his
Breakfast in Summer used to eat six or seven Sage Leaves minced small with a
little salt, and in winter as many blades of unset Leekes, drinking always a
draught of good Ale after it, by which means he preserved himself long in
healthful state. Sage is used commonly in sawces, as to stuff Veale, Porke,
roasting Pigges; Why Sage is used in sawces.
and that for good cause, for it dries up superfluous moisture, and stirs
up appetite. Sage wine.
Also of Sage is made a kind of wine, which they call Sage wine, in this
manner. Put a little bag full of Sage bruised in a Quart of new Wine, and let
it stand so a night, then wring it out and use it. This wine is good to consume
fleame and to comfort the brain and sinews. Much after the same manner is
made Sage Ale; Sage Ale.
yet some use only Sage Leaves, whole as they grow, being first clean washed
they put them in the bottom of a Vessel, and tun up new Ale upon them, so
letting it stand for three or four days, until they draw it: for every
gallon of Ale two handfuls of Sage will suffice, in operation, it is like to
Sage wine. I my self have proved it very good for a rewme. Moreover Sage is
used otherwise to be put in drink overnight close covered, Sage and Rue put in
drink, are good against infection.
or two or three hours before we drink it, for so it is good against
infection, especially if Rue be added thereto, as witnesses Schola Salerni;
Salvia cum Ruta faciunt tibi pocula tuta.

CHAP. 12. Of Rosemary.
NExt in virtue to Sage is Rosemary and of much like quality. For it is both
hot and dry. Fernelius says, Lib. 5. cap. 18. Meth. (...).
Vna cum cerebro and nervis, cor, sensus omnes and memoriam confirmat, tremori
atque paralysi salutaris, and therefore excellent good for students any way
used. Rosemary good for students. Lib. 3. D^os. c. 73.
Beside that (as says Matthiolus) Visum acuit, si toto tempore quo floret,
quispiam jeiunus flores una cum circumst^ntibus foliis cum pane and fale
quotidie voraverit. Praestat etiam ad frigidos ventric^li affectus, ad coliaca^
passiones and vomitum ^ibi* si cum pane devoretur, aut bibatur in pulverem
contritum ex meraco. The use of Rosemary in Kitchen, is well known to all men.
I would the herb were as plentiful among us in England, Plenty of Rosemary
in one part of France.
as it is in that part of France which is named PROVANCE, where it grows of
it self without setting, and is used for a common fuel. Such as have not the
Herb, may yet have the flowers preserved of the Apothecaries, called Conserva
Anthos, Conserva of Rosemary flowers. Lib. 1. p. 80.
like in operation to the Herb, which I wish to be often used of students. Such
as have the Herb, may use it now and then, as Alexis prescribes, to cleanse
and comfort the stomach, and to make a sweet breath in this manner: A good
decoction of Rosemary for the stomach.
Take Rosemary, with the flowers, or without, a handful, or more, sees it in
white Wine a good space, and put thereto if you may, a little Cinnamon, then
drink it, and wash your mouth therewith. The same Wine without Cinnamon is good
to wash the face and hands, for it makes a very clear skin. Another.
I was wont to put a handful of Rosemary in a quart of white Wine, and to
suffer it to boil in the quart until it were ready to be burned, and then to
use it, or half a handful in a pint of Wine, and sometimes a few Cloves
withal. Which drink by experience I found greatly to comfort both my stomach
and brain. This makes sweet breath, and kills Worms.
Or if you like not to be at the cost of Wine, sees it in Ale, or pound it and
strain it with Ale or Wine. For being so drunk, it is very good to open the
obstructions of the Liver and spleen, which is a special way to preserve
health: Good therefore to be used at the spring or fall of the leaf, for a
week together. And so I was wont to use Agrimony to prevent a dropsy. If any
man list to make a perfect Electuary of Sage and Rosemary, An excellent
Electuary of Sage and Rosemary.
to comfort the stomach and brain, and to make a sweet breath, he may
compound it after Alexis, in this manner: Take of Sage two ounces, of Rosemary
flowers half an ounce, of Cloves five drammes, of Cinnamon one dram and a
half, of Nutmegges one scruple, bray every thing, and with honey or Sugar make
a^ Electuary, and give thereof in the morning half a spoonful: then drink a
little red Wine, wherein (...) boiled a little Sage, and this do every day,
until you have your purpose.

CHAP. 13. Of Borage.
The temperature of Borage*
BOrage, which of Galen is named Buglosse* is hot and moist in the first degree.
But in Gardens there is found another Herb commonly called Buglosse, differing
from Borage both in leaf and flower. Borage is good for students.
And after Dodoneus, Buglosse, and Lange de Beef, are cold and dry, not far
from the mean temperature. No Garden Herb is more convenient for Students
than Borage or Buglosse, because of those five things which be enemies to
study, Lib. 1. cap. 7. de Stud. sa^i. (...). Five great enemies of students.
as Marsilius Ficinus writes, that is to say, Pituit^, Atrabilis, ^^itus,
Sacietas, Matutinus somnus, two of them, that is, Pituita and Atrabilis, are
well helped by the use of these herbs. For thus writes Galen of Buglosse* Lib.
6. Simp.
which is to be understood likewise of Borage. Buglossum humidae calidaeque
temperi^i est, itaque vinis injectum, laetitiae ac hilaritatis causa esse
creditum est, sed and iis qui ob supremi gutturis asperitatem ^^ssi^^t, coctum
in meliorato conveni^. Whereby it appears, Why Borage leaves are used in wine.
that to put Borage leaves in Wine, is no late invention, and is done for good
cause, and to be frequented of Students. Such as have not the Herb ready, may
yet have Cons^rva of Borage flowers, Conserva of Borage, and how it is to be
made.
or Buglosse flowers, which may be made as follows. Take Borage flowers, or
Buglosse, when they are full ripe and may easily be pulled from the stalks,
pound them small, then take for one ounce of the flowers, three ounces of
Sugar: put in your Sugar by little and little, and incorporate them well
together, put it up in a Gally pot, and Sun it for twenty or thirty days,
and keep it for one year. Borage water.
But he that will not be at such cost, may yet distill the Herb with the
flowers when it flowreth, How to drink a distilled water.
and use to drink the water with Wine, or of it self with a little Sugar, if
need be, which also is a good way to take any distilled water. The water of
Borage or Buglosse being drunk with Wine, does comfort the brain and the
heart* and increases memory and wit, and engenders* good blood, and puts
away melancholy and madness.

CHAP. 14. Of Baulme.
BAulme, after Avicen, The temperature of Baulme.
is hot and dry in the second degree, an herb greatly to be esteemed of
Students: For that by a special property it drives away heaviness of mind,
sharpneth the understanding and the wit, and increases memory: other virtues
it has also, which be declared at large by Gesnerus in his Book of
distillations, where he teaches to draw a water from this Herb, as
follows: Baulme water, and the properties thereof.
Take Baulme with the whole substance, shred it small, and bra^ it, and lay it
to steep a whole night in good white Wine, in an earthen vessel, well covered
and stopped, on the morrow distill it. This water has the properties
aforesaid, and may be drunk of it self with Sugar, or mingled with good
Gascoigne Wine. And if any li^t to make a perfect water, An excellent water for
students.
and expert against melancholy, let them take Buglosse, Borage, and Baulme, and
distill them together, for this water is highly commended of Marsilius Ficinus,
Lib. 1. cap. 10. de Stud. sani. tu.
in ^trae bilis remediis.

CHAP. 15. Of Hysop.
HYsop is hot and dry in the third degree, whose virtues are briefly
comprehended of Schola Salerni, Gal. lib. 8. Simp.
in these verses: Hyssopusque herba est, purgant e pectore phlegma,
Ad pulmonis opus cum m^lle coquenda jugata.
Vultibus eximium fertur praestare color^u^.


Of Hysop is made a Wine named Hysop Wine, which helps by drinking thereof
diseases of the breast, the sides, the Lungs, the shortness of wind, and an
old cough, all which effects may be wrought by the use of the sirrup. When I
was much troubled with cough and cold, Sirrup of Hysop. Hysop Ale.
I was wont to make Hysop Ale, after the manner prescribed of Sage Ale, saving
that I put to an ounce or two of good Liquorice, thin cut in slices, whereby in
that case I have been much eased. Also for the same purpose you may distill
the Herb, and use the water distilled after the manner aforesaid.

CHAP. 16. Of Mint.
MInt is hot and dry in the third degree. Whereof be diverse kinds* Gal. lib.
6. Simp.
both of the Garden and field, but one most fragrant in savor, which is called
Spear Mint, and is used to be put in puddings, and is found by experience to
comfort the stomach, and help digestion, beside that, it gives a pleasant
verdure in eating, and one passing property it has, and that very profitable
for Students, Quod animum olfactu excitat, Lib. 3. Dios. ca. 35
as Matthiolus writes. Therefore of it may be made a good posie for Students,
to smell to oftentimes: and if any be troubled with ill savor of the mouth, A
good Lotion for the teeth and mouth.
and rottenness of the gummes, they may boil of these Mints in white Wine,
with a little Vinegar, and when it is cold, wash their mouth and gummes
therewith, and after rub them with powder of dry Mints. Powder of Mint good to
kill worms.
The same powder also is very sweet, and an approved Medicine for the Worms in
children or old folks, Si detur in lacte tepid* sorbe^dum jejuno. Which thing
also is confirmed by Schola Salerni: Mentitur Menta si sit depellere le^ta
Ventris lumbrecos, stomachi vermesque nocivos.


CHAP. 17. Of Time.
TIme is hot and dry in the third degree, Gal. lib. ^. Simp.
the use whereof in the Chollicke and Stone, is well known to the Physicians,
and the use of it in Kitchen is well known to all men. Beside that (as Aetius
reports) it may be dried and made in powder, and used for sundry good
purposes, but one way especially it serves our turn: That is, three drammes
of this powder, mixed with a draught of Oximell, Powder of Time good for
Students.
does purge melancholy humors, and dullness of the senses, proceeding of
melancholy, and the same potion also gives clearness of sight, and helps
the pain of the eyes, if it be taken fasting, or before supper. The same
powder is good also for the Gowt, for swelling of the belly and stomach, for
pain of the bowels and loins: and for want of Oximell, it may be taken in a
draught of white Wine.

CHAP. 18. Of Saverie.
SAvery, after Master Eliot, purges phlegm, helps digestion, makes quick
sight, provokes urine, and stirs up carnal appetite. It is hot and dry in
the third degree, and one good property it has, whereby it is good for
students, in that it does quicken the brain by smelling thereto, Et
lethargicos olfactu excitat, as says Fernelius. Beside that, it does
strengthen the stomach that is prone to vomit, it may be taken, as I have
said of Time, being dried and made in powder, How Savory may be taken.
and supped off in a rear egg, or else boiled in wine.

CAP. 19. Of Penyroyall.
PEnyroyall is hot and dry in the third degree, and does extenuate heat, and
decoct, it reformeth the stomach oppressed with phlegm, it does recover the
faint spirit, and expels melancholy: by siege it may be taken, as I have
said of Time and Savery.

CHAP. 20. Of Town Cressis.
Town Cressis, or Garden Cressis, is hot and dry in the third degree. It may
not be eaten alone, but with cooling Herbs, as Lettuce, Sorrel, or Purslane.
For so is the heat qualified, and that is the best way to make Sallets, to
mingle hot herbs and cold together, except a man do it of purpose to cool or
heat. The often eating of this Herb in Sallets, does give a sharpness and
readiness of wit. And one medicine I will write, which I have read in an old
written Book of this Herb, that if any have an extreme Laske, For a Laske.
if he drink but a dram of the seeds thereof in powder, in a draught of red
Wine, or cold water, six or seven mornings together, not receiving any thing in
two hours after, he shall be helped, if it be curable.

CHAP. 21. Rue.
RUe, or Herb Grace, is hot and dry in the third degree, Gal. lib. 8. ^imp.
cap. 61.
the virtues whereof are pithily set forth in Schola Salerni.

Ruta facit castum, dat lumen, and ingerit astum,
Cocta facit Ruta de pulicibus loca tuta.
Which verses contain four properties of Rue: The first is, that it sharpneth
the sight, Four properties of Rue.
which effect is wrought either by eating of it green, as it is there

Ruta comesta receus, oculos caligi^e purgat. Or else the juice of Rue,
together with the juice of Fennel and Honey being clarified, and made up into
an ointment, and used to be put into the eyes. The second Galen, where he
writes of Rue; Qui^ and te^^ium est partium ^^atusque extinguit, quare ad
inflationes competit, ac Veneris appetitum cohibet, digeritque atque exiceat
sane strenue. Yet Schola Salerni in this point makes a difference between men
and women: for they say; Ruta viris coitum minuit, mulieribus a^ge^.

Because the nature of women is waterish and cold* and Rue heateth and dries,
therefore (say they) it stirs them more to carnal lust, but it diminishes
the nature of men, which is of temperature like unto the air, that is, hot and
moist. The third property Rue is good against poison and the pestilence.
Rue has a special virtue against poison, in so much that the very smell of
Rue keeps a man from infection, as is often proved in time of pestilence: for
a Nose-gay of Rue is a good preservative, but being received into the body, it
is of much greater force. For as Dioscorides writes, Lethalium medicamentorum
antidotum est si semen ex vino acetabuli mensura ebibatur, Lib. 3 cap. ^5.
folia per se sumpta, aut cum nucibus, jug^andibus, aridisque ficis inefficaces
venenorum vires reddunt, contra serpents simili modo sumere convenit. Arnoldus
affirms, that the eating of Rue, in the morning with figs and sweet
Almonds, preserves one from poison: And true is that medicine, and approved of
king Mithridates, that if any do eat fasting two dry Walnuts, King
Mithridates medicine.
as many figs, and twenty leaves of Rue with a grain of Salt, nothing which is
venomous, may that day hurt him, and it also preserves against the pestilence.

CHAP. 22. Of Dill.
DIll is hot and dry in the second degree: the seeds be chiefly occupied in
medicine, Ga. lib. 6. Symp.
and of the green herb Galen writes, that it procures sleep; wherefore in
old time they used to wear Garlands of Dill at their feasts.

CHAP. 23. Of Sperage.
SPerage is temperately hot and moist, the seeds, herb and roots are used in
medicine chiefly for the stone and strangury. Nam semen* aut radix aut herba
ipsa in vino albo cocta and pota* plurimum prodest calculosis. Sperage is used
also to be eaten, as appears by Galen, where he says: Omnes Asparagi
stom^cho utiles sunt, Lib. 1. de ali. ^a.
urinam cicut, and parum praebent nutri^enti. Fen. ult. lib. 4.
And as Avicen writes; the eating of them does amend the sight, soften gently
the belly, purges the breast, the bowels and the reins, and makes a good
savor in all the body, but the Urine then stinketh. Medicine for the stone.
By mine advice such Student^ as be troubled with gravel or stone, shall use
Sperage, Al^sander, Gromell, and such like herbs in Sallets, at their first
budding forth, or else make pottage with them.

CHAP. 24. Of Lonage.
LOnage is hot and dry in the third degree, the seeds and roots be most used
in medicine, and be of like operation to Percely and Fenell. Semina sumi
possunt totam noctem in vino albo infusa, aut etiam decocta, sed adhibito pari
pondere anisi and seniculi, nam alioquin vehementer corpus perturbant, purgant
enim utrinque valide.

CHAP. 25. Of Grummell.
Lib. 3. cap. 141.
GRummell is hot and dry in the second degree, not used in meats but in
medicine, especially the seeds have this operation, after Dioscorides,
Lithospermon, quod a seminis duritia nomen accepit, hanc vim habet, ut semine
cum vino albo po^o, An easy medicine for the stone.
calculos frangat, pellatque urinam. An easy and a necessary remedy for many
Students.

CHAP. 26. Of Coriander.
COriander commonly called Coliander. The seed is most in use, and is
moderately hot and dry, which is proved by that it breaks wind, and
resolves impostumes, Lib. 3. cap. 62.
though Dioscorides think it to be of cooling nature. It is thought to be very
hurtful and to cause madness, and therefore reckoned of Dioscorides, among
poisons; which is to be understood (as Matthiolus upon the same place notes)
of the immoderate use thereof, and especially when it is prepared; Lib 6.
for it should never be used neither in meat nor medicine, except it have
been first steeped in Vinegar by the space of three days: Coriander Confits
good for students.
it is used to be made in Confits, which in my judgment are most wholesome
for Students of all other sorts; for being eaten after meat, they do not
only strengthen the stomach, but also repress the vapors ascending to the
head, and therefore good to stay a rhume, a common and a continual adversary
to Students; Coriander Confits good for a Rume.
and Simeon Sethi affirms, Semen Coriandri stomacho bonum esse and eundem
corroborare, ^ibumin ventriculo retinere, donec probe concoquatur. Which last
property is very good to help a Rhume, because that commonly it proceeds of
indigestion. Wherefore I advise al such as be much troubled with Rhumes, to use
after their meals, some Coriander Confits.

CHAP. 27. Of Charva^le.
CHarvaile is very profitable unto the stomach, but it may not sustain very
much boiling; being eaten with Vinegar, it provokes appetite and also urine.
The decoction thereof drunken with wine cleanses the bladder. In Schola
Salerni I read three properties of Charvaile. Cap. ^^.
First that if it be stamped and laid plaisterwise to a Cankar, it helps it.
Next that if it be drunken with wine, it eases the belly. Thirdly, that it
cease vomiting and the laske, which properties are briefly contained in these
verses: Appositum caueris tritum cum melle medetur.
Cum vino potum, lateris sedare dolorem,
Saepe ^olet, tritam si nectis desuper herba^
Saepe solet vomitum ^entr^mque tenere solutum.


CHAP. 28. Of Senuie.
SEnuie which brings forth that seed whereof mustard is made. After Galen
Mustard seeds be hot and dry in the fourth degree, Lib. 8. Simp.
and are much used in medicine, especially to purge the head. The virtues of
them are briefly set forth by Schola Salerni: Ect modicum gramen siccum
calidumque Sinapi:
Dat lacrymas, purgatque caput, tollitque venenum.


The force of the seed is well perceived by eating of Mustard, for if it be
good in licking too deep, we are straightway taken by the Nose, and provoked
to neese, which plainly declares that it soon pierces to the brain.
Mustard for whom it is good.
Wherefore as it is a good sauce, and procures appetite, so is it profitable
for the Palsy, and for such Students as be heavy headed, and drowsy, as if
they would fall asleep with meat in their mouths: and if any be given to
music, and would fain have a clear voice to sing, A medicine to clear the
breast, good for fingers.
let them make Mustard seeds in powder, and work the same with honey into
little bals, of the which they must swallow one or two down every morning
fasting, and in short time they shall have very clear breasts. And for a
Tettar or a Ring-worme a little Mustard laid upon it within few days will cure
it. For a tettar or Ringworme.


CHAP. 29. Of Mercury.
Mercury is not that herb which is called in Latin Mercurialis, but (as I
think) it is that which of Matthiolus is named Bonus Henricus, of hot and dry
temperature, and is found by experience to loose the belly, and to purge
choler and fleame, insomuch that diverse who have been grieved with the ague,
Pottage of Mercury good to loose the belly.
by often using of pottage, made chiefly of Mercury, Beets and Orages, have
been delivered by that means in short time. And it is a common proverb among
the people: Be thou sick or whole, put Mercury in thy cool.

CHAP. 30. Of Mallows.
Mallows are hot and moist in the first degree, being used in pottage they
loose the belly, and are good for such as be costive, for so says Schola
Salerni: Dixerunt Malvam veteres, quod (...).

The roots of wild Mallows, or Garden Mallows, being made clean from the
earth, and washed, and at the one end first a little scorched with a knife, and
then rubbed hard upon the teeth, takes away the sliminesse of them, and makes
them very white. But of all things that I have prooved to make the teeth white,
To make white teeth.
and to preserve the gums from putrefaction, Mastick is best: which must be
beaten to powder, and laid upon a linen cloth, suppose a corner of the towell,
that you dry your face withal, and rubbed hard for a space upon the teeth,
and the mouth after washed with clean water* this practice used once in (...),
keeps the teeth fair, and marvellously preserves the gummes from corruption.

CHAP. 31. Of Perselie.
PErsely is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third: (...) of piercing
and cleansing nature and thereby dissolveth winds, provokes urine, and
breaks the stone. The virtues of Perselie.
The chief virtue of perselie is in the root, the next in the seed, the
leaves are of least force, yet of most use in the Kitchen; and many use to eat
them not only with flesh or fish, but also with Butter in a morning, and that
for good cause, for by the judgment of late writers, Perselie is very
convenient for the stomach, and stirs up appetite, and makes the breath
sweet: yet I read in Fernelius, that Perselie should be ill for the
Falling Sickness, Lib. 5. Meth. (...). cap. 7. Perselie, why it is evil.
for young children, and for women that give suck; for so he says, Sed
epilepti^^^, (ut quorum paroxis^^s irritet) and faet^^, and mulieri (...).

CHAP. 32. Of Fenell.
Fennel is hot in the third degree and dry as it were in the first. Whether
it be green or red of col^r, I think there is no difference in operation,
though the common people judge otherwise, as they do also of Sage, for the red
fennel or red sage (as they think) is of greater virtue. Schola Salerni
sets forth four properties of fennel in two verses: Four properties of
Fennel
^is duo dat Marathrum, febres fugat atque venenum,
Et purgat stomachum, lumen quoque reddit acutum.


The seeds of Fennel are of greatest virtue, and most in use; being eaten they
break wind, provoke Urine, The virtues of fennel seeds.
and open the stopping of the Liver and spleen. And in women they bring down
their terms, and increase milk in their breasts; and therefore good to be
used of Nurses. Students may use them being made up in Cumfits, Fennel Cumfits.
wherein I my self have found great commodities, as being often grieved with
windiness of the stomach.

CHAP. 33. Of Anise.
ANise is hot and dry in the third degree: The herb (...) little used, but
the seeds altogether. They may be either eaten or drunk whole, or made in
powder. Schola Salerni compriseth two special virtues thereof in one verse,
Emendat visum, stomachum con^ortat A^isum.

Beside that it makes sweet breath, procures Urine, cleanses the reins,
causes abundance of milk in women, and increases sperme* it is used to be
made in Cumfits, and so is it best for students: Anise seeds Cumfits.
and if any be grieved with the Colic or stone, it shall be good to put Anise
seeds or Fennel seeds in their bread, whole, Bread for such as have the
Collicke.
or being made in powder, it may be easily wrought up with the Dough.

CHAP. 34. Of Cummine.
CVmmin is hot and dry in the third degree, the seed is chiefly used and not
the herb, nor root; It is little used in meats, but often in medicines, to
provoke Urine, and break wind. For one that has a stinking breath, if it
proceed of corrupt fumes, rising from the stomach, it may be used thus: Take
two handfuls of Cummin and boil it in a Pottle of good white wine, For an
unsavory breath.
till half be wasted, then streine it, and drink it first in the morning and
last at night fifteen days together, half a Pint at a time, hot or cold.
The same wine also is good for the Colic, and for the Cough; and Cummin seeds
sodden in water, if the face be washed with the same, To beautify the face.
do cause the face to be clearer and fairer* so that it be used now and then,
for the often and much using of it does make the face pale: good therefore for
such as be high color. In Matthiolus I read a practice to be wrought with
Cummine seeds and (as I think) has been used in time past of Monks and
Friars. Lib. 3 Dios. c. 60.
Cumino (says he) frequenter utuntur in ^ibis, and eo saepe sufficiuntur qui
facies suas exterminant, ut sanctitatem and corporis macerationem admentiantur.

CHAP. 35. Of Carawaie.
CAraway the seed which is most used in medicines is hot and dry almost in the
third degree. Gal. l^b. 7. Simp.
The virtues whereof are well set forth by Dioscorides: Vrinam concitat, Lib.
3. cap. 57.
stomacho utile, os commendat, concoctionem adjuvat. Wherefore they are much to
be used of students, who commonly do need the foresaid helps. The Herb and
root be also in use, for so says Matthiolus, Herba pro olere comeditur, Estur
radix cocta perinde ac Pastinaca. Moreover he says, that in Germany, they use
to put Careway seeds whole in their bread, and to spice their meats therewith,
as they do in Italy with Anise and Fennel. Wherefore I advise all students
that be troubled with wind in the stomach or belly, Good bread for such as be
troubled with wind
to cause Fennel seeds, Anise or Careway to be wrought up in their bread. And
if they list they may boil any sort of them in white Wine, as I have said of
Cummin* and use the decoction in like manner, and in mine opinion these are the
better. For the same purpose Careway seeds are used to be made in Comfits, and
to be eaten with Apples* Careway Comfits.
and surely very good for that purpose, for all such things as breed Wind,
would be eaten with other things that break wind. Quod semel admon^isse sat
erit. And if they be eaten alone, they be very wholesome.

CHAP. 36. Of Coleworts.
COleworts are hot and dry in the first degree, they are used to be eaten,
especially the Cabage Cole. Which being boiled are very good with Beef,
together with Vinegar and Pepper. The virtues of Cole are well described by
Schola Salerni.

Ius caulis solvit, cujus substantia stringit.
Vtraque quando datur, venture laxare paratur.
Arnoldus affirms, that Coleworts engender melancholy humors, and ill
dreams, and that they hurt the stomach, nourish little, dull the sight, all
which qualities be very noisome to Students. Wherefore I counsel them not much
to use Coleworts. Diosc. writes, Lib. 2. cap. 113.
that if they be eaten last after meat, they preserve the stomach from
surfeiting, and the head from drunkenness. Yea, some write, that if one would
drink much Wine for a wager, A practice to preserve a man from drunkenness.
and not be drunk, but to have also a good stomach to meat, that he should
eat before the banquet, raw Cabbage leaves with Vinegar, so much as he list,
and after the banquet to eat again four or five raw leaves, which practice is
much used in Germany, The contrariety between the Vine and the Colewort.
as Matthew. upon the Preface of Diosc. notes, where he says, that the Vine and
the Coleworts be so contrary by nature, that if you plant Coleworts near to
the roots of the Vine, that the Vine of it self flees from them. Ideo nil
mirum (says he) si tantum Erassicam contra^e mulentiam pollere credant,
quodque Germani quotidia^is mensis id ol^^ semper appon^^t, ut vini noxam
effugiant. But I trust no Student will prove this experiment, whether he may be
drunken or not, if he eat Colewort leaves before and after a feast.

CHAP. 37. Of Basil.
Basil is hot in the second degree, and somewhat moist. Gal. lib. 8. Simp.
For the which cause it is not good to receive it inwardly, but outwardly
applied it does digest and concoct. Yet Galen says, that many do eat it with
oil and Vinegar. Lib. 2. de Ali. Fa.
With us in England it is not used to be eaten, but yet greatly esteemed for
the sweet savor thereof, which of some is thought to comfort the brain, and
to open and purge the head: yet to a weak brain it is hurtful by reason of
the strong savor, and causes headache, as I my self have proved. And one
thing I read in Hollerius of Basil, Lib. 1. cap. 1.
which is wonderful: Cuidam Italo ex frequenti odoratu Basilicae herbae, natus
Scorpio in cerebro, vehementes dolores, A strange tale of Basil.
and longos, mortem denique attulit.

CHAP. 38. Of Majoram.
MAjoram is hot and dry in the third degree, an Herb much esteemed of all
persons for the pleasant smell thereof. Ga. lib. 8. Simp.
I mean that which is called Majoram-gentle. The Herb being made in powder,
and given with meat, or drunk in Wine, does heat the coldness of the
stomach, and comfort digestion. And the powder of Majoram, with a little
Ginger drawn up into the Nose, To provoke neesing, and purge the head.
or the green Herb a little bruised, and put into the nostrils, does provoke
neesing, and gently purges the head.

CHAP. 39. Of Spike and Lavender.
SPike and Lavender be both of one nature, both hot and dry in the second
degree complete. Matthew. lib. 1. Diosc. cap. 6.
That which we call Lavender, is thought to be the female of this Herb, and
Spike the male. The chief use is of the flowers, which being of fragrant
savor, be dried and laid among linen, or else they are distilled, and a very
sweet water is drawn from them. Which water being sunned for a time, is not
only sweet of smell, and therefore comfortable to the brain, but also is good
for the Palsy, A Lotian for the Palsy.
and all other infirmities of the brain proceeding of cold, if the Temples,
the hollownesse under the ears, the nape of the neck be washed therewith.
Yea, two or three spoonfuls of the water being drunk, recovereth the speech
being lost, To recover the speech being lost.
and reviveth one from a swoone. Wherefore not without cause the Herb is
reckoned of Schola Salerni, among those things that cure the Palsy.

Salvia, Castoreumque Lavandula, Primula veris,
Nasturt. Athanas. haec sanant paralytica membra.
That is to say, Sage, Castory (that is, the stones of the beast Castoreum)
Lavender, Primrose, Water Cresse, and Tansie, cure and heal members infected
with the Palsy.

CHAP. 41. Of Lilly.
LIlly is hot and dry of quality; both the flowers, leaves, and roots are used
in medicine, but not in the Kitchen. The flowers are commended in the Gospel
for beauty, and preferred before the royalty of King Solomon. Wherefore they
are a great ornament to a Garden or house, yet the smell of them is
discommended, and accounted ill for the plague. They be of two sorts, white and
red. As for wood Lillies, called in Latin, Lilium ^^nvallium, so much used and
esteemed in Germany, Lib. 3. Diosc. cap. 120.
as Matthew. writes, or water Lillies, called in Latin, Nymphea aquatica, I say
nothing of them, because they are not usual in Gardens.

CHAP. 42. Of Flower Deluce.
FLower Deluce is hot and dry in the third degree. The root is only used in
Medicine, the flowers in adorning the house. One Medicine I have read to be
made with this Herb, which I will set down for the behoof of Students. Take
a new laid egg, A Medicine for the Dropsy.
pouring out the white, put into the yolke so much of the juice of the root of
Flower Deluce, as was of the white, after set the same egg a while in hot
embers, which being sufficiently warmed, sup off fasting in the morning, and
the patient shall after send forth a mavelous abundance of water, and so be
eased of the dropsy. Or else you may take a dram or two of the dry root made
in powder, and drink in Whey clarified, for so it is good also to purge the
dropsy water. Ad (...).
And if you put a little Cinnamon to the juice of Flower Deluce in the egg
yolke, it is a very good Medicine for the shedding of nature, as has been
often proved.

CHAP. 43. Of Pionie.
PIonie is of two sorts, male and female, the male is of more effect in
Medicine, and is hot and dry in the second degree. The leaf, root and flowers
are in use. The root being made in powder, F^r. lib. 5. (...). cap. 18.
and drunk in Wine, does ease the pains of the reins and bladder. And the
powder of the seeds of Pionie, being ministered in meat and drink to children,
For the stone in old folks or children.
does send forth the stone beginning in them, good therefore to be used in
youth, of such as have the stone by inheritance from their parents, by a tenure
called ex vitioso semine: Or else have gotten it by purchase, Two general
ways that diseases do grow by.
ex intemperantia: By which two ways the most part of diseases do grow.

CHAP. 44. Of Giliflower.
GIliflower is of sundry sorts and colors, the purple flowers are of greatest
virtue, and are of hot and dry temperature. As they are in beauty and
sweetness, Gilliflowers good for sundry diseases.
so they are in force and wholsomnesse, they may be preserved in Sugar as
Ros^s, and so they are very good against the plague, or any kind or venom.
Also for the falling sickness, Palsy, giddiness, crampe: but for the
pestilence Matthiolus says, (...) universa planta express^^, Lib. 2. Dios.
cap. 153. An easy Medicine, and excellent for the plague.

Vinegar of Gilliflowers excellent for diverse purposes.


quatuor (...) pondere, h^ustus* ubi (...). Moreover, the leaves of the flowers
put into a glass of Vinegar, and set in the Sun for certain days, do make a
pleasant Vinegar, and very good to revive one out of a sw^^ne, the nostrils and
temples being washed therewith: And is good also to preserve from the
pestilence, being daily used in like manner. As for Winter Giliflowers of all
sorts, they are of much like temperature, and used in Medicine, but not in
meats. Yet for their sweetness they are worthily cherished in Gardens.

CAP. 45. Of Germander.
GErmander is hot and dry in the third degree. It is much used in Medicine,
Gal. lib. 8. (...).
but not in meats. Yet if the green leaves clean washed be eaten fasting, it
is a good preservative against the plague, A preservative for the plague. Lib
3. Dios. c. 96.
as Matthiolus reports: Because it is somewhat bitter, it may best be eaten
with great Raisins clean washed, and the stones first taken out. A good
Medicino for a Tertian Fev^r.
It is called of some Febrifuga (says he) Eo quod ^pot^ ejus decocto diebus
aliquot, tertianas faget and (...). And no marvel if it help Tertian Agues,
for it opens the Liver and Spleen, and avoideth choler. For which purpose
this decoction may greatly help. Take a quart of white Wine, and boil therein
an handful of Germander, half an ounce of Seane, An excellent Medicine for
any kind of Fever.
a quarter of an ounce of Fennel seeds, and if you put as much Persley seed
thereto; it does not only open the stopping of the Liver and Milt, but also
helps the Strangury and Stone. Boil it to the half, strain it, and drink
it fasting in two mornings, and abstain two hours after. Also one Medicine I
have read of this Herb* which is very profitable for students. A passing good
Medicine for a rheum.
The Herb being made in powder, and put in a linen bag, and applied hot to
the head, is a special remedy against the rheum.

CHAP. 46. Of Blessed Thistle.
CArdnus Benedictus, or Blessed Thistle, so worthily named for the singular
virtues that it has. The perfect use of Cardnus Benedictus.
It is hot and dry of temperature, and may be used sundry ways, either in the
green leaf eaten with bread and butter, as we use Sage and Persly in a
morning, or it may be boiled in Pottage among other Herbs, or it may be used
in the juice, strained with Wine or Ale, or the Herb may be boiled in Wine or
Ale and strained, and a little Sugar put in to make it sweet, or it may be
drunk with Ale or Wine, being made in powder, or it may be used in the
distilled water drunk by it self alone, or with white Wine before meat, or
with Sack after meat, or you may use it in a decoction on this wise; (Take a
quart of running water, seethe it and scum it, then put in a good handful of
the Herb, and let it boil until the better part of the liquour be consumed,
then drink it with Wine, and if you list, with Sugar, to make it the more
pleasant. Howsoever it be used, it strengthens all the principal parts of the
body, it sharpneth both the wit and memory, The virtues of Cardnus Benedictus.
quickneth all the senses, comfort the stomach, procures appetite, and
has a special virtue against poison, and preserves from the pestilence, and
is excellent good against any kind of Fever, being used in this manner: Take a
dram of the powder, An excellent Medicine for any kind of Fever.
put it into a good draught of Ale or Wine, warm it, and drink it a quarter
of an hour before the fit come; then go to bed, cover you well with clothes,
and procure swear, which by the force of the Herb will easily come forth, and
so continue until the fit be past. Or else you may take the distilled water
after the same manner. By this means you may recover in short time, yea, if it
were a pestilentiall Fever; so that this remedy be used before twelve hours
be past after the disease felt. For which notable effects this Herb may
worthily be called Benedictus, or Omnimorbia, that is, a salve for every sore,
not known to Physicians of old time, but lately revealed by the special
providence of Almighty God.

CHAP. 47. Of Wormwood.
WOrmwood is hot in the first degree and dry in the third. G^. Lib. 6. Simp.
Two sorts of wormwood are well known to many, that is our common wormwood,
and that which is called Ponticum, now sown in many gardens, and commonly
called French wormwood. And while it is young it is eaten in Sallads with other
herbs, to the great commodity of the stomach and Liver; for it strengthens
a weak stomach, and opens the liver and spleen: which virtues are chief,
for the preservation of health, as Galen witnesses, Iecoris ^^atus per quos
fertur alimentum, apertos esse, non aegrotis modo, sed sanis etiam est
tutissimum. Lib. 2. de Ali. ^a. cap. 8. The chief means for the preservation
of health.

Wormwood wine.


For which purpose there is to be had in the stillyard at London a kind of
wine named wormwood wine, which I would wish to be much used of all such
Students as be weak of stomach; they may easily have a Rundlet of three or
four gallons, or less, which they may draw within their own chambers, as
need requires. I was wont when appetite failed, to steep a branch or two of
common wormwood in half a pint of good white wine, close covered in some pot
all night, and in the morning to streine it through a clean linen, Wormwood
wine easy to be made.
and to put in a little Sugar and warm it, and so drink it; or sometime to
burn the like quantity of wine with sugar and a branch or two of wormwood put
into it; wherein I have found many times mavelous commodity, and who so shall
use it now and then, shall be sure of a good stomach to meat, and be free from
worms. I read yet another way to make wormwood wine, prescribed by E^^mus, as
follows. Take of Aqua vitae and Malmsey, of each like much, put it in a
glass or bottle, and put to it a few leaves of wormwood, especially when it is
dried, let it stand certain days, and when you list strain out a little
spoonful, and mix it with a draught of Ale or wine, it may be long preserved.

CHAP. 48. Of Sothernwood.
Gal. lib. 6. Simp.
SOthernwood is hot and dry in the third degree, it is not used in meats, the
smell of it is so strong that it will make some men's heads to Ache, yet the
herb something dried and put in a linen bag, and laid as a Stomacher next
the skin, comfort a cold Stomach well. That which is commonly called
Sothernwood after Matthiolus, is the male kind of this herb, Li. ^. Dios.
ca. 25. Lavender Cotton.
and that which we call Lavendercotten, is the female, named in Latin
Cypressus and Sant^lina, and are both of like temperature: yet Lavender Cotton,
beside the beauty that it bears in a Garden, is commonly given of women to
young children for the worms, being first punned and strained with milk, and
taken fasting, warmed, which effect it surely works (as I have prooved by
often experience) which it does through the bitterness. A proved medicine for
the worms.
For this is a general rule, that all bitter things kill worms, as Centory,
wormwood and such like: But the setting of Sothernwood or Lavender Cotton
within the house in flower pots, must needs be very wholesome, for Dioscorides
writes, that Sothernwood, Serpents and substra^u and nidore fugat,
Sothernwood good to be set up in the house
and in vino potum exitialium venenorum (...).

CHAP. 49. Of Artichokes.
ARtichokes; reckoned of Matthew. among the number of Thistles, Li. 3* Dios. c.
14. Lib. ^. de (...). cap. 51.
is hot and dry in the second degree: It is called of Galen, Cina^a, and
thought to make evil juice, especially when the flowers begin to shed: they
have been used to be eaten raw, but our use is to boil them, and so they are
best, by the witness of Galen in the same place. They are now proved to be
restorative, The virtues of Artichokes.
and being well sodden and eaten with Vinegar and Pepper, they do not only
strengthen the stomach, but also they procure a more earnest desire both of man
and woman to the venereal act. They that eat them only for that purpose* I
would they might eat the innermost part only, and not those leaves which be
(...) off round about, nor yet the bottom which grows ne^t the stalk.

CHAP. 50. Of Leekes.
LEe^kes are hot and dry in the third degree, and as Arnoldus affirms in
Schola Salerni their nourishment is naught, they hurt the eyes, Cap. 13. Raw
Leekes unwholesome.
and engender black melancholy blood, and cause terrible dreams, they hurt
the sinews through their sharpness, they hurt the teeth and gummes* and
choleric and melancholy folks should not use to eat them, and especially
raw, yet if they be boiled and eaten with Honey, Leeks boiled, and eaten with
honey good for phlegm.
they cause one to spit out easily the fleame which is in the breast, and open
and ease the Lungs. In some Shires of England they use in Lent to eat raw
Leeks, and Honey with Beans or Pease sodden, but what Rusticks do, or may do
without hinderance of their health, is nothing to Students, Crassa enim (ut
aiunt) crassis convenient. If any student be desirous to eat Le^ks, Leeke
pottage very wholesome.
let them be first boiled, or else made in pottage, for Leek potage be very
wholesome, not only for such as be cumbred with phlegm, but also for those that
have the colic or stone. Unset Leekes are best: And one notable experiment I
will set down for the comfort of those that be troubled with the said
diseases, how by this herb which is so common in use, they may be greatly
eased. A good plaster for the Cholick
For the Collicke take unset Leekes, blades and all, chop them small, boil
them in good white wine, with May Butter or fresh Butter, until the wine be in
a manner wasted away, then lay them abroad between a clean linen cloth
plaisterwise on the belly, so hot as the patient may well abide it, and at the
cooling of that, apply another hot plaster, and thus do the third or fourth
time together, if need shall so require. And for the stone, take unset Leekes
in the month of June, A medicine for the stone.
shread them small and distill them, sun the water for a month or two, and
drink morning and evening a good draught; for this helps the costive belly,
helps the pain of the Hypps, purges the Kidneys and Bladder, causes Urine,
and sends forth the stone. For which purpose also I have known some to cut
Leeks in small pieces, and to dry them in an Oven, or against the fire, and to
make them in powder, which powder they would use in their drink oftentimes.
Beside the qualities aforesaid, Leekes have two effects mentioned in Schola
Salerni: Cap. ^4.
Reddit faecundas ma^sum persaepe puellas,
Ma^antemque potest nari^ retinere cruorem. Cap. 80.



And again, they say, that Leekes seed and Henbane seed burned together, A
good medicine for the toothache.
and the smoke received through a funnell into the mouth on that side which
aketh, helps the toothache.

CHAP. 51. Of Onyons.
ONyons are hoate and dry almost in the fourth degree: Schol. Sa. ca. 13. Raw
Onyons unwholesome.
Being eaten raw (as Arnoldus says) they engender ill humors and corruptible
putrifactions in the stomach, and cause fearful dreams and headache, and if
they be much used, they mar the memory and trouble the understanding. Yet we
see that husbandmen and laborers are nothing hurt by eating of Onyons, but
rather helped both in appetite and digestion. The reason whereof (as I think)
is that which the Poet Virgill writes, Labor improbus vincit omnia. Yet
experience teaches that Onyons sliced and served to the Table with sufficient
water, with a little salt, is a good sauce to stir up appetite to meat, and
to put away lothsomenesse of the stomach, and cause good digestion, and their
hurtfulnesse is thereby something diminished: and the water or broth of them
may be well used of Students, with Mutton roasted, or Capon, or Woodcock, and
the Onyons themselves, may be eaten also of such as be phlegmatic: But Onyons,
if they be sodden, especially in the broth of good flesh, and so eaten, they
comfort a cold stomach, and cause good digestion, and are not hurtful;
wherefore being used in pottage, or otherwise boiled for sawces (as cooks best
know) or baked in a pie, Onyons sodden be very wholesome.
as I have seen in some places, they be not hurtful but wholesome, especially
for phlegmatic persons, or at such times as phlegmatic meats be used, as in
Lent, or upon fish days: And if any be troubled with the cough, and be
over-laid with abundance of phlegm in the breast, so that they cannot easily
draw their wind, A medicine for the cough.
let them roast Onyons under hott imbers and eat them with Honey and Pepper,
and Butter, morning and evening, and within few days they shall feel their
breasts loosed, and the phlegm easily to be avoided, as I my self have often
proved. And for any burning or scalding Fernelius writes, Porri illita folia
praesenti sunt ambustis remedio; Me. lib. 6. ca. 20. For burning or scalding.

For the plague


and C^pae cum sale contusae ambustae p^rti impositae miraculo persa^ant. And
for one infected with the Pestilence take a great Onyon, and cut him
overthwart, then make a little hole in each piece, the which you shall fill with
fine Triacle, and set the pieces together again, as they were before; after
this wrap them in a wet linen cloth, or wet paper, putting it so to roast
covered in the hot imbers, and when it is roasted enough, press out all the
juice of it, and put to it a little vinegar and Sugar, and give the Patient.
Hereby it appears, that Leekes and Onyons are not only good in meats, but
also in medicines. As for Scallions, they are much of the Nature of Onions.

CHAP. 52. Of Garlic.
Garlic is hot and dry in the fourth degree; Gal. lib. 8. Simp.
if it be eaten raw it hurts the sight, and breeds Headache, yet is it good
for them that have phlegmatic, gross and clammy humors, being moderately
taken and in the cold time of the year; For whom Garlic is good, and for whom
not.
but chollerick folks should abstain from it, especially in hot seasons, for
it does inflame and dry much, and engenders red choler and adust humors;
but in the body wherein there is gross matter, or much cold enclosed, it
heateth all the body, and opens the places which are stopped, it cutteth
gross humors and slimie, and dissolveth gross winds; wherefore it is good
for the Cough, and makes one to spit well; it may be sliced thin as Onyons
are, and put in water with a little salt, or as commonly they use, to punne
it, and put to it a little water, or the broth of flesh; but if it be sodden,
it has somewhat less force, and yet loses not his property: The like is
said of Onyons and Leekes of Galen, Lib. 2. de ali. ^a. cap. ult. Who may best
eat Garlic, Onyons, Leeks, and who not.
where he gives a general judgment of eating of Garlic, Leekes, Onyons,
and such like sharp things for whom they be wholesome, and for whom not, as
follows. Abstinendum ab assiduo usu omnium acrium, and potissimum, cum is qui
ipsis vescitur, natura fuerit biliosus. Solis enim qui vel succum pituitosum,
vel crudum and crassum ac lentum acervarint, cibi ejusmodi sunt accommodati.
Moreover, Garlic has a special property against poison, as appears in
Schola Salerni, Allia, Ruta, Cap. 13.
etc. and is thought of some a good preservative against the Pestilence; But
especially, it is good for them that travail over diverse countries, Sundry
virtues of Garlic.
and use diverse drinks, or if they happen to drink naughty corrupt water, as
it is alleged in the same place out of ^acer.

Allia qui mane jejuno sumpserit ore,
Hunc ignotarum non laedet potus aquarum,
Nec diversorum mutatio facta locorum.
Also Garlic is named of Galen, Theriaca rusticorum, Lib. 12. Me. c. 8.
Garlic is the country man's Triacle.
where he says, Est allium ex eorum ciborum genere qui and flatum discutiant,
and minime sitim inferant. Ac si quis vel, Thrac^s vel Gallos, vel denique qui
frigidam regionem incolunt, vesci alliis votuerit, non leviter iis hominibus
noeuerit: and if Frenchmen may eat Garlic, because of the coldness of the
Country, English men may eat Garlic by Galens rule.
then may English men much more eat it, because they dwell in a colder Region,
as I have showed in my description of Britain. Also in the same place Galen
says, that to eat Garlic and drink Triacle (as I guess) in Ale or wine,
Garlic is good for the Collicke.
is good for the Colic, if it come without an Ague, Quia omnium eduliorum
maxim flatum discutit: And one thing I read in master Eliot very profitable
for such as be troubled with a rhume falling down to the stomach, A medicine
to dry up a Rheum, falling to the stomach.
whereby their stomachs be over-moist, as mine was many years together. The
medicine is thus, to boil certain Cloves of Garlic in Milk, and to strain
it and drink it fasting, for that dries up the moisture of the stomach. A
good medidicine for worms.
The same medicine is also very good to kill Worms, as I have often proved.

CHAP. 53. Of Radish.
RAdish is hot in the third degree, Gal. lib. 8. Simp.
and dry in the second: The roots are much used to be eaten with Mutton
roasted at supper, and those are best that be whitest, as they cry in London,
white Radish white; and the sweetest Radish say they, do grow in the sowrest
places, videlicet, in Sterquili^iis. Master Eliot by his own experience would
disprove Galen touching the use of these roots, Lib. 2. de Ali. ^a. cap. 70.
for Galen finds fault with those Physicians that eat Radish roots raw
after other meats, to comfort digestion, whereas all others following their
example have been by that means grieved. So says Galen, Galen defended
against M. Eliot touching the use of Radish. Lib. 2. cap. 106.
though Master Eliot write the contrary; whose opinion though it be ancient and
grounded upon Dioscorides, where he says, Summo cibo sumi debet, quo magis
ejus distributionem adjuvet, cum autem praesumitur, cibum suspendit: yet this
proof I have had in my self, and I dare say not one among an hundred is
otherwise, but if they eat Radish roots last, they shall belch much, by
reason that they break wind, or rather breed it, and they shall feel their
stomachs oftentimes turned up; And as before meals, if they be eaten first,
they let the meat that it may not descend, Radish neither good before meat,
nor after meat.
so eaten after other meats they will not suffer the meat to rest in the
stomach, but as the Countryman said, that had eaten fish fried with Lamp Oil,
they will make the meat eftsoons to rejolt; but our common manner in England
is not to eat them before meat or after meat, but together with meat as
sauce. And for that purpose they are not only served whole, but also sliced
thin, How Radish may best be eaten.
and with salt strowed upon them, beaten between two dishes until they be
somewhat soft, and the salt has pierced through them, which indeed is the best
way to use them: but they are unwholesome any way, especially for such as have
weak stomachs and feeble digestion; for they engender raw humors, and cause
lothsomenesse, and breed such corruption in the stomach, that by much using
them they make a stinking breath, Radish corrupt the breath. Lib. problem. 40.
which quality is well declared by Alexander Aphrodissaeus, where he says,
that they are deceived that think Radish by a natural property to make the
breath ^^savorie; for then (says he) Omnes qui eam edisse^t, faeti^^^
^ructarent. But this is the reason why it works it in some, and not in
others; The very cause of a sweet breath or of the contrary.
Quorum ventriculus non vitiosis excrementis, maximeque pituit^sis redundat,
eorum eructus purior est; quorum autem illis redundat, impurus and male olen^.
Radix enim vim calefaciendi incidendi extenuandi^que materia^ obtinet.
Flatusque ex humoribus movet* quos per ructum retrudita^ rejicit. The like
reason is to be given of Turnips, and roasted Cheese, why they should corrupt
the breath.

CHAP. 54. Of Turnips.
TVrneps are of hot and moist temperature; if they be first well boiled in
water, and after in the fat broth of flesh, and eaten with Porke or Beef, they
nourish much, they augment the seed of man, and provoke carnal lust; The
virtue of Turnips.
They be windy, wherefore they should be eaten with Pepper: They break phlegm
in the breast and cause one to spit easily, but being much and often eaten, they
make raw juice in the stomach, and corrupt the breath; the seed of it is put in
Triacle, as good against poison.

CHAP. 55. Of Parseneps and Carets.
PArsenips and Carets are hot and dry, Parsenips and Carets good for the
Colic and stone.
but Carets are hot and dry almost in the third degree; they both have virtue
to break wind and expel Urine, which properties be very profitable for such
as be subject to the Cholick and stone. The roots are used to be eaten of
both, first sodden, then buttered, but especially Parsenips, for they are
common meat among the common people all the time of Autumn, and chiefly upon
fish days: But they that abstain from flesh, and eat Parsenips or Carets,
meaning thereby partly to subdue their lust, are deceived, by the judgment of
Matthiolus, where he says: Pro ^ejunantium institu^o, essent potius eorum
cibis abdicandae; Li. 3. Dios. ca. 5.2. Parsenips and Carets provoke Carnal
lust.
venerem enim non obscure stimulant: wherein he agrees with Diosc. in the
same Chapter; for so Dios. writes of Parsenips; Radix urinam pellit, venerem
stimulat. And of Carets, Galen writes, 6. Simp.
Radix flatuosum quiddam obtinet ac venereum: Wherefore they are both good for
such as be weak and in a consumption. Parsenips and Carets be restorative.
And if students do eat them, I mean those that be Students indeed, which
follow the lesson of Pliny, Omne perire tempus quod studio non impertia^,
except they use other provocation, they need not greatly to fear Cupids force;
for Pythias said to Chremes in Terence, Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.
But of Parsenips and Carets Galen writes, Vrinam ci^^t, and si quis ipsis
copiosius utatur vitiosum succum mediocriter gigne^t, Lib. 2. de Ali. fa. cap.
67. Carets are better than Parseneps.
C^ritamen Radix melioris est succi quam Pasti^ac^.

CHAP. 56. Of Capers and Sampere.
CApers be hot and dry in the second degree; they are brought to us from beyond
the Sea, and as Galen writes, Lib. 2 de Ali. f^. cap. 34.
they nourish nothing after that they be salted, but yet they make the belly
loose, and purge phlegm which is therein contained. Also stirs appetite to
meat, Capers be very wholesome for the preservation of health.
and opens the obstructions or stopping of the Liver and Spleen, which is a
special virtue in the preservation of health. They should be eaten with
Oximell before other meat, but our custom is to eat them with meat. Sampere.
Sampere is of much like nature, and used as a sauce with meats after the same
manner: It is a weed growing near to the Sea side, and is very plentiful
about the I Will of Man, from whence it is brought to diverse parts of England,
preserved in Brine, and is no less wholesome than Capers.

CHAP. 57. Of Tansie.
TAnsie is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. It is one of those
six things which are reckoned in Schola Salerni to be good for the Palsy. The
reason is (as I think) for that it avoideth phlegm, Cap* ^0.
and by the heat thereof dry the sinews: Also it kills worms, and purges
the matter whereof they be engendered: Why Tansies are to be used about Easter.
Wherefore it is much used among us in England about Easter, with fried Eggs,
not without good cause, to purge away the phlegm engendered of fish in the Lent
season, whereof worms are soon bred in them that be thereto disposed, though
the common people understand not the cause, why Tansies are more used after
Lent, than at any other time of the year. The herb is good also for the
Stone, and stopping of Urine, as Matt. reports. Lib. 3. Dios. cap. 138.


CHAP. 58. Of Feverfew.
FEverfew is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second: it is not used in
meats, but in medicine: It is called of Matthiolus Matricaria, and is only to
be used in women's diseases. Yet this experience I have of it, An experiment
for a Fever.
that being punned small and tempered with a little salt, and laid to the
pulses of both wrests, it cures Agues in children; and sometime in the elder
sort too, so that it be renewed once in 24 hours, and used continually for the
space of nine days.

CHAP. 59. Of Fumitory.
FVmitory is hot and dry almost in the second degree; though it grow wild, yet
because it is found in some gardens and is very profitable for Students, I have
here mentioned it. Galen shows how a Countrie-man was wont to use it, Lib. 7.
Simp.
both to strengthen his stomach, and to loose his belly: How a man of the
Country used Fumitory.
First he made the herb into powder, Et cum uti volebat subunctionis gratia,
meliorato inspargebat: at roborare volens stomachum, vino nimirum diluto. But
Students may distill the herb, and use to drink the water by it self with a
little Sugar or with white wine fasting, for it does strengthen the stomach,
open the Liver, purify the blood by purging humors adu^t, Great virtues of
fumitory.
and by that means helps itching and scabbinesse, and Morphew, and gives a
lively and fresh color to the face; To make a fair color in the face.
good therefore for such as would be fair, and hurtful to none. Some use to
boil Fumitory in clarified Whey, and so it is very good also to be drunk for
the purposes aforesaid. Syrup of Fumitory is of the same effect, and may be
drunk being mixed with white Wine, three spoonfuls of the Syrup to a quarter
of a Pint of the Wine.

CHAP. 60. Of Filipendula.
FIlipendula is hot and dry not fully in the third degree: it is highly
commended of Physicians for the Stone, and Strangurie, and stopping of Urine:
Wherefore such as be grieved with the like infirmities, may use the herb in
pottage or brothes, or otherwise by the wise counsel of the learned Physician.

CHAP. 61. Of S. John's Woort.
SAint John's Woort is hot and dry in the third degree: Beside that, it is a
very good Pot-hearbe, it is used both in Physic and Surgerie. In Medicines, as
Matthiolus writes, Li. 3. Dios. c. 156.
Epotum semen ex vino calculos ejicit, and venenis adversatur. Aqua stillatitia
florescentis jam herbae, maxim quibusdam praefertur comitialibus et resolutis.
And in Surgerie there is made thereof a Balm which is excellent good for
wounds, after Alexis, in this manner: Take of S. John's Wort the flowers, and of
the flowers of Rosemarie, of each one a handful, put them together into a
glass, and fill it with perfect Oil, Lib. 2. par. 4.
and close well the mouth of the glass, that no Air go out, An excellent
Balm to heal any wound.
then let it stand in the Sun the space of thirty days, and in clear nights
also* and when the Oil shall have gotten the color of the flowers, strain
it, and put to it Ginger one dram, and a little Safron, dissolved in good
wine, then set it in the Sun again the space of 18 days, and anoint the
wounds with the said Oil, luke warm twice a day, and you shall have your
effect.

CHAP. 64. Of Cinckfoile.
CInkfoile is dry in the third degree, and has very little heat: it is much
used in Surgerie, when need requires to bind and consolidate, and is a very
pot herb.

CHAP. 63. Of Avens.
AVens is hot and dry in the second degree, an herb sometime used in
Medicine, but most commonly for the Pot.

CHAP. 64. Of Hartes-ease.
HArts-ease or Panses are dry and temperate in cold and heat: the flowers are
beautiful for variety of colors, but not used in meats, yet the herb is
commended for a rupture. And the distilled water, the herb and flowers is
thought good for the falling evil in children, For the falling sickness in
Children.
if they drink it oftentimes.

CHAP. 65. Of Marigolds.
MArigolds are hot and dry, an herb well known and as usual in the Kitchen,
as in the hall; the nature whereof is to open at the Sunrising, and to close up
at the Sunne-setting: It has one good property, and very profitable for
Students, that is, as Matthiolus writes, Lib. 4. Dios. cap. 186. For redness
of of the eyes.

For the Toothake.


Hujusce herbae usu acui indies oculorum acies. And again, Constat
stillatitiam floridae plantae aquam, oculorum ruborem e^ inflammationem arcere,
si in oculis instilletur; aut si li^eola in ea macerata superponantur. Siccatae
pulvis cavis dentium immissus dolorem levat. But it is of greater force in
women's diseases, as he writes in the same Chapter. Constat sexcentis
faeminarum factis periculis, eandem valere plurimum ad menses ducendos, et
praesertim epo^^ ejus succo, aut herba ipsa recente diutius d^vorata.

CAP. 66. Of Larks claw.
LArks claw, or Larks heel, is temperately warm, and is of small use in meat
or Medicine.

CHAP. 67. Of Columbine.
COlumbine is temperate in heat and moisture: the flowers only are used to
adorn the house. An easy medicine for the Yellow Iaundies
Se^en (ut scribunt quidam rei herbariae authors) drachmae pondere potum ex
Cretico vino addito ^ro^i momento, icteritiam sanat, sed aegros in lecto
subinde sudare oportet.

CHAP. 68. Of Chamaemell.
CHamaemell is hot and dry in the first degree An Herb in great estimation
among the Egyptians, and was thought a remedy for all Agues* Lib. 3. Sim.
as Galen reports. And this Medicine I learned of a Country man, for an
Agew, A good medicine for a Fever.
which I have proved true in many, though it failed in some. Take a handful of
Chamaemell, wash it clean, and bruise it a little, and seethe it in a pint of
Ale, till half be wasted, scum it well, and strain it, and drink it an hour
before the fit, and if you think it bitter, put in Sugar, cover you warm, and
procure heat, so doing three days together fasting. The smell of the Herb is
comfortable to the brain, and therefore to be frequented of Students.

CHAP. 69. Of Saffron.
SAffron is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first; though it be
reckoned among spices, yet because it grows in many Gardens, and is so usual
in meats, I thought good to mention it in this place. Fernelius writes, Lib.
5. Meth. cap. 21.
that Saffron, ^or imprimis, deinde alias parts roborat, emenda^que earum
putredines: sed extra modum sumptus lethalem vim infer perhibetur. Which
thing is proved true by experience: for if a man use much Saffron, it will make
him very fainty: but being moderately used, Stomacho ^^i^is est, ciborumque
concoctionem juvat.

CHAP. 70. Of Oak of Jerusalem.
Oak of Jerusalem is hot and dry in the second degree. The chief use of it is
in Physic for shortness of wind, and avoiding of blood and phlegm by
spitting* as in Plurisies and Impostumes. It may be boiled with Liquorise
thin cut, or else by it self in pure water, and after sweetened with a little
honey or Sugar, and so drunk. But Students may cut the Herb when it is full
grown, and dry it a time in the Sun, and after lay it among their clothes,
for so it will keep them from Moths, and give them a good savor, which
Wormwood will not do, To preserve cloths from Moths.
though Wormwood being used in the like manner, preserve garments from Moths.

CHAP. 71. Of Alecoast.
ALecoast is hot and dry in the second degree. Alecoast Ale.
If you list to make a pleasant drink, and comfortable to the stomach, put
certain handfuls of this Herb in the bottom of a vessel, and tun up new
Ale upon it, after the manner of Sage Ale before prescribed. The Herb Maudlin
is of the same nature, Maudlin.
and much like of smell.

CHAP. 72. Of Clary.
CLary is hot and dry almost in the third degree. It is found by experience
very good for the back, and restorative in a waste. For which purpose they use
not only to boil the leaves whole in broths, tied together in one bunch or
handful, A good Medicine for the back grieved, o^ for a waste in man or woman.
but also they fry the leaves with the yolks of eggs, and so serve them up to
the table. And thus much I can say by proof, that who so shall use this Herb
often, shall find greatness for the griefs aforesaid.

CHAP. 73. Of Betayne.
BEtaine, though it grow wild, yet it is set in many Gardens, and is hot and
dry in the second degree. The virtues of it are innumerable, (as Antonius Musa,
who has written a peculiar book of this Herb, Lib. 5. Meth. cap. 18.
does testify, For diseases of the brain.
but especially it is good for the brain, so that (as Fernelius writes)
Cerebrum vel odore solo recreat, hinc Comitialibus furiosisque medetur,
Paralysi^, torpentiaque membra persanat. For which virtues it is greatly to be
esteemed of Students. And one thing I have often proved, To purge the head.
when I was a Student my self, that if you put a leaf of it up into the
nostrils, it will provoke neesing, and purge the head of phlegm.

CHAP. 74. Of Angelica.
ANgelica is hot and dry almost in the third degree. It is a rare herb, and of
singular virtue, but chiefly* commended against the Pestilence, as well to
preserve a man from it, as to help him when he is infected. After Mat^hiolus,
Pestilentiam arcet hausta, Li. 4. Dios. c. 111.
aut frequenter commansa. And so was I wont to use it at Oxford in time of
Plague, to grate of the dry root into drink, A good Medicine to preserve from
the Pestilence.
and to carry a little piece of the root in my mouth when I went abroad. And
for such as be infected, Datur radicis semidrachma una cum Theriacae dram e
sua ipsius aqua, iis qui peste laborant, and deinde sud^^e coguntur,
repetiturque eodem modo post septem horas, aliqui enim hoc tantum antidoto
sanati sunt. Beside the virtues aforesaid, For one infected with the Pestilence.
the decoction of the root in water or wine, is excellent good for those that
be short winded, through abundance of cold phlegm stopping the Lungs. And the
same decoction is wonderful good to dissolve and avoid any inward impostume,
For shortness of wind and an impostume.
or congealed blood, and greatly strengthens the stomach, yea, the powder of
the root being taken in drink, comfort the heart, and strengthens such as
be subject to swooning, and for the biting of a mad dog, or stinging of any
venomous worm: pound the leaves of this Herb and Rue together, For biting of
a mad dog, or stinging of a venomous Worm.
and apply them to the place, and give the Patient to drink inwardly the
decoction of the leaves or roots. Moreover the root chewed, or a little piece
thereof put into the hollownesse of the tooth, helps the toothache, For the
toothache.
and amendeth the ill savor of the breath: in so much, that it will in a
manner take away the smell of Garlic. Wherefore every Student that has a
Garden, should provide to have this Herb.

CHAP. 75. Of Pellitory of Spain.
PEllitory of Spain is hot in the third degree fully, and dry in the second.
To purge the head.
The chief use thereof is in Medicines to purge the head. Which effect it
works, if a man cut but a little piece of the root dried, and chew it
between his teeth for a time. For so it draws abundance of flegmaticke and
waterish humors, which must be avoided by spitting, holding down the head. It
may best be done fasting, or at night a little before we go to bed. And this
practice I have proved good, nor only to ease the toothache, For a rheum.
(which is a pain most intolerable) but also for a rheum and grief of the
head, proceeding of a rheum, which is a common calamity of Students. Also
Matthiolus says, that this root Oris halitum commendat, Lib. 3. Dios. c. 65.
and omnes roborat sensus, and that in pulverem contrita, vinoque subinde pota
frigidis occurrit morbis: Quamobrem resolutis, comitialibus, convulsis auxilio
est.

CHAP. 76. Of Dragons.
DRagons is hot and dry in the third degree: The chief use whereof is against
the plague. For which purpose we use to distill the Herb, and preserve the
water, which may be used as need requires. A little fine Treacle being mixed
withal, Non solum valet ad praeservandum, For the plague.
verum etiam ad liberandum infectos.

CHAP. 77. Of Elecampane.
ELecampane is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. The chief
virtue thereof is to open the breast, and to help shortness of wind, caused by
tough fl^gme stopping the Lungs. Also it opens opilations of the Liver and
Spleen, and comfort the stomach, as says Schola Salerni* Cap. 68.
Enula Campana, haec reddit praecordia sana.

And for this purpose, who so lists may make Conserva of Elecampane roots, in
this manner. First wash the roots clean, slice them in pieces as big as your
thumb, sees them in fair water until they be tender, take them up and pound
them, and draw them through a hair Sieve or strainer, Conserva of Elecampane.
then set them again over the fire, and put to them the double or treble
weight of Sugar. And when it is perfectly incorporated, take it off, and keep
it in a glass or gally-pot. Also of the roots of Elecampane is made a kind of
Wine called Vinum Enulatum, much used in Germany, as Matthiolus writes; Lib.
1. Dios. c. 12.
Quod vinum in potu sumptum mirifice visum acuit. Beside that, it has like
virtue as the conserve. The best time to gather the roots, is when the leaves
fall. The best season to gather roots in.
Which time also is best to take all other roots that are to be used in
Physic, except it be for present necessity.

CHAP. 78. Of Setwall.
SEtwall, or Capons-taile, is hot and dry in the second degree. Thereof be two
sorts, commonly known and set in Gardens. The one small, which is called
Valerian, and is a good pot-herbe, and beside that, is very good to heal a
cut, as every Kitchen maid knows. The other is named of some, great Valerian,
whose virtues are very great and very many, after Matthiolus, where he says:
Lib. 1. Dios. c. 10.
Praestat Phu ad venenosorum ictus ex vinopotum, and adversus pestilentiam, non
modo haustum, sed etiam olfactum, valet ad stranguriam ejus decoctum potum.
Datur quoque utiliter anhelosis, and tussientibus, praesertim si coquatur cum
dulci radice, uvis passis and semine anisi. Devorata radix flatus pellit. Tota
planta virens una cum radicibus con^usa, and capiti dolenti illita, dolores and
punctiones mulcet. Facit and ad oculorum vitia, ubi albo vino decoquatur, and
deinde vinum in oculum instilletur. Additur in potionibus vulnerum
intrinsec^rum, magno juvamento. And one thing I will note of this Herb for the
pleasure of Students, that the roots thereof being dried and laid among cloths,
they give a sweet smell to them.

CHAP. 79. Of Galingale.
GAlingale, or rather Cipresse roots, though it be rare, yet is it found in
some Gardens, and is hot and dry in the third degree. Beside that, the roots
are good in Medicines; if they be laid among cloths, they make them to savor
well. Lib. 1. Dios. c. 4.
Matthew. sets down an easy Medicine to be made of this root for the
Dropsy, For the Dropsy.
in this manner; Ciperi radicum farina, addita ^accharum lauri eadem mensura,
urina impubis pueri excepta and illita, hydropicos mirifice juvat.

CHAP. 80. Of Skirwort.
SKirwort is hot and dry in the second degree. The roots thereof are used of
skillful Cooks for Salads, as Burre roots when they are young.

CHAP. 81. Of Prickmadem.
PRickmadem is one kind of ( Sedum.) Another is Housleeke, Cold Herbs.
and the third is Stone crop. All three do grow commonly upon the slates of
houses, but Prickmadem is planted in Gardens, and is used for a Pot herb, and
is cold in the third degree.

CHAP. 82. Of Lettuse.
LEttuse is cold and temperately moist in the second degree: The herb is much
used in Sallads in the Summer time with vinegar oil, and sugar or salt, and is
found both to procure appetite to meat, and to temper the heat of the stomach
and Liver. But in one point we differ from the use of old time. For we eat
Lettuse in the beginning of our meals, The old custom of eating Lettuse.
whereas they were wont to be eaten last, as the Poet Martial writes:
Claudere quae coenas lactuca solebat avorum,
Dic mihi cur nostras inchoet illa dapes.


Galen gives Lettuse this commendation, Lib. 2. de Ali. fa. cap. 40.
that of all herbs it breeds lest evil juice; it may be eaten raw (as I
have said) in Sallets, yet because of it self it is waterish and cold, Cap.
52. eius. lib.
as Galen writes Non modo suavior sed utilior etiam redditur, si acrium olerum
quoddam assumpserit, ob eam certe causam nonnulli Erucae ac porri follia, alii
Ocimi lactucae admiscent. It may be also eaten being first boiled, as we use in
Broths, Li. 2. de. Ali. fa. cap. 40.
or as Gal. used in clean water, for so he says; Aetate juvenili cum mihi
ventriculus bile assidue infestaretur, lactuca quo ips^m refrigerarem utebar:
cum vero ad aetatem declinantem perveni, hoc olus fuit mihi adversus vigilias
remedio: How Galen used to eat Lettuse, and why.
tunc enim contra ac in Iuventute, somnum mihi dedita opera conciliabam, grave
enim mihi erat praeter voluntatem vigilare, quod mihi accidebat pa^tim quod
juventute meapte sponte vigiliis assueveram, partim quod declinantium aetas ad
insomnium est prop^nsa. Itaque lactuca vespere commansa, unicum erat mihi
insomniae (...): Whose example I wish all Students to follow, because they are
commonly in youth and age even as Galen was: For whom Lettuse are ill.
Yet one thing I warn all men of out of Matthew. Cavendus est lactucarum usus,
suspiriosis, sanguinem excreantibus, pi^uitosisque, sed iis maxim qui
procreandis liberis dant operam. And if any Student list to live honestly
unmarried, let him use oftentimes this medicine* set forth by Dios. Epotum
semen lactucae libidinum imaginationes in somno compescit, For one that would
live unmarried. Lib. 6. Simp.
and venerirefragatur. And as Galen says, Geniturae profluvium cohibet: sumi
potest in Cervitia, prius contritum mane and vespere.

CHAP. 83. Of Endive and Succorie.
The virtues of Endive and Succory.
ENdive and Succory are cold and dry in the second degree; because they are
much like in operation, I join them both together. The leaves especially of
white Endive are not only used in medicines, but also in meats, either raw in
Sallads, or boiled in Brothes. Both Endive and Succorie any way used do cool
the heat of the liver, and by a special property do strengthen it, and open
the obstructions thereof. For which virtues they are worthy to be greatly
esteemed: For it is a great preservation of health, to have the liver temperate
and unstopped, considering that it is the place where all the humors of the
body are first wrought, and therefore called Officina sanguinis. The Liver is
the workhouse of blood.

The heat of the Liver.


Students that have hoate stomach or hoate livers, may cause their Cooks to
boil them in a broth with a chicken: Or they may distill them in the Summer
season and keep the water, and when they are disposed, drink a good draught
fasting with a little Sugar, or else by the advice of some learned Physician,
they may use the syrup of Endive, or Succorie. I was wont to lay certain
handfuls of the green herbs, clean washed in the bottom of a vessel, and
to tun up new Ale to them, not over strong: and so to make Endive Ale, after
the manner of Sago Ale, Endive Ale.
showed before, wherein I found great commodity being troubled with
inflammation of the Liver. Dandelion and Sowthistill, Dandelion and Sowthistill.
are of much like effect to Endive and Succory; for they are both cooling and
very good to be used in pottage, or boiled whole in Broths, or eaten in
Sallads: They have one good property, very profitable for Students, (who for
the more part have ill stomachs) for of Sowthistill Matthew. says, In vino
decoctus stomachi fluxioribus medetur: and of Dandelion he says, Li. 2. Dios.
c. 124.
Cocta herba stomachum dissolutum adstringit.

CHAP. 84. Of Bleet.
BLeet is cold and moist in the second degree: It is used for a Pot-hearbe
among others, and is sometime eaten being first boiled in water, and then fried
with Oil and Butter, and after that seasoned with Salt and Vinegar, or
Verjuice: yet the often eating of it is disallowed by Matthew. Quia vomitiones
movet ventriculi, and intestinorum t^rmina facit, and alui (...) excitatabile.

CHAP. 85. Of Spinach.
Spinach not mentioned in Galen is cold and moist in the first degree, being
used in brothes or pottage it makes the belly soluble, and eases pains of
the back, and opens the breast, and strengthens the stomach.

CHAP. 86. Of Orage.
ORage is moist in the second degree, and cold in the first, being used in
pottage it does both loose the belly, and ease the pain of the bladder. The
seed of Orage is a vehement purger, as Matt. writes; Noviego Pharmocopolam
quendam, Li. 2. Dios. c. 112. Orage seed purges extremely both ways.
(says he) qui ad ructicos purgandos, Atriplicis tantum semen exhibebat. Quod
iis non sine molestia magna, abunde aluum ciebat, atque etiam simul crebros
provocabat vomitus.

CHAP. 87. Of Beets.
BEtes are cold in the first degree, and moist in the second, they be
abstersive and loses the belly. But much eaten they annoy the stomach, yet
are they right good against obstructions or stopping of the liver, and do
greatly help the spleen.

CHAP. 88. Of Violets.
VIolets, the flowers are cold in the first degree, and moist in the second:
Conserva of Violets how to be made.
Of them is made Conserva in this manner. Take the flowers of Violets, and pick
them clean from the stalk, and cut off all that which is green. Punne them
small, and put to them double the weight of Sugar, to the weight of Violet
Flowers; But to all other Flowers, The virtues of Conserva of Violets.
put three parts of Sugar to the weight of the Flowers* incorporate well
together the Violets and Sugar, and keep it in a glass or Gallipot, it will
last one year, it is very good, to be used of such as have hot Stomachs or
hot Livers. Also it cools the head, and procures sleep, it tempereth the
heart and all other parts of the body. The leaves may be boiled in a broth with
other cooling herbs, as Endive, Succory, Orage, Beets, Sorrel, What herbs
are good for a cooling broth.
Strawberry Lettuce; For so they make the belly soluble and avoid choler and
do bring the parts inflamed to good temper.

CHAP. 89. Of Sorrel.
Sorrel is cold in the third degree and dry in the second; For the Pestilence.
the leaves being sodden do loose the belly. In a time of Pestilence, if one
being fasting do chew some of the leaves, and suck down some of the juice, it
marvellously preserves from infection as a new practiser called Guainerius
does write; and I my self have proved in my household, says Master Eliot in
his Castle of health. Which practice proves that green sauce is not only
good to procure appetite, but also wholesome otherwise against contagion. The
seeds thereof brayed, and drunk with wine and water, are very wholesome against
the Collicke, and fretting of the Guts; it stops the laske and helps the
stomach annoyed with repletion: If any be grieved with heat of the stomach
or inflammation of the Liver, they may easily make a good Conserva for the
purpose in this manner: Conserva of Sorrel.
Take the leaves of Sorrel, wash them clean, and shake off the water, or else
tarry until the water be dried clean; then bea^ them small in a marble Mortar
if you have it, if not in some other, and to every ounce of Sorrel, put three
ounces of Sugar* and incorporate them well together, putting in the Sugar by
little and little then put it in a glass or Gallipot* How to make Conserva of
any herb.
and stop it close; and so keep it for one year. After the same manner you
may make conserva of any herb.

CHAP. 90. Of Rose.
ROse is cold in the first degree and dry in the second, Fer. lib. 5. me. c. 3.
somewhat binding, especially the white Rose: but the red is less cold and
more dry and binding, as for the damask and musk rose is hot and moist
withal. Beside the beauty and fragrant savor of Roses, which is very
comfortable to all the senses: of Rose leaves is made a conserva, passing good
to be used of Students, The virtues of Conserva Roses
not only to cool, but also to comfort the principal parts of the body,
namely, the head, heart, How to make Conserva Roses
stomach, liver, spleen, reins; it may be made thus: Take the buds of red
Rose, somewhat before they be ready to spread, cut the red part of the leaves
from the white, then take the red leaves and beat them very small in a stone
Mortar with a pestell of wood, or otherwise, as you may conveniently, and to
every ounce of Roses put three ounces of Sugar in the beating after the leaves
be small, and beat all together, until they be perfectly incorporated, then put
it in a glass or Gallipot, stop it close, and set it in the Sun for a
season, Conserves should be sunned.
for so teaches Iacobus Weckerus in all Conserves. It my be kept for a year
or two. Of Rose leaves likewise may be made a water of like operation to the
conserva and may be drunk as other distilled waters, either of it self with
Sugar, or mixed with wine. Red-rose water or damask.
The red Rose water pure without any other thing mingled, is most commended for
wholesomnesse, but the damask Rose water is sweetest of smell: And the best
way to distill Roses or any other flower or herb, Li. 1. Dios. c. 113.
after Matthew. is in a Stillatory of glass set over a pot of boiling water,
which they call Balneum Mariae, for those waters which be distilled in Lead or
Brass, receive some smatch of the metal and be not so wholesome for men's
bodies: But our common manner of distilling in England is in Lead or Tynne, and
so we draw very good waters, which keep their strength for a year or two; and
if any list to draw a very sweet washing water, he may draw it as follows.
Take the buds of red Roses; Spike flowers, and Carnation Gilophers, or others,
A very sweet washing water.
but most of the Roses, let them dry a day and a night, put to them an ounce of
Cloves gross beaten, and so distill them, after that Sun the water certain
days close stopped; and if you will yet make it more sweet, take of Musk and
Civet, of each a grain or more, tie it in a fine linne^ cloth by a thread*
Damask powder to make sweet water to strew among clothes.
so that it may soke in the wares, and so let it stand in the Sun for a time.
Or else you may make a very sweet water thus. Take of Cipresse roots, of
Calamus aromaticus, of A^^is of Cloves, of Storax, Calamite, of Benjamin, of
each a quarter of an ounce; make them in powder, and when you will distill your
Roses, fill your Still with Rose Leaves, and a few Spike Flowers, and upon the
topp strew some of your Powders, and so distill them: These Rose-Cakes will be
very sweet to lay among clothes. And if you list you may hang Musk and Civet
in it, and Sun it, as I have said before, for twenty or thirty days; and if
you will not be at cost upon Spices, you may make a very sweet water thus: Take
Damask Roses or red-Roses, A sweet water good cheap.
Spike Flowers, Rosemary, Gilo-Flowers, Mynte, Majerom, Balm, Bay Leaves, of
each alike, and distill them. Also Spike Flowers distilled alone do make a
very sweet water. These waters, The use of sweet waters for students.
I counsel all Students that be able, to have* at the least some one of them,
and to sprinkle themselves therewith sometimes, and wash their temples,
Nostrels, and Beards, for the savor of sweet waters and perfumes do greatly
comfort the Brain, and revive the senses; but pure Red Rose water is not only
good to be drunk, but it is good also to wash the eyes; and if any Student be
dim of sight, he may make an excellent water for the eyes, A good water for
dim^es of sight, or for any other impediment of the eyes.
in this manner: Take three Spoonefuls of Red-Rose water, one spoonefull of
White Wine, of Tutia a dram, of Aloes Epaticke, of white Sugar-Candie, of
each the weight of two pence* make all in Powder, and mix them together, let
them settle in a glass for two or three days, whereof drop as need requires
into the eyes, for it does cleanse, dry, and strengthen the sight, and helps
all exulceration and redness, proceeding of heat. And for such as have a care
to preserve their sight, as all good students have, Another good water for eyes.
(for it stands them upon) they may make a water after the prescription of
Schol. Sal. as follows: Feniculus, Verbena, Rosa, and Chelidonia, Ruta,
Ex istis ^it aqua quae lumina reddit acuta.


Take of each of these five alike, gather them when they are dry cut those
herbs short that be long, distill them, and Sun the water as before is said,
and use now and then to wash your eyes therewith.

CHAP. 91. Of Purslane.
PUrslane is cold in the third degree, and moist in the second. The leaves are
used to be eaten in Sallets with Vinegar, by themselves, or with Lettuce in
the Summer season. And surely very good for such as have hot stomachs, for it
does mitigate the great heat of all the inward parts of the body, likewise of
the head and eyes. Also it represseth the rage of Venus: Against Venus*
wherefore it is much to be used of such students as will live honestly
unmaried. Being eaten, it helps the teeth that be set on edge with sour
things. Some use to preserve it in salt and brine, but so it heateth and
purges the stomach.

CHAP. 92. Of Strawberrie.
STrawberrie is cold in the first degree, and dry in the second. The leaves and
roots are used in Medicines, The virtues of Strawberries.
but the fruit is used to be eaten. And beside that it is very pleasant in
taste, it qualifieth the heat of the stomach and Liver. In some places where
they are plentiful, they use to distill them, and draw a very cooling water,
which is good to drink for such as have choleric stomachs, or inflamed
Livers, and being dropped into the eyes, helps the itch, redness, and
inflammation of them, Strawberry water, wherefore it is good.
as I my self have proved. They may be made in a Conserva in like manner, as I
shall show afterward of Berberies.

CHAP. 93. Of Poppie.
POppie, whereof be three kinds, white, red, and black. The red is wild, and
grows among corn, the white and black are commonly in Gardens, it is cold
and dry in the first degree. The seeds of white Poppie and black, are used to
be eaten, as appears by Diosc. and Matthew. yea, the Country folks about
Trident, Lib. 4. Dios. c 60.
(as says Matthew.) take the leaves of wild Poppie, at their first budding
forth, and boil them as they do other Herbs, and eat them with butter and
Cheese. And one goodly experiment I learn out of Matthew. in the same place,
that the red leaves of Poppy which grow among corn, For a Stitch or Plurifie.
being dried and made in powder, and given in drink, should marvellously help
a Pleurisy, and the women of Salerne give their children the powder of white
Poppie seeds with milk to cause them to sleep; it may also be given otherwise
for the same purpose, as in Posset-drinke, To procure sleep.
in an Ale-berry, or best of all in a Cawdale made of Almonds and Hemp Seed.

CHAP. 94. Of Orpine.
ORpine cools in the third degree. It is proved good to heal a cut, being
pounded and laid to it. It is wonderful to see how long this herb will
continue green, being hanged up in the house as I think, through the abundant
and firm moisture that is in it.

CHAP. 95. Of Burnet.
BUrnet is dry in the third degree, and cold in the second. It is very
astringent, and partly cooling, and therefore good to put in Wine, to confirm
the stomach. And being used in pottage, Lib. 4 Dios. c. 45. Burnet good for
any flux of man or woman.
it binds the belly. And as Matthew. reports, Muliebre profluvium
efficacissime sistit, dyssenteriam, and caeteros alvi fluxus cohibet, and
biliosas vomitiones reprimit. And as he says in the same place by the
authority of Matthaeus Curtius, it is also very good in the plague. For which
purpose I have known some to distill the Herb, Burnet good for the Plague.
and to keep the water all the year. Which thing may easily be done, for the
Herb is very plentiful, and is commonly green, Winter and Summer.

CHAP. 96. Of Deysies.
DEysies are of nature cold and moist, whether they be red or white, double or
single. They be of like virtue, they are used to be given in Potions in
fractures of the head, and deep wounds of the breast. And this experience I
have of them, that the juice of the leaves and roots of Deysies being put into
the nostrils purges the brain, To purge the head. Lib. 3. cap: 139.
they are good to be used in pottage, for Matthew. writes, Herba ipsa rece^s in
acetariis devorata, alvum adstrictam leuit, id quod etiam praestat ex jure
pinguium carnium decocta.

CHAP. 97. Of Gourds, Melons and Cucumbers, which though they be fruits, yet
because they are commonly set in Gardens, be here specified.
GOurds are cold and moist in the second degree. Being eaten raw, they be
unpleasant in taste* and ill for the stomach, and almost never digested.
Therefore he that will needs eat them, must boil them, roast them, or fry
them. Every way they be without savor or taste, and of their proper nature
they give to the body cold and moist nourishment, and that very little, but by
reason of the slipperinesse of their substance, and because all meats which be
moist of nature be not binding, they lightly pass forth by the belly, and
being well ordered, they will be meetly concoct, if corruption in the stomach
do not prevent them.

CHAP. 98. Of Melons and Pepons.
MElons and Pepons, commonly called pompions, be cold and moist in the second
degree, they be almost of one kind, saving that the Melon is round like an
Apple, and the innermost part thereof where the seeds are contained is used to
be eaten. The Pepon is much greater and somewhat long, and the inner part
thereof is not to be eaten. The vulgar people call both by the name of Melons,
and they use to boil them and to eat them with fat Beef, or fry them with
Butter, and to eat them with vinegar and pepper. They both are very cold and
moist, and do make ill juice in the body, if they be not well digested, but the
Pepon much worse than the Melon. They do least hurt if they be eaten before
meals. Albeit if they do find phlegm in the stomach, Melons and Pepons be
like the Chameleon.
they be turned into phlegm, if they find choler, they be turned into choler,
Notwithstanding there is in them the virtue to cleanse and provoke urine, and if
any be troubled with heat of the stomach or liver, or reins, with the
Strangury, they may take ripe Melons, and shred them into small pieces, and
distill them, An excellent water to cool the reins and to help the stone.
and sun the water for a month, then drink thereof every morning tempered
with a little Sugar, the quantity of three or four ounces, for the space of a
month: for besides that, this water cools all the inward parts, it does
greatly help the stone, provokes urine, and cleanses the kidneys.

CHAP. 99. Of Cucumbers.
CVcumbers be likewise cold and moist in the second degree, they are pared,
sliced thin and served to the table with vinegar and pepper in the Summer
season, and eaten with Mutton, and proved to be cooling and comfortable to such
as labor with their bodies, or have hot and strong stomachs. But for
flegmaticke and delicate persons which do no labor, they be unwholesome, and
engender a cold and thick humor in the veins, which seldom or never is
turned into good blood, and sometime brings in fevers. They are good to abate
carnal lust. And the seeds as well of Cucumbers as of Melons and Gourds,
being dried and made clean from the husks, are very medicinable against
sicknesses proceeding of heat, and the difficulty or let in pissing, as
Physicians prove daily in their practice.

CHAP. 100. Of Nettle.
AFter all garden herbs commonly used in kitchen, I will speak somewhat of
the Nettle, that Gardeners may understand, what wrong they do in plucking it
up for a weed, seeing it is so profitable to many purposes. Whether it be cold
or hot, may well be perceived by touching: for who so handles it without some
defense for his hand, shall feel that it is hot in the third degree, and dry
in the second, according as Avicen affirms. Cunning cooks at the spring of
the year when Nettles first bud forth, Nettle potage*
can make good potage with them, especially with red Nettles, very wholesome to
cleanse the breast of phlegm, to break wind, to provoke urine, and to loose
the belly. All which properties with other more are briefly comprehended in
Scho. Sa. cap. 6^.


Aequis dat somnum, vomitum quoque tollit and usum,
Compescit tussim veterem, Colicisque medetur,
Pellit Pulmonis frigus ventrisque tumorem,
Omnibus and morbis sic subvenit articulorum.
CHAP. 101. Of Fruits.
NOw that I have spoken sufficiently of garden herbs, it follows that I
entreat of fruits, which is the second part of my division proposed before,
touching meats. For such is the providence of God toward mankind, that he
has not only provided corn and herbs for our sustenance, but also fruits,
Herbs and fruits were the first meats of mankind.
flesh and fish. Howbeit, herbs and fruits were the first food that ever was
appointed to man, as appears by the commandment of God given to Adam. And
from the time of Adam until after Noah's flood, Genesis 1. ver 29.
he use of flesh and wine was altogether unknown: for before the flood they
neither eat flesh nor drank wine. Gen 9 Ve^. 3.
But now by the change of diet of our progenitors, there is caused in our
bodies such alteration from the nature which was in man at the beginning, The
alteration of mankind touching diet.
that now al herbs and fruits generally are noyfull to man and do engender ill
humors, and be oft-times the cause of putrified Fevers, if they be much and
continually (...). Notwithstanding unto them which have abundance of choler,
they be sometime convenient to repress the flame, which proceeds of choler.
And some fruits which be stypticke or binding in taste, eaten before meals, do
bind the belly, but eaten after meals they be rather laxative. Wherefore it
shall be expedient to write particularly of such fruits as be in common use,
declaring their noyfull qualities in appeyring of nature, and how they may be
used with least hurt.

CHAP. 102. Of Apples.
OF all fruits, Apples are most used amongst us in England, and are cold and
moist in the first degree, as M. Eliot alleges. Howbeit there is great
difference in apples, as in form, so in taste: for some be sweet, The
difference of Apples.
some be sour, some bitter, some harrish or rough tasted Apples, some be of a
mixed temperature both sweet and sour, etc. The sweet and bitter Apples are
inclining to heat, the sour and harrish are cooling, and therefore good, where
the stomach is weak by distemperance of heat. But all Apples generally are
unwholesome in the regiment of health, especially if they be eaten raw or
before they be full ripe, or soon after they be gathered. For (as Avicen
says) they hurt the sinews, they breed wind in the second digestion, they
make ill and corrupt blood. Wherefore raw apples and Quodlings are by this rule
rejected, Raw Apples and Quodlings.
though unruly people through wanton appetite will not refrain them, and
chiefly in youth when (as it were) by a natural affection they greedily covet
them, as I have known in my days many a shrewd boy for the desire of apples,
to have broken into other folks orchards. But apples may be eaten with least
detriment, How Apples may be eaten with least hurt.
if they be gathered full ripe, and well kept until the next Winter, or the
year following, and be eaten roasted, or baken, or stewed. For so they are right
wholesome and do confirm the stomach and make good digestion most properly in
a choleric stomach, yea raw apples if they be old, being eaten at night
going to bed, Cold Apples for whom they are good.
without drinking to them are found very commodious in such as have hot
stomachs, or be distempered in heat and dryth by drinking much wine, and are
thought to quench the flame of Venus, according to that old English saying, He
that will not a wife wed, must eat a cold apple when he goes to bed, though
some turn it to a contrary purpose. And this experiment I have known, that a
roasted apple suffered until it were cold, and then eaten last at night to
bed-ward, has loosed the belly, and is therefore good for such as be commonly
costive. A cold roasted Apple what it works. Lib. 2. de Ali. fa. cap. 21.
But what time is best to eat apples Galen declares. Caeterum post cibum
statim dare ipsa conveniet, nonnunquam autem and cum pane ad ventriculum and
stomachum roborandum iis qui deiecta sunt appetentia, tardeque concoquunt:
quique vomitu, diarrhaea ac dysent eria infestantur. Which saying is diligently
to be noted, The English use of eating Apples proved by Galen.
for this is a confirmation of our use in England, for the serving of Apples
and other fruits last after meals. Howbeit we are wont to eat Carawayes or
Biskets, or some other kind of Comfits, or seeds together with Apples, The
best way to eat apples.
thereby to break wind engendered by them: and surely this is a very good
way for students. The best Apples that we have in England are Pepins,
Costards, Duseannes, Darlings, and such other. They that will not eat Apples,
may yet eat Apple tarts, Apple tarts. How to preserve apples a long time.
which be very wholesome for choleric stomachs, if they be well made. Who so
will preserve apples long, must lay them in honey, so that one touch not
another.

CHAP. 103. Of Pears.
Pears are much of the nature of Apples and of the same temperature, that is
to say, cold and moist in the first degree. The difference of Pears must be
discerned, by the taste even as of Apples. For some are sweet, some sour, some
both, some drier, some more moist, etc. But they are heavier of digestion than
apples. And all manner of fruit generally fill the blood with water, which
boyleth up in the body, as new wine does in the vessel, and so prepares and
causes the blood to putrify, and consequently brings in sickness. How raw
pears may be eaten with least hurt.
So Pears eaten raw make waterish and corrupt blood, and beside that they
engender wind, and so cause the Cholicke. And therefore if any be so greedy
of them, that needs they will eat raw Pears, it shall be good to drink
after them a draught of old wine of good savor, as sack or Canary wine. And
this is the reason (as I think) of that saying which is commonly used, that
pears without wine are poison, that is to say, hurtful to man's nature, as it
is said, in Scho* Sal. cap. 39.


Add py^o potum sine vino sunt pyra virus. Pear baken, roasted or stewed.
But if they be roasted baken, or stewed, they are not unwholesome. And eaten
after meat being ripe and well gathered, they do restrain and knit up the
stomach and fortify digestion, which also is approved by Schola Sal.

Cum coquis, antidotum pyra sunt, sed ^ruda venenum. eodem.

Cruda gravant stomachum, relevant pyra cocta gravatum.
But to avoid all inconvenience that may grow by eating of Pears, Apples, and
other fruits, Cordus gives a very good caveat in this manner. How Pears and
other fruit may be eaten without hurt.


Vt pyra non noceant, extra mundentur and intra,
Mox immerge sali projice deinde for as.
The great pears which Virgil names Gravia volema, in English peare-wardens,
Georg. li. 2.
may be longest preserved and have chiefly the foresaid virtues. As for other
sorts of pears, though they be more pleasant in taste; yet they are but (...),
as Galen speaks, that is to say Summer fruits.

CHAP. 104. Of Peaches.
PEaches be cold in the first degree, and moist in the second. Dios. says,
Lib. 1. cap. 131.
that ripe peaches be wholesome both for the stomach and belly. But they should
be eaten before meals, as Galen shows, and not after meat (as our manner is
in England) for being eaten after meat, they swim above, Li. 2. de ali. ^a.
cap. 19.
and both corrupt themselves, and also the other meats. But eaten before,
Pears should be eaten before meat.
they mollify the belly, and provoke appetite, and qualify the distemperature
of choler in the stomach. And after Peaches we should drink wine, Wine to be
drunk with Pears.
to help the coldness of them, as it is in Scho. Sal.

Persica cum musto, vobis datur ordine iusto. But for such as can rule
themselves and refrain their appetite according to reason, it is best of all to
forgo both apples, pears and peaches, together with other things which
engender melancholy, and are unwholesome for sick folks, and are briefly
contained in these verses following taken out of Scho. Sal.

Persica, poma, pyra, and lac, caseus and caro salsa,
Et caro cervina, and leporina, bovina, caprina,
Atra haec bile nocent, suntque infirmis inimica.
CHAP: 10. Of Plummes.
PLummes are cold and moist in the second degree. Though there be diverse sorts
of Plummes both of the garden and field, and of sundry colors, yet the
Damasins are counted most wholesome: and being eaten before meats they cool a
hot stomach and soften the belly, cap. 41*
as it is in Schola Sal.

Frigida sunt, laxant, multum prosunt tibi pruna. Damasins
The Damasin Plummes are wont to be dried and preserved as figs, and are
called in English, Prunes. Howbeit the Latin word Prunum signifies any kind
of plumme: yea Sloes and Bullase which grow wild. Our Damasins in England be so
small, What Prunes are best. Lib. 2. de ali. fa. cap. 31
and so sour, that they will make no good Prunes. But our Prunes are brought
from beyond the sea. The best are called Damask Prunes, because they grow in a
city of Syria called Damascus, as Galen notes, and are brought out of Syria
to Venice, and from thence to other parts of Europe. The next in virtue to
Damask prunes, be Spanish prunes. They are used diverse ways in Physic, as
in Syrrups, electuaries, Conserves to loose the belly, and to avoid choler. But
for meats, though they nourish little, they be chiefly used in Tarts, or
stewed in water or in wine, and so if they be eaten before meals, they dispose
a man to the stool. I say before meals, because we are wont to eat them after
meals. And some (as I have known) being costive and using them after meals,
purposely to make them soluble, have missed of their purpose. Which error may
be helped by eating them before meat. For so says Math. speaking of Prunes
stewed. Primis mensis devorata praeter id quod esui placent, commodissime aluum
citant. Stewed Prunes should be eaten before meat to loose the belly.
Whose judgment I my self following having a choleric stomach, and a costive
belly, was wont sometime to break my fast with a dish of prunes stewed,
contrary to the use of other men who commonly eat them last. I have written the
more of Prunes, because it is so common a dish at Oxford. As for Sloes and
Bullase, they are more meet for swine, than men. Sloes and Bullase.


CHAP. 106. Of Cherries.
CHeries be cold and moist in the first degree, they be diverse in taste and
commonly of two colors, either black or red. The red Cheries, if they be sour
or sharp, be more wholesome. And if they be eaten fresh and newly gathered, and
fasting, or at the beginning of dinner, their nature is to scour the stomach,
and to provoke appetite (as says Arnoldus) upon Sch. Sal. whose authority I
allege, Cheries should be eaten before meals. cap. 40.
because peradventure it may seem strange to some, that I prescribe them to be
eaten before dinner, whereas our common use is to eat them after dinner. The
virtues of Cheries are briefly set down in the same Chapter, as follows; Si
Cerasum comedas, tibi confert grandia dona.
Expurgat stomachum, nucleus lapidem tibi tollit,
Hinc melior toto corpore sanguis inest.


That is to say, Cheries purge the stomach, and the kernels of the cherry
stones, The virtues of cheries.
eaten dry, or made milk, breaks the stone in the reins or bladder, and
that which no fruit in a manner else does, the substance or meat of Cherries,
engendereth very good blood, and comfort and fitteth the body. But yet let
no student be too bold hereupon, to take any surfeit of Cheries, as I have
known some do, but always to remember that golden lesson of Pythagoras (...).
And if you would eat Cherries or plummes, without all danger, then may you
preserve them after this manner. How to preserve cheries.
Take a pynt of fair running water, half a pint of Rose Water, half a pound
of Sugar, sees all together upon a soft fire of coals, till the one half be
consumed, then take it from the fire, and when it leaves boiling put therein
your cherries or plummes, if they be cherries cut off half the stalks, and let
your fruit be the like weight as of the Sugar. Set it again on the fire, and
keep it in the like heat, till they be soft, the space of an hour, if need
be. Then put into it some Cloves bruised* and when it is cold keep it in a
glass or gallipot* the stronger the syrrup is with sugar* the better it will
continue. Some put to the syrrup Cinnamon Sanders, Nutmegs, Cloves, and a little
Ginger. Sees them not hastily for fear of much breaking.

CHAP. 107. Of Quinces.
QVinces be cold in the first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.
They are not used to be eaten raw, for so they are both unpleasant and
unwholesome. And in my judgment no better for a students stomach than raw
beef, but being roasted, stewed, or baked, and eaten after meals, they close
and draw the stomach together and help digestion, and mollify the belly, if
they be abundantly taken: for this is Galen his rule: Qui stomachum habent
imbecillum, ventrem iis dejici, Lib. 2. de Ali^ sa^ cap. 22^.
cum postrem is epulis astringentium quippiam sumpserint. Wherefore students
having commonly weak stomachs, may (if they be costive) ease themselves, by
eating after meat something which does bind and restrain the stomach, as
Galen tells of one Protas a Rhetoritian, on whom the like practice was
proved. But Quinces may be otherwise used very wholesomly, as being made in
conserva, or preserved in syrrup condite, or made in Marmalade. And because the
making of Marmalade is a pretty conceit, and may perhaps delight some painful
student, that will be his own Apothecarie, partly to spare cost, and partly
to be sure that it be rightly made, I will here set it down as plainly as I
can. How to make marmalade of Quinces.
Your Quinces being full ripe, and very yellow, as in Lent season, or
thereabout, first pare them, and take out the cores, then sees them until
they be tender and soft. That done, beat them small in a wooden mortar, or
marble, with a pestill of wood, then with some of the liquour wherein they were
sodden, draw them through a strainer, as you would do a tart, then set it over
the fire to sees softly, and in seething, strew in by little and little white
Sugar made in powder, the weight of the Quinces or more, as your taste shall
tell you, stir it continually and put thereto some pure Rose Water or
Damask-water, let it sees on height, until it be wall standing. Which thing
ye may know by taking some of it upon a knife, and letting it cool. For if it
be stiff, then take it off and box it, while it is warm, and set it in a warm
and dry air. And if you will not have your Marmalade so binding, you may put
some ripe Apples of good verdure among your Quinces, when you boil them with
Sugar. The Apples must first be sodden or roasted, and then drawn through a
course boulter, as a tart. After the same manner you may make Marmalade of
Wardens, Pears, Apples, Medlars, Cheries, Strawberries, yea, of Prunes or
Damasins, or other plummes. First to boil them upon a soft fix with a little
fair water, To make any kind of marmalade.
till they be soft, then to draw them, as ye do a tart, after to boil them
again with sufficient sugar, to dash them with sweet water and box them.

CHAP. 108. Of Grapes.
GRapes be diverse in taste, and so are they in quality, for sour grapes are
cold and moist, and sweet grapes are hot and moist. The like is to be said of
other sorts. All grapes, if they be eaten newly gathered do trouble the belly,
and fill the stomach with wind. But if they be kept two or three days after
they be gathered, till the husk be somewhat assuaged, they nourish the
better, and are less laxative: neither do they inflate so much, as says
Arnoldus. Ripe Grapes and sweet do nourish much, and make one fat, Lib. 2. de
Ali. fa. cap 9.
as Galen proves by experience of those which keep vineyards, who feeding two
or three months upon grapes and figs only, become very gross. But the
flesh so gotten, soon wears away again, because it is not firm and fast,
but loose and over-moist. And Schola Salerni reckons grapes that be sweet,
cap. 9.
for one of the twelve things that nourish and make fat. And well I wot that
who so eats many of them, they will make him fat with an R. you know what I
mean. Grapes make one fat with an R.
Grapes are used to be eaten after meat as other fruits; but Arnoldus says,
upon the same chapter, That if they be eaten upon a full stomach, they both
be corrupted in the stomach, and they corrupt other meat.

CHAP. 109. Of Raysons.
OF Grapes dried through the heat of the Sun, are made Raysons, which be
therefore named in Latin uvae passae, and they be hot in the first degree and
moist in the second. Among us in England, they be of two sorts, that is to
say, great raysons, and small raysons, otherwise called Corans. The greatest
sort are called raysons of the Sun, the other are commonly to be had, and be
much used in meats, and that for good cause, for beside their pleasantness in
taste, they do make the stomach firm and strong, and do provoke appetite,
and do comfort weak bodies being eaten before meals. But some question is made
of raisons, whether they be binding or loosing, which Galen himself does
answer, Whether Raysons be binding or loos^^g. Lib. 7. and 8. de com. ^edi. Li
5, Dios. cap. 4
where he says, that Raysons without kernels do open the breast and liver, but
eaten with the stones they bind. Whose opinion Matthiolus confirms in these
words, Vvae passae quae vinaciis carent, vel quod ita natura producantur, vel
quod ii art fuerint exempti, si dulces sint, adstringente facultate adeo
privantur, ut etiam mirifice leniant. Quamobrem pectoris angustiae, tussi,
exasperatis faucibus, and renum vesicaeque vitiis maxim convenient. Raysons by
nature are good for the liver.
Beside this, Raysons are Secundum totam substantiam visceri ipsi, hoc est
iocinori familiares ac propriae. And they concoct raw humors, and withstand
putrefaction, Lib. 7. de Comp. med.
as Galen writes, and for this purpose they may well be eaten fasting, the
stones being first taken out. And for cruditie or rawnesse of the stomach,
master Eliot by his own report never found any thing better, than fine rubarbe
chewed with raysons of Corans, yet raysons of Corans, by the judgment of
Arnoldus, do^ cause op^ilations of the spleen, though they be good for the
breast and reins, and so says Schola Sal. cap. 4^.


Passula non spleni, tussi valet, and bona reni. But Rubarbe may be better
eaten, as I think, with great raysons.

CHAP. 110. Of Figs.
Figs, if they be new, are hot and moist, if they be old, they be hot in the
first degree, and dry in the second, if they be ripe they do least harm of
any fruits, or almost none. Yet being much eaten, they make ill blood, whereof
lice are engendered. By reason of their sweetness, they anoy the liver and
spleen inflamed, and they fill the belly with wind, but by their quick
passage the wind is soon dissolved. In Sch. Sal. are set forth two operations
of figs, cap. 43.
as follows, Vermiculos veneremque facit* sed culibet obstat.

After Avicen, figs are best eaten fasting with nuts or almonds, for so they
breed better juice in the body, and open and prepare the way for meat. And he
more commends the eating of them with nuts than with almonds. But our use is
to eat figs and almonds together, which (in my judgment) is better. For so
they may better cleanse the breast and lungs, which is a special virtue that
figs have. And though we eat them commonly after other meats, or upon
fasting days for want of other meats, yet, as it appears by Galen, Lib. 2.
de. Ali. fa. cap. 8. Figs to be eaten before meals.
Physicians were wont to give them long ante cibum, with ginger or pepper, or
powder of Time or peniroyall, to such as had oppilations of the liver or
spleen, or had any hard congealed matter in the inward parts of the body, or
any distillations or rheums falling into the breast and stomach, for in all
these cases figs do profit much; beside that they make the belly soluble,
and do cleanse the reins of the back. And one easy medicine I will set down for
the comfort of such students as be short winded, Lib. 1. de Dios. c. 1 4 6 For
a cough^ cap. 43
taken out of Math. Caricas du ^ aut tres, nocte una in aqua vitae maceratas,
asth* maticos juvare qui mane eas devoraverint. Also in Sch. Sal. it is showed
that a plaster made of figs first sodden in water and a little vinegar, and
after beaten small in a mor^ar, are good for the swines evil, for kernels, for
swellings, as appears in the verses following, For swelling in the necke^
Scrofa, tumor, glandes, ficus cataplasmate cedunt.

CHAP. 111. Of Almonds.
ALmonds be hot and moist in the first degree, they do extenuat and cleanse
without binding. Wherefore they purge the breast and lungs, and be good to be
eaten with figs, Bitter almonds
of such as be short winded. As for bitter Almonds, I omit, because they are
not used to be eaten, though in medicines they be of great virtue. Of sweet
Almonds is made by skill of Cooks, Almond milk, Almond milk how to be made
Cawdales of Almonds.
a very temperate meat in hot diseases. Also cawdales of Almonds, both
comfortable to the principal parts of the body, and procuring sleep: also
almond Butter very delicate and good for a stuffed breast. Almond Butter
The making of which things I refer to cunning cooks, or to the learned
Physician, who is, o^ ought to be a perfect cook in many points. Yet because
all students be not of ability to have a cook, or a Physician at their
pleasure, I will set down an easy way, which I was wont to use my self in
making of almond milk. Take a pottle of fair water, boil in it two handfuls
of violet leaves, or if you list, one handful of violet, and another of
strawberrie leaves or the like quantity of Endive and Succorie or other
cooling herbs; take also an ounce of good Liquorice, cut in thin slices* if
you would make it for phlegm, let the herbs and Liquorice boil in the water
leasurely until half be wasted, then strain it, and let the liquor cool.
Then take a quarter of a pound of almonds and blanch them, To blanch almonds.
that is to say, put them into water boiling hot, and let them steep therein a
while, then get off the husks, as you shale nuts, that done, punne them small
in a mortar of Marble (if you have it) until they wax moist, then put the
Almonds into the liquor, and stir and blend both together with a spoone, after
that draw the liquor and all through a streiner, pressing the Almonds well with
the back of a spoone. And of that which is strained when you will occupy more
or less, you may put in sugar and set it over the fire, until it boil, then
take it off, and use it as please you. Diverse sorts of Almond milk
Some draw their almonds after they be blanched and strained, with fair water
only, making it neither too thick nor too thin, which way also is good: or
to draw them with any distilled water, as rose water, Endive or Succory water.
As for Almond Cawdales are made with ale, strained with almonds, Cawdales of
Almonds how they are made
blanched and brayed, as before, then lightly boiled and spiced with Nutmeg and
Sugar, as before is said, or otherwise, as pleases the party.

CHAP. 112. Of Dates.
DAtes new gathered are hot and moist in the first degree, but if they be old,
they be hot and dry in the first degree. Dates being much eaten, Galen. Lib.
2. de Ali. fa. ca. 26.
and not well digested, annoy the head and cause gnawing in the stomach, and
make gross juice, and sometime cause obstructions or stoppings in the liver and
spleen: wherefore they are not wholesome for students. Yet they are commonly
used at delicate feasts, to set forth other meats, and are counted restorative.
But their chief virtue is, that if they be well digested, and temperatly used,
they nourish and make the flesh firm, and bind the belly. And for this last
property they are much used in medicines, when it is requisite to bind or
restrain, Lib. 1. cap. 126.
and so says Diosc. Decoctum Palmarum, per se potu and gargarizatione
magnopere astring^t and cohibet. For any laske or waste.
Good therefore in any laske or waste in man or woman. And for that purpose
they may be used, sodden in milk or in Muskadine. Yea the very stones of Dates
being beaten to powder, and used together with sanguis Draconis, in Raspis or
red wine, is passing good in the said cases, as by experience I have often
proved.

CHAP. 113. Of Pomegranates.
POmegranates be of good juice, and profitable to the stomach, especially they
which are sweet. But in hot fevers, they that are sour be more expedient and
wholesome, for then the sweet do incend heat and puff up the stomach. They
are found by experience to be very comfortable and restorative in long
sickness, and specially they are good in any consumption or flixe. Lib. 8.
Simp.
Because as Galen says, Malum granatum om^e* adstringentem qualitatem obtinet.
Insomuch that the very pill of a Pomegranate, being made into powder and dru^ke
in red wine or Raspis, together with a little Cinnamom, A good medicine for a
laske Lib. 1. Di^s. c 1:7
is a singular remedy for any laske or flixe, as I have often proved. Yet
Matthiolus prescribes the whole Pomegranate to be used, as follows, Punicum
malum ^ictili vase inclusum, cooperculo argilla circumlito and in fu^no
combustum, dysentericos, and ^orminosos, praesentane^ remedio juvat, ubi ipsius
sesquidrachmam^ in pulverem contrit^, ex vino potandum propinabis. And as for
the kernels of sour pomegranates, he writes in the same place, For a waste
in women.
that Ossiculi punicorum malorum acidorum uncia una cum thu^is dr^chm^, in
tenuissimum pulverem contrita, auxiliantur faeminis albis uteri profluviis
laborantibus, si quotidierosarum stillatitia aqua, huiusce pulveris bin^^
hauserint drachmas.

CHAP. 113. Of Medlars.
MEdlars are cold and dry in the second degree, they strain or bind the
stomach, and therefore they are good after meals, especially for such as be
over laxative: being much eaten they engender melancholy, and be rather
medicamentum than alimentum, as Galen says. Yet of the stones or kernels of
Medlars, may be made a very good medicine for the stone, Lib. 2. de ali. fa.
cap. 25.
as Matthew. writes. Mespilorum ossicul^, in pulver^m contrita, calculos
^^renibus pellunt, ubi cochlearis me^sura, Lib. 1. cap. 136. Li. 1. Dios. c.
133. A good medicine for the stone^*
ex vino i^ quo vulgaris petr^selini radices decoctae fuerint, ebibantur.

CHAP. 114. Of Services.
SErvices are much of the nature of Medlars, saving that they are not so
binding. Yet they are more pleasant in eating. They are likewise to be eaten
after meat, to constrain and close up the stomach. They are plentiful about
Oxford. Mandu^tur, ^t ^lvum sist^nt, as says Dios. Lib. 1. cap. 136.


CHAP. 115. Of Berberies.
BErberies are cold and moist in the second degree. Because of their soreness
they are not used to be eaten alone, but made in conserva, or else put in other
meats. Conserva of Berberies is very good for a hot stomach, or hot liver, to
provoke appetite, to restrain vomit, The virtues of Conserva barberies, and how
it is to be made
as I have often proved in hot diseases. It may be made in this manner: Take of
Berberies a pint full, clean washed and picked from the stalks, let them
sees leasurely in a quart of water, or more, until they be soft, then pour
out the water, and draw them through a strainer as you do prunes, then take
all that is strayned, and put to it three times so much sugar, and let them
sees together, until the sugar be incorporate with the Berberries, then take
it off, and put it in a glass or gallipot. Also this experiment I will
disclose for the behalf of students. For the yellow Iaundise
That the inner rind or Bark of the Berberry tree, being laid in ale or
white wine close covered and drunk the next morning after, is a sufficient
medicine to cure the yellow jaundise, if it be used four or five times fasting
in a morning, abstaining two hours after it* and if any list to preserve
Berberries whole, for a banqueting dish, they must be used as I have declared
before of Cheries. And if you would keep them all the were for saucing of
other meats, then take them, and pick the leaves clean from them and put them
in a pot of earth and fill the pot full of verjuice, How to keep berberies all
the year.
or cover them over with salt, and take them out as you occupy them.

CHAP. 116. Of Olives.
OLives, if they be ripe are temperately hot, they which be green, are cold
and dry. They are brought into England from Spain, being preserved in salt
liquor, and are used as a sauce, and so they do not only stir up appetite,
but also strengthen the stomach, and being eaten with vinegar, they loose the
belly. Of Olives is made our salot oil, and that which is commonly called oil
Olive, the mother or ground of many other oils, and is most properly called by
the name of oil, as Galen writes, wherewith as Matthew. reports, may be made a
very good medicine to ease the pain of the cholicke and stone. Lib. 6 S^mp^
Li. 1 Dios.. cap. 31.
Which I will recite for the behalf of students. Oleum si cum pari pondere
vini Cretici calidum bibatu^, aut clystere infundatur, Colicos, Ili^cos, and
Cal^ulosos dolores mirifi^e mulcet. A good medicine for the colicke and stone.
And this commodity I note in this medicine, that it may be received at both
ends* or tone or the other, as best shall like my brother. The salet oil, which
is indeed the purest oil olive, Salet oil and the operation thereof.
is wholesome to be eaten with sops of white bread, and is like in operation to
butter, yet some deal stronger in loosing. And this proof I have of it, that
if you would procure an easy vomit, and without all danger, to cleanse the
stomach and inward parts, Sack and salet oil to procure a vo^ it
take but four spoonefuls of Sack or white wine, and as many of salet oil,
and mix both together, and warm it and drink it, and you shall have the effect.

CHAP* 115. Of Orenges.
ORenges are not wholly of one temperature, for the rind is hot in the first
degree, and dry in the second, the juice of them is cold in the second degree,
and dry in the first. They are colder and hotter as they are in soreness or
sweetness. For the sourer the juice i^, the colder it is, and the sweeter, the
more hot. With the juice of Orenges is made a syrrup, and a conserva very good
and comfortable in hot fevers, and for one that has a hot stomachs. Also with
the juice putting to a little powder of Mints, Sugar, and Cinomon may be made a
very good sauce for a weak stomach, to provoke appetite. The rindes are
preserved condite in sugar, and so are the flowers of the Orange tree. Either
of them being taken in a little quantity, do greatly comfort a feeble
stomach. The substance of the Orange is used to be eaten raw with roasted
flesh, as a sauce, yet Matthew. does not commend it, Quia cruda non facile
coctioni obediunt, L. 1. Dios c. 131.
and crassum generant succum. But Lady Gula has not only commended them to be
eaten with meats, but also devised a banqueting dish to be made with sliced
Orenges and sugar cast upon them.

CHAP. 118. Of Limons.
Limons are like in nature to Orenges, saving that as they are sourer, so are
they colder. Neither is the pil of them bitter as the pil of an Orange, but may
be eaten together with the substance, though it be of harder digestion. Of the
juice is made both syrrup and conserva, and the whole Limon is preserved
condite with sugar. Yea, the juice of a Limon is very good against the stone,
Lib* 1. Dios c. 131
for so says Matthew. Limoniorum succus ex vino Cretico potus, mirifice calculos
pellit. Wherefore a cup of Rhenish or white wine, An easy medicine for the
stone.
with a Limon sliced and sugar is a pleasant medicine next a man's heart in a
morning. And I would every good student might be hurt so thrife in a week.

CHAP. 119. Of Hasill Nuts and Filberts.
HAsill Nuts be hot and dry in the first degree, they be hard of digestion,
they fill the stomach and belly with wind, they incline one to vomit, Hasill
nuts very unwholesom
and as experience proves, they stuff the breast full of phlegm, and cause a
cough. Wherefore I advise all students not to use them much, especially after
they be dry for the dry nuts are worse than the new and moist, because they
are more dry and oilie: by reason whereof they turn soon to choler, and
engender headache. Yet if any be come of a Squirrels kind, and loves well to
eat old nuts, let him eat raysons together with them. For raisons through their
moisture will qualify the dryness of the nuts, as Scho^ Sal. teaches, Sumere
sic est mos nu^ibus sociando rucemos. cap. 4^.


Yet in another place, cap 38.
dry nuts are commended to be eaten after fish in stead of cheese saying, Post
pisces nuces, post carnes caseus adsit.

Because nuts by reason of their dryness, let the ingendring of phlegm that is
wont to come of fish. But otherwise nuts are discommended, as in the verse
following, Vnica nux prodest, nocei altera, tertia mors est.

Meaning, that the Nutmeg is wholesome, the Hafill nut hurtful, and the Nut
which the Arabians call Nux Metel is venomous. Filbers are of much like nature,
Filbers.
saving that they are more pleasant in eating, longer in form, thinner in
shale, and sooner ripe, Matthew. sets down a medicine to be made of nut
shales in this manner: Li. 1. Dios c. 142.
Putamina ipsa cruda, in tennem pulverem contrita, A medicine of Nut shales,
for a laske.
and ex vino austero hausta drachmarum duarum pondere, diarrhaeam cohibent, and
alba faeminarum profluvia.

CHAP. 120. Of Walnuts.
WAlnuts be hot and dry in the second degree. If the pills be taken off, they
are thought to be good for the stomach, and somewhat loosing the belly, and
mixed with sugar they do nourish temperately. cap. 13.
They are reckoned in Scho. Sal. for one of those six things which are good
against poison.

Alli^, Ruta, Pyra, and Raphanus cum Theriaca Nux,
Haec sunt antidotum contra mortale venenum.
King Mithridates medicine against poison.
And true it is, that dry Walnuts, and Rue, and Figs and salt, were king
Mithridates medicine, against venom, which after he had long used, when he
sought to dispatch himself with poison he could not. And no marvel, for the
water of green VValnuts taken about Mid-summer being drunk two or three
ounces, Asure medicine against the pestilence taken out of Euony^^us.
cools and resists the Pestilence. And the water of the outer husks of
VValnuts, being not rotten distilled in September, is given to drink against
the pestilence with a little vinegar, as a certain experiment.

CHAP. 121. Of Chestnuts.
CHestnuts are commended of Galen of all wild fruits to yield best
nourishment. Lib. 2. de ali. fa. cap. 38.
Yet elsewhere he says, that whether they be roasted, fried or boiled, they be
hurtful; but much more if they be eaten raw. But if any man desire to eat
them, let him first prick them through the husk with a knife, and then roste
them under the embers or hot ashes. And if they be eaten with honey fasting,
they will help a man of the cough. But their chief force is in binding the
belly. For so says Matthi. Castaneae vehementer sistunt, tum al^i, Li. 1.
Dios. c. 122.
tum ventriculiflu^ciones, idque maxim siccae: quin and sanguinem excreantibus
prosunt. For a laske or flix.
Acornes of the Oke-tree are like in operation, which being likewise roasted
under ashes, and eaten will soon stay a laske, as I learned of an old woman,
which therewith did great cures in the flix.

Of Spices, which because they are for the most part fruits of certain trees
growing out of this Realm, yet much used in meat and drink among us, I have
here annexed to the Treatise of fruits*

CHAP. 122. Of Pepper.
cap 75. Three sorts of pepper. Lib. 8* Si^p.
PEpper after Arnoldus upon Schol. Sal. is hot and dry in the fourth degree.
There be three sorts of pepper, that is black, white, and long pepper, al
growing upon one tree, as Galen reports. And that is white pepper which is
gathered very green and moist. And that long Pepper, which is a little dried,
but not perfectly ripe. And that black pepper which is gathered full ripe. But
the Spaniards and Portingales, which have traveled the East and West Indies,
report the black Pepper to grow upon long bushes* and the long pepper to be
the blowings of a certain tree, much like those blossoms which the Hasill
trees bring forth at the fall of their leaves. But in operation all sorts of
pepper differ little, though the white Pepper be best for the stomach, L. 4, de
Sa. Tuen.
as Galen writes: for all kinds of Pepper generally do heat the body, contrary
to the vulgar opinion, which is, that pepper is cold in operation. The vulgar
opinion of pepper disproved.
But who so receives it into the body, shall feel it hot in operation, for
through the heat and dryness that it has, it dissolveth phlegm and wind, it
helps digestion* expulseth urine, and avails against diseases of the
breast, proceeding of cold. All which properties are briefly and pythily set
forth in Schola Sal. cap. 75^


Quod piper est nigrum, non est dissolvere pigrum.
Phlegma purga^it, digestivamque iuvabit.
Leucopiper stomacho prodest tussique dolorique
V^ile, praeveniet motum febri^ue rigorem.
In which verses, the chief commendation is given to white pepper, and that it
has five virtues: first to comfort the stomach, secondly to help the cough,
thirdly to help the colicke or any pain coming of wind, fourthly to
withstand the causes of a cold fever being given before the fit, fifthly to ease
the shaking of fevers. All which properties notwithstanding may be ascribed to
the other kinds of pepper. For which causes there is an excellent confection
made of all three peppers, Diatrion piperion.
and is thereof called Diatrion piperion, passing good for a cold and windy
stomach, and may be taken at any time of the day. And such as have not that
confection, may take a few corns of black pepper gross beaten in a draught
of ale fasting, or take a little of the powder of any of the three sorts
together with meat, for nothing is better for wind and phlegm.

CHAP. 123. Of Cloves.
CLoves are hot and dry almost in the third degree They have virtue to comfort
the sinews, also to consume and dissolve superfluous humors, they are good
for the stomach, liver and heart, they help digestion, and stay a laske. And
being sodden whole in milk or made in powder, and so taken in milk, they
comfort the debilitie of nature, and stir up Venus. Beside this, they are
sundry ways used both in meats and medicines, and to give a sweet savor to
distilled waters and powders no spice is of more force, they are the fruit of a
certain tree growing in the East Indies.

CHAP. 124. Of Maces.
MAces are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. They are found
growing close about the Nutmeg, covering it as it were an husk, they are to
the stomach very commodious and restorative, being used in meats. And for
this purpose they are boiled whole in broths or coleyses, or milk. Beside
that, they be very good to be drunk against spitting of blood, and bloody
fluxes, and excessive laxes, and the cholicke.

CHAP. 125. Of Nutmegs.
NVtmegs be hot and dry in the second degree. They are the fruit of a tree in
India like unto a peach tree, they strengthen the stomach and liver, they
abate the spleen, they provoke urine, they stay a laske, they break wind.
And that which is best for students, they make the mouth to savor well, they
comfort the brain, the sight, the liver, the spleen, and specially the mouth
of the stomach. Yea as I have proved in many that had weak heads, Nutmegs is
the best spice for students.
being taken last at night in a cawdell of Almonds or hempseed, they procure
sleep. And in my judgment it is the best spice for students of all other. And
I would advise them to grate often of it into their drink, and if they can get
nutmegs condite, which must be had of the Apothecaries, that they would have
always by them half a pound or more to take at their pleasure.

CHAP: 126. Of Ginger.
GInger is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first. It is the root of a
certain herb, Li. 4^ de Sa. Tuen^
as Galen writes. It heateth the stomach, and helps digestion, and is good
for the sight. For this experience I have of Ginger, that a penny weight
thereof together with three penny weight of white sugar both made very small in
powder and ^earsed through lawne or a fine boulter cloth, and put into the eye,
A certain experiment to take away a phlegm or perle from the eye.
has within short time worn away a phlegm grown over the eye: also with two
ounces of sugar, a quarter of an ounce of ginger, and half a quarter of an
ounce of Cinnamon, al beaten small into powder, you may make a very good blanch
powder, to strew upon roasted apples, Blanch powder
Quinces, or Wardens, or to sauce a hen. But that ginger which is called green
Ginger, or ginger Condite, is better for students: for being well made, if it
be taken in the morning fasting, it comfort much the stomach and head, and
quickneth remembrance, and is very good for a cough. Green ginger


CHAP. 127. Of Cinnamom.
CInnamom is hot and dry in the third degree: that which we have is the bark
or rind of a certain tree growing in the Indies, and is the right Cassia, as
Mathio. thinks. The use thereof is great as well in meats, Li. 1. Dios. ca.
13.
as in medicines, and found to be very comfortable to the stomach, and
principal parts of the body, insomuch that I have read in an old Author of
Physic, this meeter following, Cur moriatur homo, qui sumit de Cinamomo?

An excellent cinamom water
There is made a water with Cinamom, very good for many purposes, in this
manner. Take a pound of good Cinamom, and beat it gross, then take a pottle of
perfect rose water, and as much of good wine, sack or Canary wine, or else
take a galon of the wine only without rose water, steep all together close
covered in some clean vessel the space of four and twenty hours, then still
it in a Limbecke, you man keep that which comes first if you list by it
self about a pint, for the later will be weaker. Some put a pound of Sugar Candy to steep with the Cinamom, and so they make it very pleasant. And I
have proved the best way to be to take a gallon of Sack, a pound of Cinamom
gross beaten, and a pound of sugar candy* and to steep all together, and so
distill them. This water has innumerable virtues, but especially to restore
and preserve the debility of nature. And as Matthiolus says in the Chapter
aforesaid, Ventriculum, iecur, lienem, cerebrum, nervosque iuvat, and roborat.
Wherefore I reckon it a great treasure for a student to have by him in his
closet, to take now and then a spoonefull.

CHAP. 128. Of Grains.
Grains are hot and dry in the third degree: they are good for a cold
stomach, and are much like in operation to Pepper. Old folks use them often in
their drink, either for some special property, or else because they are
better cheap than other spices. Doctor Boorde in his Dietarie says, it is a
good spice for women.

CHAP. 129. Of Sugar.
Unto this treatise of spices, Sugar may be added, because it is commonly
joined with spices, both in meats and medicines. It is the juice of certain
Canes or Reeds, which grow most plentifully in the Islands of Medera, Sicilia,
Cyprus, Rhodus, and Candie. It is made by art by boiling of the Canes, much
like as they make their white salt at the wiches in Cheshire. Sugar is not so
sweet as honey, nor so hot, and therefore causes not so great thirst. It may
be given in agues, as Galen affirms, because it does not inflame the body as
honey does. Lib. 8. cap. 4. Meth. Meden. Sugar and honey compared together in
wholesomnesse
And this I can say of experience, that Sugar agrees with all ages, and all
complexions but honey contrariwise anoyeth many, especially those that be
choleric or full of wind in their bodies: yet I grant that honey is very
wholesome to some, especially our English honey, if it be pure and unmixt, for
in my judgment it is comparable with Mel Atticum, which was in Galens time
most commended. And honey is the more wholesome if it be clarified: How to
clarify honey.
that is to say, a little water being put to it, gently boiled, and scummed
while any froth arises. For by this means (as Galen shows) Melli acrimoniam
adimemus, Lib 3. de Ali. fa* cap. 39.
ipsumque efficiemus ad distributionem and coctionem accommodatius. And if you
would know briefly for whom honey is wholesome, For whom honey is wholesome and
for whom not wholesome.
and for whom not wholesome, Galen in the end of the foresaid Chapter declares
in these words, Senibus quidem ac in universum frigidi temperamenti corporibus
est accommodum: aetate autem florentibus, and calidis in bilem vertitur. And
this is the reason why honey agrees with some natures, and not with others.
Wherefore sugar is generally more wholesome. And although it be not so strong
in operation against phlegm as honey, yet it purges phlegm well. Sugar and
water, good to clear the breast and stomach of phlegm.
And for that purpose, some use to drink white sugar and water brewed
together, and thereby have found great ease. And if a branch or two of Rosemary
be put to it in brewing, it will be much the better. Yet white sugar is not so
good for phlegm, as that which is called Sugar Candy, Sugar candy.
whether it be white or brown, for both sorts are exceeding good in this
case. And the ginger, which is named ginger Condite is passing good both to
digest phlegm, and to comfort the stomach and head, Ginger condite.
and is to be used of Students that be much cumbred with phlegm.

CHAP. 130. Of Biefe.
NOw that I have spoken sufficiently of corn, herbs, and fruits, it remains
that I prosecute the third and last part of my division before set down, which
is touching living and sensible creatures, and their parts pertaining to diet.
And because biefe of all flesh is most usual among English men, I will first
entreat thereof. I need not to show how plentiful it is throughout this land,
before all other countries, Biefe and the commodity thereof
and how necessary it is both by sea for the vitailing of ships, and by land
for good house keeping, insomuch that no man of honor* or worship, can be said
to have good provision for hospitality, unless there be good store of biefe in
readiness. And how well it does agree with the nature of Englishmen the common
consent of all our nation does sufficiently prove. Yea, that it brings more
strong nourishment than other meats, may plainly be perceived, by the
difference of strength in those that commonly feed of biefe, and them that are
fed with other fine meats. Notwithstanding, Galen affirms, that biefe makes
gross blood and engendereth melancholy, Lib. 3. de Ali fa. cap. 1 Bie^e is a
melancholy meat.
especially if it be much eaten, and if such as do eat it be of melancholy
complexion, for in those, (says he) it breeds melancholy diseases, as
cankers, scabbes, leprie, fevers, quartaines, and such like. And Isaak Iudaeus
is of the same judgment. For which cause, Par. 4* de di^^^is universalibus. c.
7
Sco. Sal. reckons biefe among those ten sorts of meats, that engender
melancholy, and be unwholesome for sick folks: the verses are these.

Persica, poma, pyra, and lac, caseus and caro salsa,
Et caro cervina* and leporina, bovina, caprina,
Atra haec bile nocent, suntque infirmis inimica.
But all these authors (in mine opinion) have erred in that they make the biefe
of all countries alike. For had they eaten of the biefe of England, or if they
had dwelt in this our climat, which through coldness ( ex antiperistasi) does
fortify digestion, and therefore requires stronger nourishment, I suppose they
would have judged otherwise. Yet do I not think it wholesome for sick folks,
but for those that be lusty and strong. Or else we may say, that those famous
Physicians meant of old biefe, or very salt biefe. For there is great difference
of biefe touching age, for young biefe is tender and pleasant in eating, Great
difference of biefe.
and old biefe is more tough and unsavorie. Again Ox biefe is better than
Bull biefe, except it be for those that would look big. And cow biefe if it be
young (as Irish men think) is better than both. But by master Eliotes
judgment, Ox biefe not exceeding the age of four year is best of all. As
for veale is greatly commended in Schola Sal. because it does nourish much,
Veale. cap. 28.
for so they say, Lib. 3. de al. fa. cap. 7.
Sunt nutritivae multum carnes vitulinae.

Whose judgment Galen approves, where he says, that the flesh of a sucking
calfe, of six or eight weeks old, being roasted does nourish much, and is
easily digested. But our use is to kill calves at three weeks or a month old,
at which time they must needs be full of superfluous moisture: yet that
superfluity is very well abated by rosting. Therefore veale is better roasted
than sodden. Roasted meat is dryer than bo^led.
And should be rather little over roasted than under. For this is a general
rule in Philosophy and Physic, that meat roasted is drier than boiled. ^ib 3.
de ali. fa. cap. 2. Salt biefe*
Which is confirmed by Galen in these words, Quae assantes aut in sartagine
frigentes mandunt, ea corpori siccius dant alimentum: quae vero in aqua
praecoquunt, humidius. As for salt biefe which is much used in some places of
England, whether it be kept in brine or hanged up in the smoke, called
Martlemas biefe, because it is commonly killed about that time of the year, is
in the verses before alleged out of Scho Sal. reckoned unwholesome, and to
breed gross and melancholy blood. And as I have often proved in my self, is
very hard of digestion. Yet biefe light poudered, is more wholesome than fresh
biefe. Because by the salt it is purified and made more savorie. And this much
I know that in choleric stomachs, as it is commonly in youth, biefe is more
convenient than chickens, and other like fine meats. Because fine meats in hot
stomachs, be as it were over-boiled, when the grosser are but duly concocted.
The good ordering of Biefe and other victuals, I refer to good Cooks.

CHAP. 131. Of Mutton.
MVtton is commended of the most part of Physicians, save Galen, who says,
that it makes il juice for so he writes of lamb and mutton jointly. Lib* de
Ali^ ^a. cap. 1 Galen disproved concerning mutt^n.
Agni carnem habent humidissimam ac pituitosam: Ovium vero excrementosiorest,
ac succi deterioris. But how much Galen is deceived if he speak generally of
the Mutton of all countries, experience proves here in this realm, for if it
be young, and of a wether, it is a right temperate meat, and makes good juice.
And therefore it is used more than any other meat, both in sickness and in
health. Yet is it not like good in all places in England. Nor the sheep which
bears the finest wool, is not the sweetest in eating, nor the most tender.
But as Galen speaks of all kinds of flesh, so of mutton, Carnes castratorum
sunt praestantiores, Senum autem pessimae, tum ad coquendum, tum ad succum
^onum generandum, The best Mutton.
tum ad nutriendum. Wherefore Rams mutton I leave to those that would be
rammish, and old mutton to butchers that want teeth. Lamb flesh.
As for lamb is moist and flegmaticke, and not convenient for aged men, or for
them which have in their stomachs much phlegm, except it be very dry roasted.
But mutton contrary to veal should be rather under roasted than over. For it is
seldom seen that any man has taken harm by eating raw mutton, so light and
wholesome it is in digestion.

CHAP. 132. Of Swines flesh.
SWines flesh is most commended of Galen above al kinds of flesh in nourishing
the body, Li. 3. de ali. fa. c. 1.
so it be not of an old swine, and that it be well digested of him that eats
it. And that it gives more steadfast and strong nourishment than other meats,
he proves by experience of great wrastlers, who if they eat like quantity of
any other meat, and withal use like exercise, shall feel themselves the next
day following more weak than they were, Swines flesh in many points like to
man's flesh.
when they fed of Porke. Moreover, the flesh of a swine has such likeness to
man's flesh, both in savor and taste, that some have eaten man's flesh in stead of
porke. Yea swines blood and man's blood, be so like in every thing, that hardly
they can be discerned. And the inward parts of a swine (as is proved by
Anatomy) be very like to the inward parts of a man. But notwithstanding this
similitude and strong nourishment, yet I think swines flesh no good meat for
students, and such as have weak stomachs, to be commonly used. For as that
worthy Arabian Rh^zes writes, Lib. 3. c. 9* ad Alman.
Crassa caro multum sese exercentibus convenit* iis vero qui vitam in maiore
otio ac quiet degunt, subtilis and extenuans. So then it follows, that
swines flesh is good and whols^m for their bodies that be young, whole, strong
occupied in labor, and not disposed to oppilations, and for them that desire to
be fa^. But for students that flesh is better which is temperate of complexion,
easy of digestion, and ingendereth good blood. Neither is al swines flesh so
comme^dable, but that which is young and best of a year or two old. Also better
of a wild swine than of a tame, because as Galen says, the flesh of swine fed
at home is more full of superfluous moisture for want of motion, Lib. 3 de. ali
fa. cap. 13.
beside they live in a more gross air than those that live wild. Wild swine
better than tame.
But our use in England is for the more part to breed our swine at home, except
it be for the time of mast falling, for then they feed abroad in the woods,
which kind of feeding in my judgment is most wholesome: wherefore brawne,
which is of a bore long fed in ^ stie, can in no wise be wholesome mea^,
although it be young. Brawne.
For beside that it is hard of digestion (as common experience proves) it must
needs breed ill juice in the body, considering the want of motion and gross
feeding thereof, for which cause we use commonly to drink strong wine with
brawne, to help digestion. And we eat it before other meats, that it may lie
lowest in the stomach where digestion is strongest, and we eat it in the cold
time of the year, when we are best able to digest gross meats, as Hip.
says, Ventres hyeme ac vere natura calidissimi, and somni longissimi. Aphoris.
1.
Which use of England is confirmed in Schol. Sal. on this wise, Est caro
porcina sine vino peior ovina, cap. 15.

Si tribuis vina, tunc est cibus and medicina.


Which is to be understood (as Arnoldus affirms in his commentary upon the
same) especially of rosting pigs and brawne. For young pigs commonly called
rosting pigges, though they be commonly eaten, and accounted light meat, yet
they are not very wholesome, Rosting pigs.
by reason of their overmuch moisture, and they breed in our bodies much
superfluous humors, wherefore they need good wine as well as brawne, the one
because it is over hard and gross, the other because it is over moist and
slimy. But physic teaches the cook, that flesh which is inclined to
drienesse should be sodden: What flesh should be boiled, and what roasted.

Potage to make one soluble.


and the flesh which is inclined to moisture should be well roasted. Wherefore
porke, pig, veale and lamb, is better roasted than boiled. Yet if a man be
costive, and would saine be soluble, let him make po^age with fresh porke, and
none other herb but Mercury, and by eating thereof (as I have often proved)
he shall be easily loosed. Bacon.
As for Bacon is in no wise commended as wholesome, especially for students, or
such as have feeble stomachs. But for laboring men it is convenient, according
to the Latin proverb, Crassa crassis convenient. For the country woman when
her sick husband would eat no fat bacon, thought he was past all eating: for
when the Physician advised her to dress him a chicken: What master Doctor
(said she) do you think he will eat of a chicken, when as he will eat no
bacon as yellow as the gold noble? And indeed in such kind of men, it forces
not much how wholesome meat be, so it fill the belly, and keep strength. For
as the Poet Virgil writes, A gamond o^ ^a^on.
Labor improbus vincit omnia. Yet a gamond of bacon well dressed is a good
shooing horn to pull down a cup of wine. But all sorts of swines flesh were,
and are abominable to the Jews, because it was forbidden by God to be eaten
of them, Levit 1^. cap 7. verse.
as being unclean. In so much that seven brethren and their mother were most
cruelly put to death, Man. 2.7. chap.
because they would not eat swines flesh. Act, 10, 15 Rom, 14, 2, 3.14.
But it is lawful for the faithful to eat all kind of meat. And although
swine be unclean beasts, yet their flesh makes clean nourishment, as Galen
thinks.

CHAP. 133. Of Goats flesh.
Goats flesh either of male or female is dispraised of Galen. Li. 3. de. ali.
s^. cap. 1.
Quia praeter succum vitiosum acrimoniam etiam habet. Kydde.
Yet kid is commended of him next unto porke. But Avicen and the sect of the
Arabians, prefer kid flesh before all other flesh, because it is more
temperate, and breeds purer blood: as being in a mean between hot and cold,
subtle and gross. So that it can cause none inflammation nor repletion. And
is therefore a good meat for those that have weak stomachs, and use mean
exercise. But it is not convenient for laborers, because great labors would
soon resolve the juice engendered thereof. Isaak Iudaeus makes four
differences in age as well of goats, par 4. de animalibus.
as of other kinds of beasts. That is to say, Lactens, adolescens, Iuvenis,
and decrepitus. And he most commends sucking Kids. For this rule is
general, that flesh of a dry complexion, The difference of beasts concerning
age.
is better near calving time than farther from it. Wherefore Kids and calves be
better than Goats and Oxen, because their dryness is abated with the moisture
of their youngnesse. But flesh of beasts of moist complexion, is better and
more wholesome in age than in youth, for a great part of their over much
moisture, is dried away as they do increase increase in age: wherefore
weathers of a year old, are less clammy and more wholesome than sucking lambs.
And likewise porkes of a year or two old, are better than young pigs. But
generally all beasts and birds that be in the fourth age before mentioned, that
is decrepiti, are tough and unwholesome. For most true is that English proverb,
young flesh and old fish does men best feed. Again generally Castrati sunt
meliores.

CHAP. 134. Of Hare.
HAre flesh, beside that it is hard of digestion, makes gross and melancholy
blood, and is one of the four kinds of flesh which breed melancholy,
mentioned before in the chapter of biefe: wherefore it is not for the goodness
of the flesh, that this silly beast is so often chased with hounds and hunters,
but for pastime. The manifold commodities of the hare.
Yet thus much I will say to the commendation of hares, and for the defense of
the hunters toil, that no one beast, be it never so great, is profitable to so
many and so diverse uses in Physic as the hare and parts thereof, Lib. 2. Dios.
c. 1^
as Math. shows. For the liver of the hare dried and made in powder is good
for those that be liver sick, and the whole hare skin and all, put in an
earthen pot close stopped, and baked in an oven so dry that it may be made
into powder, being given in white wine is wonderful good for the stone, as
well in the raines as in the bladder. The gaul of the hare mingled with sugar,
does take away Flewmes of the eyes, and helps dimnesse of sight. The kidneys
of the hare eaten raw, especially while they are hot, do marvellously help
those that have the stone, and being boiled they are of like force. The stones
of the Hare are wholesome to be eaten of them that have griefs of the
bladder. The blood of the Hare while it is warm, boiled with barley meal and
eaten helps the flixe presently. The dung of the Hare is good for the same
purpose. The hairs of the Hare burned and applied do stanch blood, but
chiefly the hairs that grow under the belly, pulled off while the Hare is
alive, and put into the nostrilles, do stop bleeding at the nose. The ancle
bone of the foot of an Hare is good against the crampe. This much touching
medicine. Now concerning diet, Lib. de 60. anim.
Rasis that famous Arabian says that Hares flesh being roasted is wholesome for
them that have any kind of f^ix. But our use is to roast the hinder parts and
to boil the fore parts, or to bake the whole. But howsoever it be used, Galen
says, Lib. 3. de Ali. fa. cap. 1
that Caro leporum sanguinem quidem gignit crassiorem, sed melioris succi quam
bubula and ovilla. The opinion which some hold that every hare should be of
both kinds, that is male and female, is disproved by Matthew. in the chapter
aforesaid as untrue.

CHAP. 135. Of Conie.
COnie, which is so plentiful a meat in this land, and proved so light in
digestion, is little spoken of by Galen and other ancient writers. But it is
well proved among us, that there is no meat more wholesome, or that more
cleanely, firmly and temperately nouri^heth than Rabbets. A digression
touching hospitality.
And what commodity a good warraine of Conies brings toward the keeping of a
good house, men of honor and worship that love hospitality do well know.
Which virtue being acceptable to God, and a singular benefit of all the country
round about them (the more it is to be lamented) is every day more and more
neglected in England. The chief cause thereof (as wise men think) is
wastefull and sumptuous apparel now commonly used in every degree far
otherwise than William Rufus did, who being a kings son and the second king
of this land after the conquest, was thought to exceed, when he bestowed a
mark upon a pair of hose, using commonly to bestow but three shillings. Whose
example may well be a condemnation to gentlemen in these days, who bestow as
much upon one pair of hose, as the king did upon twenty.

CHAP. 136. Of Venison.
VEnison, whether it be of red dear or fallow, makes ill juice, engendereth
melancholy, and is hard of digestion, as Galen witnesses. Wherefore it is no
wholesome meat for students, ^i. 3. de. ali. fa. cap. 1. Wh^ Venison should be
drowned in wine.
no though it be drowned in wine, as the best manner is to eat it. Which way
no doubt was first devised to amend the noysomnesse thereof, because wine is of
contrary nature to that humor which venison most of all breeds. For wine is
hot and moist, and melancholy is cold and dry. A wonder it is to see how much
this unwholesome flesh is desired of all folks. In so much that many men
rashly will ven^er their credit* yea, and sometime their lives too, to steal
Venison, when they cannot otherwise come by it. But I would advise them as
Demosthenes said by the strumpet Lais, Non tanti emere poenitere. And I could
wish (saving the pleasure of honorable and worshipful men) that there were no
parkes nor forests in England. For a good part of the best pasture in this
Realm is consumed with dear which might otherwise be better employed for a
commonwealth. And when with great travail and peril they have gotten a piece
of flesh, then the dressing and eating is more costly, than would provide many
other dishes of meat a great deal more wholesome. And concerning red dear,
Simeon Sethi writes, Read dear.
that stagges in the summer season eat vipers and serpents, whereby their
flesh is made venomous and noisome, and therefore is in no wise to be eaten.
Yet master Eliote thinks the flesh of ^allow dear more unwholesome ^d
unpleasant than o^ red dear. And I think there is more virtue in the stagges
horns than in the flesh. For I know the horn burned and made in powder, is
given with great success in all kinds of ^asks, spi^^ing of blood* and
ra^ndise. Virgill write^h that the Crow lives nine times the age of a man,
D^^tatibus animalium.
accounting the age of man to be an hundred years. The age of a Stagge.
And that the Heart or Stag lives four times the age of a Crow. Whose opinion
how true it is, I refer to keepers of Parkes and rangers of forrestes. The
verses of Virgill be these.

Ter binos deciesque n^vem superexit in ^nnos,
Iusta senescentum quos imp^et nita virorum,
Hos novies superat vivendo garrul^ cornix,
Et quater egreditur cornicis s^cula cervus.
CHAP. 137. Of strange beasts used for meats.
Li. 3. de ali* fa. ^.1.
GAlen makes mention of diverse other kinds of beasts which some nations use
to eat, as the flesh of Asses, Lions, Dogs, Wolves, Bears, and such like. To
the which he might have added the Canibals who feed on man's flesh, as sometime
the Sco^s did, as Saint Hierome witnesses of his own knowledge. For so he
says, what shall I say of other Nations? Since that, when I was a boy, I saw
in France, Scots a people of Britain eat man's flesh. The Scots were sometime
Anthropophagi.
And when they found in the forests herds of swine, beasts and cattle, they
would cut off the buttocks of the boys which kept them, and also the women's
paps, and took that to be the most dainty and delicate meat. And snailes are
a common dish among the Grecians, as Galen writes in the second chapter of the
book aforesaid. Much like as I have heard tell of a bishop of this land, that
would have eaten fried frogs. Rookes.
And some have I known to ea^e hedgehogs, and as for Rookes, if they be
flea^d, perboyled and well roasted or bake^* are good mea^e for poor folks,
and (as I have heard) be medicinable for an agew. But the other sorts
aforenamed are more meet for hogs than men. Wherefore I will let them pass,
and will speak of the parts and members of such beasts as be usually eaten in
England.

CHAP. 138. Of the head of beasts.
THe flesh of the head of any beast is slow of digestion, and annoyeth the
stomach. Yet after it is digested it nourishes much and augmenteth seed. Some
say that every part does best nourish his like. Which if it were true, then
should the head of a calfe or a sheep, best nourish the head of a man. But I
think otherwise, for I know that the flesh of heads is very hurtful to them
that have the falling sickness, which is a disease of the head. Wherefore I
think that reason proceeded first out of a Calves head, or a sheep head.

CHAP. 139. Of the Brain.
THe brain is flegmatike, of gross juice, slow in digestion and noisome to
the stomach, causes loathsomenesse and takes away appetite. But where it is
well digested it nourishes much, and is reckoned in Schola Sal. for one of the
twelve things which greatly nourish and make fat man's body, cap. 9.
as appears in the verses following.

Nutrit triticum* and impinguat, lac, caseus infans,
Testiculi* porcina caro, cerebella, medullae,
Dulcia vina, cibus gustu i^cundior, Twelve things that breed fatness.
ov^
Sorbilia, and ficus maturae vuae que recentes.
Notwithstanding if any man list to eat brains, he should in no wise eat
them last after other meats, because so they procure vomit, and beside they
should be well sodden, and after well spiced with pepper, or such like. But the
preparing of meats I refer to skillful Cooks. The Calfe which is not the
wisest beast, has yet the most brains and most used to be eaten. Yet some
wise gentlewomen set more store by the brain of a Conie or a woodcocke. And in
some men's opinions, (as Arnoldus reports upon the verses aforesaid) the
brains of Chickens and Capons is good for the memory and comfort the wit.
But I think the brain of a Calfe will make a man as wise as the brain of a
Capon. The Hares brain is good against the trembling and shaking of the
limbs, which is commonly called the Palsy.

CHAP: 140. Of the Tongue.
THe tongue is of a spungie and sanguine substance, and is of good nourishment,
especially about the roots* if it be well digested, if not, it breeds phlegm
Esop being sent to the market by his master to buy the best meat, bought a
tongue: and being sent the second time to buy the worst meat, bought a tongue
likewise. As who should say, a tongue is both the best meat and the worst,
according to that saying of Saint James the Apostle: The tongue can no man
tame. It is an unruly evil full of deadly poison, etc. But of man's tongue I
have not to speak* but I wish all men to use that Physic which the wise man
Cato prescribes.

Virtutem primam puta esse compescere linguam. Yet it is very hard for women to
observe it, as he knows best that is troubled with a shrew. But a neates
tongue well dressed is best to be eaten, and if it be pricked with cloves, it
is the better, because thereby the moisture is diminished. But the well
dressing I refer to good cooks, whom I mention oftentimes, because cookery
is a part of Physic, and a good cook (as Doctor Board says) is half a
Physician. The kernels which are in the roots of the tongue or elsewhere in
the body, Kernels of the tongue.
are of much like nourishment to the tongue. For so Galen writes* Lib. 3. de
ali. fa. cap. 6.
Alimentum quod ex iis probe quidem in ventriculo concoctis provenit, prope
sane ad carnium alimentum accedit: quod si minus quam sat est, sint confectae,
succum crudum aut pituitosum generant.

CHAP. 141. Of the Ears.
THe Ears are nothing else but gristill and skin, and therefore hard to
digest, and nourish little. The gullet or weasand is of like nature.

CHAP. 142. Of the Eyes.
THe Eyes be of diverse substances, of skins, humors, fat and filth. Yet they
are light of digestion, and being of a fat beast they are pleasant, as of a
calfe or samon, for these two have best eyes to eat, though the beast Linxe
have best eyes to see.

CHAP. 143. Of the Heart.
THe Heart is of hard flesh and therefore is not soon digested, nor passes
shortly from the stomach. But where it is well digested, the juice that it
makes is not to be dispraised. Nay (as Isaak Iudaeus says) Multum and bonum
praestat corpori nutrimentum. Par. 5.


CHAP. 144. Of the Lunges.
THe Lunges or lights are easy of digestion, and soon pass throughout the
body by reason of their natural softness. Yet their nourishment is little and
unwholesome, for it is flegmatike. Albeit the lungs of a Fox are medicinable for
them which have sickness of the Lungs, being used in this manner. Take the
lungs of a Fox and dry it to powder, The lungs of a Fox good for the lungs of a
man.
and put a quarter of a spoonefull in a little almond milk, or broth, and eat
it, for it is very good to preserve the lungs. Or else you may take it with
syrope of Hysope. Or you may have an electuary at the Apothecaries called Loche
de pulmone vulpis, excellent for the same purpose.

CHAP. 145. Of the Stomach.
THe stomach or maw is of ill digestion, and hardly passes the body, and
makes ill blood by reason that it is a sinewy member and gristly, yet the
extreme parts of the maw, as the bottom and brimme are better digested,
because those parts are more fleshie and fat. cap. 48.
Which is approved in Scho. Sal. as also that which I have written touching
other parts as follows; Egeritur tarde cor, digeritur quoque dure,
Atque itidem stomachus, tamen exteriora probantur.
Reddit lingua bonum nutrimentum medicinae.
Concoctu facilis pulmo est, cito labitur ipse,
Est melius cerebrum gallinarum reliquorum.


CHAP. 146. Of the Liver.
THe liver of beasts is ill to be digested, passes slowly and makes gross
blood. But it is strong in nourishment, and is best of those beasts that
suck, as of calves and lambs.

CHAP. 147. Of the Spleen.
THe Spleen or milt, makes ill juice and melancholy blood. For it is the very
place where melancholy is made. Isaak Iudaeus says: Splenporcinus melior est
caeteris propter substantiae suae subtilitatem and raritatem. But with us in
England, Par. 5.
the milt of a swine is not used to be eaten.

CHAP. 148. Of the inward of beasts.
THe intrailes or inward of beasts, as tripes, and chitterlings, be hard to
digest, and therefore although they be well digested, yet make they nor juice
naturally sanguine or clean, but raw juice and cold, and requires a long time
to be converted into blood: thus says master Eliote. Yet common experience
proves that a fat tripe well roasted or fried, is easily digested. And that
shall any man find that eats tripes at supper. Tripes and other souse are
used to be broyled upon coals, or fried. But neither way is commended in
Physic, for broyled meat is hard of digestion and evil for the stone,
Broyled meat and fried meat unwholesome.
and fried meat is harder of digestion and breeds choler and melancholy.

CHAP. 149. Of Puddings.
OF the inward of beasts are made Puddings, which are best of an hog, as Schola
Sal. says: cap. 25.
Ilia porcorum (...) sunt, mala sunt reliquorum.

For the blood of swine is most agreeable in complexion to man's nature. Yet
puddings are used to be made also of the inward of sheep, and of kine, which
though they be not so good, do yet serve well to fill up the belly of those
that be hungry, and have strong digestion, for as the Poet Horace writes: S^r.
lib. 2. Sa. 2.
Ieiunus stomachus raro vulgaria temnit.

A hungry dog will eat thirty puddings, as the Irish man says.

CHAP. 150. Of the Reins.
THe Reins or Kidneys make gross and ill blood, Par. 5.
as Isaac Iudaeus writes, both for the hardness of their substance* and also
because that nourishment which is in them, passes away with the urine. Yet at
Oxford the Scullion is glad of the Kidneies of loins of Mutton, and many pour
scholar is glad to receive them well roasted at the Sculliou^ hands.

CHAP. 151. Of the Stones and Vdders.
THe stones and udders of beasts being well digested do nourish much, but the
stones are better with their moystnesse, the udders cold and flegmaticke, they
both do increase seed of generation. But the blood made of the udder, is
better than that which comes of the stones, except it be of Calves and
Lambs, which be very good baked. And the stones of Cocks are best of all, Lib.
3. de ali. fa. cap. 7.
if they be fat and young (...) G^len witnesses. And stones are reckoned of
Scho* (...)* for one of those twelve things which greatly nourish and make fat
man's body, as appears by the verses before alleged, where I have spoken of
the brains of beasts, wherefore they may be accounted among meats restorative.

CHAP. 152. Of Marrow.
MArrow of all beasts is hot and moist, and where it is well digested, it
nourishes much, yet it does mollify the stomach, and takes away appetite,
it is best, How Marrow ^ may best be eaten.
if it be spiced with pepper and salt. And the marrow of Biefe is best to be
eaten. If it be of a Dear, it is good to anoint any place where ach is. This
also is one of the twelve things that makes fat, as appears in the verses
aforesaid. The Marrow that comes down the back bone is of like nature to
the brain.

CHAP. 153. Of the Fat.
THe fat of flesh alone without lean is unwholesome, and cloyeth the stomach,
and causes lothsomenes, and better is lean without fat, than fat without
lean. Yet have I known a countryman that would feed only of the fat of Bacon,
Beef, or Pork, without le^^e, but that is not to be marvelled at, considering
that many of them have stomachs like the bird that is called an Ostridge which
can digest hard Iron.

CHAP. 154. Of the Feet.
THe feet being well boiled and tender in a whole stomach digest well, and do
make good juice, and pass forth easily. Galen commends the feet of Swine.
But I have proved (says M. Eliot) that the feet of a young Bullock tenderly
sodden, and laid in souce two days or three, and eaten cold in the evening,
have brought a choleric stomach into a good digestion and sleep, and
therewith has also expulsed salt phlegm and choler. And this I have found in my
self by often experience, always foreseen that it be eaten before other meat,
and without drinking immediately after it. All this I have taken out of M.
Eliot, because he has written most pithily of this part. Yet one thing will I
note of mine own experience, that the fat which is left upon the water of the
seething of Netes feet, called commonly foot seame, For stiffness of the
Sinews and for the Crampe.
is passing good for the stiffenesse or starkenesse of the Synewes or joints,
for the Crampe and such like. And if you mix a little Aqua vitae withal, it is
a very good ointment for any ache, for the Sciatica or cold gout, as I have
often proved.

CHAP. 155. The Preface to Foul.
HItherto I have spoken of the flesh of Beasts, and their parts usually eaten.
Now I will entreat of Birds and their parts concerning diet. And if comparison
be made between both generally, whether is lighter of digestion, I say that
the flesh of birds is much lighter than the flesh of beasts. And again that the
flesh of those fowls which trust most to their wings, and do breed in high
countries, is lighter then the flesh of such as seldom or never fly, and be
bred at home. Par. 5.
Yet the tame birds (as Isaac says) do nourish more than the wild, and be
more temperate.

CHAP. 156. Of Capons, Hens and Chickins.
THe Capon being fat and young, is praised above all other fowls, because, as
it is easily digested, so it makes little ordure, and much good nourishment.
The flesh will be more tender if it be killed a day or two before it be
eaten, it is commodious to the breast and stomach. Hens in winter are almost
equal to the Capon, but they do not make so strong nourishment. The flesh of
them is without superfluity, as Haly and Mesues write, and is soon turned into
blood. And they have a marveilous property, Consiliator dissert. 68.
to temper man's complexion and humors, and their broth is the best medicine
that can be for Leapers. Canon. 2. c. 296.
And Avicen affirms that the flesh of young Hens augmenteth understanding,
and clears the voice, and increases the seed of generation. That hen is best
which as yet never laid egg. And a fat hen full of eggs is not the worst. The
Poet Horace in the person of the Epicure sets forth a way to make a hen
tender upon the sudden in this wise. Ser. li. ^. ^a. 4. How to make a Hen
tender upon the sudden.


Si vespertinus subito te oppresserit hospes,
Ne gallina minus responset dura palato,
Doctus eris vivam misto mersare Falerno.
Hoc teneram faciet.
If guestes come to thee at unwares,
In water mixed with wine,
Souce thou thy hen, she will become
short, tender, nesh and fine.
Chickens.
Chickins in Summer especially if they be cocktels, are very convenient for a
weak stomach, and nourish well, neither is there any flesh lighter of
digestistion than a chicken, or more agreeable with all natures, as well in
sickness as in health: yet would I wish those that be in good health, A
caveat not to use much fine meats.
not to use themselves much to such fine meats, but rather accustom to feed on
grosser meats til need require. As for chickens upon sops, they are no meat
for poor scholars, unless they can get them.

CHAP. 157. Of Cock.
THe flesh of a Cock, especially if it be old, is hard of digestion: but the
broth wherein it is boiled loses the belly, and if you boil therewith
Polipodium or Cartamus, it purges ill humors. Galen says, Lib. 11. Simp.
Galli^arumius simplex retinendivim possidet, vti gallorum veterum subducenil^.
If you list to still a Cock for a weak body that is in a consumption, through
long sickness or other causes, you may do it well in this manner. Take a red
cock, that is not old, dress him, and cut him in quarters, and bruise all the
bones, To make a Coleise of a cock or capon.
then take the roots of Fennel, Darcely and Succory, Violet leaves and
Borage, put the Cock into an earthen pot which is good to stew meats in, and
between every quarter lay of the roots and herbs, Corans, whole Mace, Annise
seeds, liquorise being scraped and slyced, and so fill up your pot. Then put in
half a pint of Rose water, a quart of white Wine or more, two or three Dates
made clean and cut in pieces, a few prunes and raysons of the Sun, and if
you put in certain pieces of Gold, it will be the better, and they never the
worse, and so cover it close and stop it with dough and set the pot in seething
water, and let it sees gently for the space of twelve hours, with a good fire
kept still under the brass pot that it stands in, and the pot kept with
liquor so long. When it has stilled so many hours, then take out the earthen
pot, open it, streine out the broth into some clean vessel, and give thereof
unto the weak person morning and evening warmed and spiced, as pleases the
patient. In like manner you may make a coleyse of a capon, which some men like
better.

CHAP. 158. Of Fesaunt.
FEsaunt exceeds all fowls in sweetness and wholsomenesse, and is equal to a
Capon in nourishing but is somewhat dryer, and is of some men put in a mean
between a hen and a partrich. It is a meat for Princes and great estates,
and for poor scholars when they can get it.

CHAP. 159. Of Partrich.
Partrich most light of digestion.
PArtrich of all fowls is most soonest digested, and has in him much
nourishment. It drives away the dropsy, it comfort the stomach, it makes
seed of generation, and increases carnal lust, and it is said that customable
eating of this flesh comfort the memory. Wherefore it were a convenient meat
for students, and such as be weak, and I would that every good student twice in
a weak instead of his commons might have a Partrich to his supper. A good wish
for students.
Neither do I marvel considering the goodness of the flesh, that Gentlemen
be at such cost to keep hawks, Hawking commended.
and take such toil to kill Partriches and Fesants. For beside the pleasant
pastime in hawking, the flesh of these birds is very precious, and every
morsel worth gold.

CHAP. 160. Of Woodcocks.
WOodcocks are of a good temperature, and meetly light in digestion, and the
flesh of them is very wholesome. They come into England at the fall of the
leaf, and depart again at the spring, but whence they come or whither they
go, it would trouble a good Doctor to define. When the woodcocke goes, The
Woodcocke compared with the Swa^low.
the Swallow comes, but the Swallow is like a feined friend that forsakes us
in adversity: for when cold begins, she returns again over the sea into
hot Countries, and as Pliny judges into Africa. So may we guess likewise
that Woodcockes come out of cold Countries, as Denmark, Norway, Swetia, or
else from those regions which have summer when we have winter, and contrariwise.

CHAP. 161. Of Pigeons.
PIgeons are very hot and moist, wherefore they are not good for those that be
choleric, or inclined to any fevers, but to them that be phlegmatic and pure
melancholy, they are very wholesome, and be easily digested. They should be
taken when they be ready to fly, and so killed that they may bleed well.
Arnoldus says that they be better baked, being stuffed with sour grapes, than
roasted, because the sour grapes do qualify and temper the heat of them.
Wherefore cunning cooks have devised to stuff them with grapes also when they
be roasted. The old doves for their very great heat. drought and hardness of
digestion, are to be eschewed, yet the Turtle dove is commended in Scho. Sal.
and is said to nourish well, cap. 29. Canon. 2. ca. 146
and to engender good blood. Which Avicen also affirms, where he says* that
there is no fowls flesh better than a Turtles or a hens, nor more subtle: but
I think he means of young Turtles.

CHAP. 162. Of Quails.
QVailes are commended in Scho. Sal. to be wholesome, yet Isaak Iudaeus
affirms that they are worse than any other foul, and that they engender the
crampe, and experience proves them to increase melancholy, therefore they are
no good meat for students, although they were the meat that God rained from
heaven to feed the Israelites withal in the desert. But God gave them a sour
sauce to their meat, for while the fle^h was yet between their teeth, Number.
11.7.31.
before it was chewed, even the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the
people, and the Lord smote the people with an exceeding great plague. God
defend this Land from such a sauce for all the sweet meats that be so
plentiful in it.

CHAP. 163. Of Black Birds.
Black birds or Ousiles are greatly commended for lightness of digestion, and
that they make good nourishment and little ordure, and they be one sort of the
fourteen kinds of wild fowls reckoned most wholesome in Schola Salerni,
where also are named certain other sorts of birds, Cap. 29.
as the Stare or Shepstare, which unless it be taken before it fly from the
neast, is bitter in taste. Also the Moore hen, the Wagtaile, the little Robin
red breast, all these aforesaid are briefly contained in the verses following.

Sunt bona Gallina, and capo, turtur* sturna, columba,
Quiscula, Phasiades merulae simul ortygometra,
Perdix, frigellusque orex, tremulusque amarellus.
CHAP. 164. Of Larkes.
LArkes, as they be delicate in eating, light of digestion and of good
nourishment, so are they medicinable, for as Dios. writes, Assa, Lib. 2. cap.
48.
and in cibum sumpta caeliacos adinv^t, which Master Eliote expounds to be
the collicke.

CHAP. 165. Of Sparrowes.
SParrowes be hard to digest, and are very hot, and stir up Venus,
especially the cock sparrowes. Being boiled in broth, they are restorative,
and good for weak and aged persons, Mulieres nonnulle salaces, ho^ parant in
cibis mariti^ suis, ut sint procliviores ad libidinem.

CHAP. 166. Of Goose.
GOose is hard of digestion, but being young and fat the wings be easy to
digest in a hot stomach, and nourish competently, but the green goose is
better than the stubble goose, and I speak of tame geese, for wild geese are
much worse, yet a Lankashire man will find fault with neither, being fat and
well roasted. The swan is much like in nature to the goose. Swanne.


CHAP. 167. Of Ducke and Mallard.
DVcke and Mallard, wild or tame be hard to digest and make ill juice, saving
that the braunes on the breast bone, and the neck is better than the remnant.
They feed oftentimes of frogs and todes, wherefore their flesh must needs be
unwholesome.

CHAP. 168. Of Plover.
PLover is thought to be a dainty dish, and right wholesome, yet it is slow of
digestion, nourishes little, Lapwing and Teale.
and increases melancholy, likewise is to be said of the Lapwing. The Teale
is some (...) better.

CHAP. 169. Of Peacocke.
PEacockes if they be old, be hard of digestion, and so are Turkey cocks
likewise, but the chickens of either of them about half a year old, are good
and wholesome.

CHAP. 170. Of Crane.
CRane is hard of digestion, and makes ill juice, but being hanged up a day or
two before he be eaten, he is the more tender and less unwholesome.

CHAP. 171. Of Bustard.
BVstard being fat and kept without meat a day or two before he be killed, to
expulse his ordure, and then drawn and hanged as the Crane, and after roasted or
baken, is a good meat, and nourishes well if he be well digested.

CHAP. 172. Of Heron.
HEron, Byttour or Shovelar, being young and fat be lighter digested then
Crane. And the Byttour, sooner than the Heron, and the Shovelar sooner then any
of them. But all these fowls must be eaten as venison, with much spice, and
have good old wine drunk after them, and so shall they be more easily
digested, and the juice coming of them be the less noyfull. Other fowls also
are used to be eaten, which I omit, because I find little written of them, and
these which I have mentioned be most common, therefore now it remains that I
speak of the parts and members of the birds aforesaid.

CHAP. 173. Of the Wings.
THe wings, brains and necks of Geese, Capons, Hens, Fesant, Partrich, and
small birds being fat, are better than the legs in digestion, and lighter in
nourishing. Of wild foul and Pigeons being fat, the legs are better than the
wings: The brains of Ducke, Teale and Wigeon except, which is better to digest
than the residue.

CHAP. 174. Of the Gysar.
THe gysar or stomach of a Goose or Hen, being made fat with wheat, branne
and milk, or water, and wheat branne made in powder, or else well sodden, is
good for the stomach, in making it strong to digest, and nourishes
competently.

CHAP. 175. Of the Liver.
THe liver of a Capon, Hen, Fesant, or Goose, being made fat with milk, mixed
with other meat, is not only easy to digest, but also makes good juice, and
nourishes excellently.

CHAP. 176. The Preface to Fish.
THus much of flesh. Now concerning fish which is no small part of our
sustenance in this Realm of England. And that flesh might be more plentiful,
and better cheap, two days in the week, that is Friday and Saturday, are
specially appointed to fish, and now of late years, by the providence of our
prudent princess Elizabeth, the Wednesday also is in a manner restrained to
the same order, not for any religion or holiness supposed to be in the eating
of fish rather then of flesh, but only for a civil policy as I have said. That
as God has created both for man's use, so both being used or refrained at
certain seasons, might by that intercourse be more abundant. And no doubt if
all days appointed for that purpose were duly observed, but that flesh and
fish would be much more plentiful, and bear less price then they do. For
accounting the Lent season, and all fasting days in the year together with
Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, you shall see that one half of the year is
ordained to eat fish in. But here I must crave a pardon of the divines, that
they will give me leave to utter mine opinion touching abstinence from meats,
I confess that meat makes us not acceptable to God, Corint. 1. cap. 8. Romans
14.
and that there is nothing unclean of it self, and that every creature of God
is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving:
Ti. 1. cap. 4.
yet this much I will say that if a man would refrain from such meats, as do
most nourish and cherish his body, (which indeed is the exercise of fasting) he
should rather forgo the eating of flesh than fish, because as Cornelius Celsus
says, Plus alimenti est in carne quam in ullo alio cibo, which thing
peradventure was the occasion why people were prohibited in time past to eat
flesh or any thing else having affinity with flesh, Lib. 2.
upon the fasting days. Which order (as it is thought) being first established
by Gregory the great bishop of Rome, was afterw^^d superstitiously abused. But
now that superstition is abandoned among us, and all men do know that
whatsoever goes into the mouth, defiles not the man, but that which comes
forth, Math. 15.
me think for orders sake, all people should be obedient to good laws, and
be as well contented to forbear flesh upon the days appointed, as to use it
at their pleasure at other seasons. But such is the selfewill of some, and
voluptuousness of many in this our own licentious time, that without any
reasonable cause, or sufficient authority, only to satisfy their fleshly
lust, they will eat flesh at all times and seasons, yea some in contempt of all
good order, and as it were despising all kinds of fish, as though God had not
created fish for our food as well as flesh, wilfully misorder themselves in
this behalf. But this kind of people had need to sail to the Island Antycyra,
according to the old proverb, to have their melancholy strongly purged, least
in process of time they become stark mad. But the reformation hereof I
refer to the godly magistrates, and return to my purpose. And this generally
I say of fish, that if it be compared to flesh, it is of less nourishment
than flesh, and the nourishment thereof is full of flegmatike superfluities,
cold and moist. And of fish generally I say, A comparison between flesh and
fish, between sea fish and river fish.
that sea fish is of better nourishment, then fresh water fish of the same
sort, because it is not so superfluously moist, by reason of the saltwater
which dries and purifieth. Yet I grant that fresh water fish is sooner
digested than sea fish, and therefore better for sick folks, because of their
feeble digestion. And again of sea fish that is best which swimmeth in a pure
sea, and is tossed and hoysed with winds and surges. And therefore the fish
that is taken in the North sea, which is more surging, and tempestuous, and
swift in ebbing and flowing is better than the fish that is taken in the dead
or south sea. Wherefore, the fish that is taken about this our country of
Britain, must needs be very wholesome. And true it is, as Doctor Board
witnesses in his Dietary, who was a great traveller, The felicity of Britain
for fish.
that no nation under the sun is better served with all manner of fish, both
of the sea, and the fresh water than Britain. And as I have said of sea fish,
so I say of fresh water fish, that to be best which is bred in the deep
waters, running swiftly toward the north, What fresh water fish is better
stony in the bottom, clean from weeds* whereunto runs no filth nor
ordure coming from towns, or cities. For that which is taken in muddy waters,
in standing pooles, in fennes, motes and ditches, makes much phlegm and
ordure. And here occasion is offered to speak somewhat of the old English
proverb touching the choice of fish, The English proverb exp^und^d touching
the choice of fish.
which is: That young flesh and old fish does men best feed How it is verified
in flesh I have declared before. Now concerning fish I say, that old fish is
not always the best: for if fish be of a firm and hard substance, then it is
better young than old, as a young Pike or a young Perch is better than an old.
But if it be of a soft and open substance, the^ the elder is the better, as an
old Eele is wholsomer than a young as some say, which my interpretation is
approved in Sco* Sal.

cap. 30.
Si pisces molles sunt* magno corpore t^lles,
Si pisces duri, p^rvi sunt plus valit^ri.
But now what sorts of fishes be most wholesome for man's body, may well
appear by the verses following, where are reckoned ten sorts as principal in
the preservation of health.

Lucius and perca, and saxanlis, and albi^a, ^encha,
Sonus, plagitia, and cum carpa, galbio, truta.
CHAP. 177. Of the Pike.
OF which ten sorts, the first is a Pyke, which is called the king and Tyrant
of other fishes, because he not only devoureth fishes of other kinds, but also
of his own kind, as it is in the verse following.

Lucius est piscis rex atque tyrannus aquarum.

Antiphrasis, quia nulli piscium parcit, but wounds other fishes with his
sharp sins. The Perch is likewise of hard and fast substance, and therefore
is of more pure nourishment.

The third is a sea fish called a Sole, whose commendation Arnoldus utters in
these words: Est inter pisce^ marinos saluberrimus.

The fourth is a Whiting, which for wholesomenesse

The fifth is a Tench, which is commonly called the Physician of other fishes,
because when they are hurt,

The sixth is a sea fish called a Gurnard, which is of

The seventh is a Playce, which if it be well grown and some deal thick, is
a passing good fish, and may a placendo* quia palato valde placet. Flounders or
Floukes be of like nature to a playce, though not so good.

The eighth is a Carpe, a fresh water fish greatly desired

The ninth is a Gogion (as I understand) which fish Dioscorides declares. And
of Gogions, Lib. 2. cap. 29. Lib. 3. de ali. fa. cap. 29.
as Galen writes, Presta^tissimus ad volu^tatem, coctionem, simul ac
distributionem, and succi bonitatem est is, qui in arenosis littoribus, aut
saxosis promontoriis vivit.

The tenth is a Troute, which is so sound in nourishing, is thoroughly sound,
we use to say that he is as sound as a Trout. This fish by nature loves
flattery: for being in the water it will suffer it self to be rubbed and
clawed, The nature of a Trout.
and so to be taken. Whose example I would wish no maids to follow, lest they
repent after claps.

CHAP. 178. Of other fishes very wholesome.
BEside those ten sorts aforesaid, there be diverse other of the sea and
fresh water, which be very wholesome, as Breame, Bret, Turbut, Holibut, Cod,
Hadocke, Tunie, Mullet, which is a fish of this nature, that being afraid
hides only his head, and thinks that then all his body is hid. Also
Ba^bill, a fish in such estimation among the Ancient Romans, that in the time
of Claudius the Emperor, A strange nature of a fish.
Asinius Geler one that had bin Consul, paid for one of the said fishes 8000
Serstertios, which after To^stals account, is forty pound sterling. Forty pound
given for one fish.
Also Roch, Loch, Base, Smelt, are very wholesome fishes. And generally all fish
that has skales and fins, for many skales and fins betoken the pureness of
the fishes substance. Likewise Shad and Mackerel are both sweet in taste and
soft in substance, yet not very wholesome. Of which the one is out of season
and full of bones, except it be at the spring of the year, that is the Shad.
And the Mackerell, as in color it does resemble the Edder* so is it not
lightly taken, but when thunder and lightning, or some tempestuous weather
arises.

CHAP. 179. Of other fishes much used though not so wholesome.
Among all fishes that be pleasant in taste and not wholesome, the Eeles are
most in use, Of Eeles.
which as they be engendered of the very earth, dirt or mire without
generation, or spaune, so be they of a slimy substance, clammy and greatly
stopping, whereby they are noisome to the voice, as it is recorded in Scho.
Sal. in these words: Vocibus anguillae pravae sunt si comedantur. cap. 31.
Also they are ill for such as be given to the stone: for their sliminesse
will cause the gravel sooner to congeale, and gather to a stone, and they
dispose a man to the gout, breeding such like matter as brings pain of the
joints. Wherefore Arnoldus says prettily upon the said verse: Inique natura
fecisse videtur, quae tam suavem refutandis expuendisque piscibus indiderit
saporem.

CHAP. 180. Of Lamprayes.
LAmprayes or Lampur^es be partly of the nature of Eeles, yet somewhat
wholsomer, and less jeopardous, for that they be not so clammy and so gross
as Eeles, yet they are thought in some part venomous, because they engender as
Serpents do, or as some say with Snakes. Wherefore the heads and tails, and
the string within, should in no wise be eaten. After eeles and Lamprayes, we
should drink good strong wine, as says Arnolde, and generally with all kinds
of fish wine is very wholesome. The French proverb of wine to be used with
fish.
For as the French man says ( Poisson sans vinest poison) that is to say,
Piscis sine vino venenum.

CHAP. 181. Of Conger.
Lib. de Ali. fa. cap. 31.
COnger is of hard substance, as Philotimus thinks, whose judgment Galen
allows, and therefore hard of digestion: For this rule is general and
alleged in the same place, A general rule touching choice of fish.
Tum concoctio quae in ^e^triculo fit, tum in singulis corporis partibus
alendis assimilatio, i^ mollioribus quidem facilius, in durioribus vero aegrius
fit.

CHAP. 182. Of Salmon.
SAlmon though it be a pleasant fish, and very sweet, especially the belly
thereof, yet is it not so wholesome as many other before mentioned, but much
grosser, more clammy, harder of digestion and fuller of superfluity. And that
it is not simply wholesome is proved hereby, for that it is not used to be
eaten hot or immediately after it is boiled. The mort is of like nature, for it
is the young Salmon. The nature of the Salmon is to spawne in the fresh water,
and after uses both fresh and salt.

CHAP. 183. Of Raie or Thornebacke.
RAie or thornebacke is a fish of soft substance, saving that it is full of
bones, like unto gristles. This fish also is thought unwholesome, if it be eaten
hot, and to dispose a man to the falling evil. Which noisome quality (as I
think) does rise thereby, for that it is so moist a fish and full of
superfluity. Yet the pricks thereof which grow without upon the skin, pulled
up by the roots, and dried and made in powder, and drunk in white wine or
Renish wine fasting, A go^od medicine for the stone.
is an excellent medicine to avoid gravel and to break the stone, as it has
been often proved.

CHAP. 184. Of Porpus and Sturgeon.
POrpose and Sturgeon are fishes of hard substance, (and in my judgment) not
much better than bacon and brawne. Although for the rareness they be esteemed
of great estates. But that fish is best which breeds best juice in the body,
and the best juice is that which is in a mean between thick and thin. Qui
fit ex pane optime praeparato, Optimus succu^.
et animalibus volucribus perdice scilicet atque id genus: quibus ex marinis
piscibus Pelagij sunt propinqui, as Galen writes. Lib. 3. de (...). cap. 26.
The best flesh and the best fish.
Where I note that he puts a partrich for example of the best flesh and such
fishes as live among rocks, to be best, and to approach nearest to the nature
of wholesome flesh. Which fishes afterward he calls Saxatiles, Alocis in
quibus versari comperiuntur, as he himself expounds, Non enim in lavibus aut
arenosis aut terreis littoribus, cap. 28.
sed in petrosis prom^ntoriis and ubi saxa sunt, deli^escunt and pariunt, among
which he reckons the whiting, the perch the gilthead or goldnie.

CHAP. 185. Of Herring.
HErring is a fish most common and best cheap. Yet it is not very wholesome. As
it is often proved by them who through eating of fresh herring, fall into
fevers, yet they may not well be spared, of poor folks, who regard not so much
the wholesomnesse of meats, as that they fill up their hungry bellies. For as
the Poet Horace writes, Cum sale panis, latrantem stomachum been leniet. Ser.
li. 2. Sa. 2.
Pilchards be of like nature to herrings, which kind of fishes as they be
small in quantity, so be they small in value. As for red herrings and sprattes
they be much worse, and they give as good nourishment to the body, as restie
bacon.

CHAP. 186. Of Shellfish.
GAlen gives this general property of shell fishes, Quod salsum in carue
succum contineant qui aluum subducit. Li. 3. de ali. fa. cap. 33.
Wherein he prefers Oysters before others of the same sort, because they
have a very soft substance. Oysters with us are eaten raw. Which Galen also
mencioneth in the same place. Oysters.
They be used also in brothes, boiled, or roasted upon coals. One good property
they have, in that they do not lightly corrupt in the stomach, But if they be
eaten raw, they require good wine to be drunk after them, to help digestion,
I think red wine or sack is best for that purpose. They be not good for any
that have an itch or breaking forth of a hot liver.

CHAP. 187. Of Muskles.
MVskles are worse to be digested raw than Oysters. Wherefore they be most
used being roasted or boiled, they are very noisome to such as be disposed to
fevers, gout or dropsy. There is a kind of Muskles in which Pearls are found,
and though the Indian pearls be greatest and more desired as being far
fetched, Pearls.
yet certain it is (as Matthew. writes) that pearls do grow and are gotten,
Lib. 2. Dios. ca. 4.
in the west Ocean about England and Scotland. With which kind of pearls
Julius Caesar adorned a breast plate and offered it up in the temple of Diana,
as Pliny reports. Good pearls gotten about Britain.


CHAP. 188. Of Cockles.
COckles be lighter of digestion than muskles or oysters, yet are not to be
eaten raw. But being roasted upon coals, as soon as they open they may be
eaten without danger, neither do they breed like inconvenience as Muskles do.
When shell fish is at the best. Lib. 2. Ser. Sa. 4.
Shell fishes be at the best when the moon increases, as the Poet Horace
notes.

Lubrica nascentes implen^ conchilia lunae. CHAP. 189. Of Crevis and Shrimpes.
AMong shell fishes may be numbered these also which follow. Howbeit Galen
calls them Crustata and not Testacea, but the name is not material, and the
Crevis is chief of them. For it is very nourishing, and does not lightly
corrupt in the stomach. Yet is it hard of digestion, as Arnoldus says upon
Scho. Sal. Cap. 30.
The Crab, the Lobster, and the Shrimpe are of the same nature. At Oxford (as I
remember) upon festival days, they are wont to eat Crevices, last after
flesh. And commonly at great feasts in London and elsewhere, they use to serve
up sturgeon last, as it were to make up the mouth. And this they name a feast
royal. But this kind of service is dispraised by Arnoldus in the same
Chapter, A feast royal. Flesh and fish should not be eaten together at one
meal.
where he says, that fish and flesh together should not be eaten* nor fish
and white meat, nor fish should not be eaten after other meats.

CHAP. 190. Of the Puffin.
THere is also a kind of fish called a Puffin, which in respect that it lives
altogether in the water, may be accounted a fish: whereas otherwise considering
that it is feathered and does fly, as other fowls do, it may seem to be
flesh, except you would account it as a Siren or mermayden, that is half fish,
and half flesh. They be eaten as well fresh as powdered, and as they be in a
mean as it were between flesh and fish, so be they in wholesomnesse, neither
best nor worst. A Carthusian may eat them and never break his order.

CHAP. 191. Of Saltfish.
DIverse sorts of the fishes beforesaid, are used to be eaten salt as well as
fresh, as Salmon, Conger, Cod, Eeles, Herrings, and such like. Beside these,
there be some other which are used no way but salt. Whether fresh fish or salt
fish be more wholesome.
Now if comparison be made between fresh fish and salt fish, whether is more
wholesome, to speak generally in my judgment, fresh fish is to be preferred.
For as Arnoldus says upon Scho. Sal. fresh fish does moysten the body, and
increases milk and seed of generation, Cap. 30.
and is very wholesome for choleric folks. Fresh fish good for choll^^icke
folks. Cap. 52.
But salt fish contrariwise, dries the body, diminishes seed of generation,
and is hurtful to those that be choleric. Beside this, if it be much eaten,
it hurts the sight, and causes itch and scabbinesse, by reason that it
engenders a sharp, biting, and burnt humor. All which discommodities are
briefly comprised of Scho. Sal. in two verses, as follows.

Vrunt res salsae visum semenque minorant,
Et generant scabiem, pruritum, sive rigorem.
Which inconveniences although they grow as well by much eating of salt flesh
as of salt fish, yet I think they are rather bred by salt fish.
Notwithstanding I grant that somekind of fish, a little salted, is better than
the same fresh. Because it takes away lothing, and makes a good appetite. But
fish of long time salting (as is the most part of our salt fish) is unwholesome.

CHAP. 192. Of Stockefish.
THere is yet a kind of fish which may be doubtful, whether it should be
reckoned among salt fish or fresh fish, because it is in taste fresh, yet
brought to us dried from Island and other countries Northward. Concerning which
fish I will say no more than Erasmus has written in his Colloquio. Est genus
piscis, quod vocatur Anglice Stockfish, non magis nutrit quam lignum. Yet I
have eaten of a pie made only with Stockfish, which has been very good, but
the goodness was not so much in the fish as in the cookery, which may make
that savoury, which of it self is unsavory. And as it is said, a good Cook
can make you good meat of a whetstone, even so it may be that such fish and
flesh as is of it own nature unwholesome and unpleasant, by the skill of
dressing may be made both wholesome and pleasant. Therefore a good Cook is a
good jewel and to be much made of, modo sit vir bonus.

CHAP. 193. Of White meats.
THere remains yet a third kind of meats, which is neither fish nor flesh,
commonly called white meats, as eggs, milk, butter, cheese, which
notwithstanding proceed and come of flesh, as eggs from the hen, and milk
from the Cow. Yet because they are not plainly flesh, they are permitted to be
eaten upon the fish days, among which four sorts, eggs is the chiefest and
most nourishing. Eggs.
For eggs be of that kind of meat, which in a little quantity nourish much,
as Avicen writes. Ca. 4. cap. 1. Cap. 8.
Wherefore they are reckoned in Scho. Sal. together with other two very
nourishing things, as follows, Ova recentia, vina rubentia, pinguia iu ra,
Cum simila pura, naturae sunt valitura.


That is to say, new laid eggs, chiefly the yolks, red wine, and pottage or
broth of good flesh, as of mutton, veale, capon, or chicken, especially being
made with fine flower or grated bread, these three are very comfortable and
restorative for man's body, and these three would I wish to be much used of
students, for they most need nourishing meats. But touching the choice of
eggs, first I say, that hen eggs, as they be most used so are they best.
Yet eggs of Fesants and Partriches be not unwholesome: but eggs of ducks,
geese, Hen Eggs are best.
turkeis and other fowls should be eschewed. And of hen eggs the choice
stands in three po^nts, How to choose an egg.
that they be white, long, and new: as it is in Sch. Sal.

Filia presbyteri iubet pro lege teneri
Quod bona sunt ova haec, candida, longa, nova. Ser. lib 2. Sat. 2.

Which is approved in the Poet Horace.

Longa quibus facies ovis erit illa memento,
Vt succi melioris, and ut magis alba rotundis,
Ponere. Now concerning the dressing of eggs, The difference of eggs in dressing.
there is great difference. For either they be sodden, roasted or fried. And
they be sodden two ways; either in the shells, or else the shells being broken,
the eggs are put into seething water, Sodden eggs Poched eggs.
the first is called seething of eggs, the second poching of eggs. Both ways
are good, but eggs poched are best and most wholesome. Yet eggs sodden in
their shells, Roasted eggs.
are better then roasted, because the moystnesse of the water, Fried eggs.
tempereth the heat of the fire which dries up the substance of the eggs,
overmuch. And fried eggs be worst of all, for they engender ill humors, annoy
the stomach, and cause corrupt fumes to rise to the head. Collops and eggs.
Wherefore collops and eggs, which is an usual dish toward shrovetide, can in
no wise be wholesome meat, yet it is, the less unwholesome, if the eggs be not
fried hard. For in the regiment of health, eggs should in no wise be eaten
hard. But being in a mean between rere and hard, Hard eggs. Soft eggs. Rere
eggs.
which Galen calls Ova tremula, yet rere eggs, named Ova sorbilia, that is
to say little more than through hot, are good to clear the throat and breast,
and they do ease the griefs of the bladder and reins made with gravel, so
that they be taken before any other meat. A fine breakfast for a weak stomach.
And if a man would break his fast with a light and nourishing meat, then I say
there is nothing better, then a couple of eggs poched, or the yolks of two
eggs sodden rere and put into one shell, seasoned with a little pepper,
butter, and salt, and supped off warm, drinking after it a good draught of
Claret wine. This I know to be very comfortable for weak stomachs, and is
often used of the wisest men in England. And this rule is generally to be
observed, to drink a good draught of wine, ale or bear, after we have eaten an
egg, as it is taught in Schola Sal. Cap. 38.


Singula post ova, pocula sum nova. If hens be slack in laying of eggs, give
them hempseed enough, and they will become fruitful. For as Mat. says, Canabis
sativae semen in cibis sumptum, Lib. 3. Dios. Cap ^48.
plane contrarium efficit in gallinis and in nobis. Siquidem largius com
manducatum nobis genituram extinguit, Hempseed has contrary effects in men and
in hen.
gallinas vero oviferaciores re^dit. There is great difference in the parts of
an egg, for the yolke is temperately hot, the white is cold and clammy, and
hardly digested, and the blood thereof engendered is not good. Yet it is of
great use in bruises, wounds, and sores: as skillful surgions do know. The
chicken is engendered of the white and nonrished with the yolke, though some be
of a contrary opinion. Alexander Aphrodissaeus has a pretty saying of an egg.
Orbis vniversi quem inundum vocamus, Lib. 2. proble 84*
speciem in ovo dixeris d^m^nstrari: An egg resembles the whole world.
nam and exquatuor constat elementis, and in spherae faci^m conglobatur, and
vitalem potentiam obti^et. The shell he likeneth in qualities to the earth,
that is cold and dry: the white, to the water that is cold and moist the some
or froth of the white to the air, that is hot and moist: the yolk to the fire,
that is hot and dry. So he makes the egg as it were (...), a little world.

CHAP. 194. Of Milk.
Milk is made of blood twice concocted, or as Isaak Iudaeus defines it, Par
5. What milk is.
Lac non est aliud nisi sanguis secundo coctus in uberibus: For until it come
to the paps or udder, it is plain blood: but afterward by the proper nature of
the paps it is turned into milk. Diosco. gives this commendation to milk
generally, Lib. 2. c. 6 4.
Lac generatim omne boni succi est, corpus alit, aluum emollit, stomachum and
intestina inflatione vexat. But this last inconvenience may be helped, as he
teaches afterward: minus inflat quodcunque semel fervefactum est. How the
windiness of m^lk may be helped.
And I was wont to help it by putting in a little pepper, Cloves and Mace.
Milk, notwithstanding that it seems to be wholly of one substance, yet it is
compact or made of three several substances, that is to say in effect, Three
substances in milk.
of Cream, Whey and Cruds. O^ Cream is made Butter, and of Cruds Cheese, of
which I shall entreat afterward. But of milk there is great difference, not
only concerning the kinds; but also touching the time of the year. For Cow
milk is thickest and the milk of a Cammel is thinnest, Three sorts of milk.
and the milk of a Goat is between both. Wherefore in the governance of
health, Goats milk is best.
Goats milk is best, and Cow milk is next. Yet the goodness of the pasture
helps much to the goodness of the milk: for ill pastures make ill milk,
and good pastures make good milk: for such as the food is such is the blood,
and such as the blood is, Lib. 3. de Ali fa. cap. 15.
such is the milk, as Galen excellently proves, by example of Goats which fed
on Spurge and Scammony, whose milk was very laxative. Also by example of a
Nurse; who having fed much of wild herbs after she gave suck to a child,
infected the same with many sores and byles. And touching the time of the year
I say, that in the spring time, milk is thinnest, and at the fall of the leaf
it is thickest and best according to that old saying, What time of the year
milk is best.
when fern waxes red, then is milk good with bread. And how natural and
nourishing a meat, Milk is, may be perceived not only by children, who live
and like better with that, than with any other thing: but also men and women,
who being used from their childhood for the most part to Milk, and to eat none
or little other meat but milk and Butter, appear to be of good complexion and
fashion of body. And no marvel: for where milk is well digested, it
engenders good blood, and gives great nourishment, yea, it is a restorative
for them that be wasted or in a consumption, or be lean, as appears in
Scho. Sal. in these words. Cap 34.


Lac hecticis sanum, caprinum, post camelinum,
Ac nutritivum, plus omnibus ast asininum, The degrees of milk in goodness.

Plus nutritivum vaccinum, sic and ovinum,
Ad sit si febris, caput and doleat, fugiendum est.
Whereby it appears that Goats Milk is principal in a consumption, Quia
mediae est consistentiae, Lib. 3. de ali fa. cap. 15.
as Galen says, because it is not so thin as Camels milk or Asses milk,
nor so fat and thick as Cow milk or Sheep milk, yet common experience
proves that women's milk sucked from the breast is without comparison best of
all in a consumption, Whereof a notable example was showed of late years in the
old Earl of Cumberland, The Earl of Comberland cured of a consumption by
woman's milk.
who being brought to utter weakness by a consuming Fever, by means of a
Woman's suck together with the good counsel of learned Physicians, so
recovered his strength, that before being destitute of heirs male of his own
body, he gate that most worthy gentleman that now is inheritour both of his
fathers virtues and honor. But in the last verse it is said that milk hurts
them that have the ague or the head ach: the reason is, Why milk is unwholesome
in Ag^es or Head ache.
because in bodies that be distempered, it is lightly corrupted in the
stomach, and is turned into choleric fumes, which both inflame the body and
grieve the head. Milk is ill for the Colic or stone, and causes
obstructions.
Also milk is hurtful to them that have the Cholicke or stone, or
obstructions of the Liver or Spleen. But it is especially good for them which
be oppressed with melancholy, which is a common calamity of students. Milk
good against melancholy
And for this purpose it should be drunk in the morning fasting abundantly,
new milked warm from the udder. But who so would use it, should cause the
beast to be milked into a vessel wherein are first put a few leaves of Spear
Mynt, a little Sugar or pure Honey. For by this means it shall neither rise in
the stomach afterward, nor yet turn into cruds, and after it should abstain
both from other meats and exercise for three or four hours, for so doing it
may purge the belly, which is one good property that milk has: Whether milk
be loosing or binding.
for because it is buttery, it washes and cleanses the intrailes, and is good
against pricking pains of the Lungs, guts, reins, and bladder. But otherwise
if the Whey be consumed by any means, Milk rather binds the belly than
loses, and may be used as a medicine for a laske in this manner. Take Milk
warm from the Cow, A medicine for a la^ke.
or else new milked, and heat a gad of Steel or Iron glowing hot in the fire,
and quench it therein, so doing nine or ten times, together, then drink it
fasting and it will help. Yet some I have known almost grown to a flix, that
by drinking of milk well boiled without salt, and well spiced with cinamome,
or with chalk shaven into it, have been eased in short time. Whey.
But so long as the Whey is in it, it is rather laxative: for Whey of it self
is very laxative, and may well be used of such as be costive, because it
loses the belly gently. And for this cause (as Galen writes) Veteres ad
alvum subducendam; Lib. 3 de. ali. fa. cap. 15.
hoc potu plurimo uti videntur. And this I can say of experience, that if it be
commonly drunk at the spring of the year, and especial^y in May, it brings
the body to good temper, and is good against itch, skabs, Morphew, and other
impediments, without the skin, and makes a good color in the face, (as I
suppose) for that it purges Choler and Melancholy, and qualifieth the heat of
the stomach and liver: all which properties are briefly set forth in Scho.
Sal. in one verse. Cap. 36.


Inciditque lavat, penetrat, mundat quoque Serum. Some use to boil Fumitory,
Hartstong, Endive, or Succory, Scabiouse, Violet leaves, Sorell, and such like
cooling herbs in the Whey, A cooling decoction of whey good for many purposes.
and so it is made more effectual for the foresaid purposes, and who so
needs may use this decoction, for it is of great force.

CHAP. 195. Of Cream.
Cream is one part or substance of milk, and is indeed the very head or heart
of Milk: and is of two sorts, that is to say, raw Cream which is gathered of
the milk without fire after it has stood a time, and clouted Cream which is
made by setting the milk over an easy fire, until it come to a thick head.
Both these kinds are used as a delicate dish in the summer season, either with
Sugar, or with Strawberries. But how wholesome a dish it is Matthew. teaches
upon Dios. saying: Lib. 2. ca. 66.
Ob pinguedinis copiam praeterquam quod ventriculum relaxat, and cuncto
su^ernatat cibo, nutrimentum eijcit, and crassum generat succum. Wherefore they
that go from Oxford to Botley, or from London to Islington to ear Cream, make
but a sleevelesse errand, yet raw Cream well boiled with a little Sugar, is a
good nourishing meat, and good for a weak student, so it be used according to
the conditions aforesaid in the treatise of Milk.

CHAP. 196. Of Butter.
OF both sorts of cream is made Butter, which if it be fresh and new made, is
very wholesome, especially if it be eaten in the morning; but afterward it is
not so good, according to the old English proverb, butter is Gold in the
morning, and Silver at noone, and lead at night. The meaning whereof because it
is so common, I will here omit. The chief properties of Butter are reckoned to
be three in Schola Salerni as follows. Cap. 35.


Lenit and humectat, soluit sine febre butyrum. Butter mollyfieth and
moysteneth and loses the belly, An experiment of butter to make one soluble.

The virtues of butter.


which effects are wrought chiefly by reason that it is oily and slippery.
Wherefore it is good for such as be commonly costive: and this experience I
have of it, that some which have been wonted to a fine diet, and to eat no
bread but manchet, by the eating of brown bread and butter in a morning
fasting, (which is a Country man's breakfast) have been made as soluble as if
they had taken some purgation. Also Paracelsus writes in his book named
Paramirum, The Flemmings little troubled with the collicke.
that the Flemmings are little troubled with the collicke, because they use to
eat much Butter. But in one respect they are reproved by Arnoldus upon Scho.
Sal. in the Chapter aforesaid, for that they eat it last after other meats,
for Butter (says he) should in no wise, as meat be eaten in great quantity,
and especially it should not be eaten after other meat. But to use it with
other meat it is very wholesome. Beside this, it profits them much that be
stuffed in the breast or lungs, with superfluous humors, and be short winded,
especially if it be eaten with Sugar or Honey. Yet it is not good for them that
have any fever or hot livers, for the fatness thereof does augment the heat of
the fever or Liver. The necessity of Butter in dressing of meats, in making of
salves and ointments, I overpasse, yet would I wish that such as have children
to bring up, May Butter.
would not be without May Butter in their houses. It is to be made chiefly in
May, or in the heat of the year, by setting Butter new made without salt, so
much as you list in a platter, open to the Sun in fair weather for certain
days, until it be sufficiently clarified, and altered in color, which will
be in twelve or fourteen days, if there be fair Sun shining. This is of
mavelous virtue in any exulceration, and I have known the wild fire healed
therewith, To heal the wild fi^e.
being incorporate with Sage leaves. And for the ease of Infants to bring forth
their teeth, To bring forth teeth in children. Lib. 10. Simp.
Galen advises us to rub their gummes oftentimes with fresh Butter, and
thinks it of no less force than Honey, for that purpose. Of the making of
Butter is left a kind of whey, which they commonly call Butter milk, or sour
milk, which after it has stood a time, becomes sour, and is much used to
be eaten either of it self, or with sweet milk, especially in the Summer
season, because it is cooling, and no doubt but that it is both moist and
nourishing, and cleanses the breast and is shortly digested. Also with it is
made together with sweet milk, A posset of two milkes.
a kind of posset, which is called a posset of two milkes, or a sour milk
posset, which is a very temperate and cooling drink, and is used in hot
diseases with great success, and does cool more than any other drink, as is
proved daily in Lankashire, where it is most usual. The way to make it is to
take a quantity of Butter milk after it is sour, and to use that as you are
wont to use Ale or Wine to make other possets. This kind of posset, and the
other made with Ale and sweet milk, are so usual in the Country aforesaid,
that they supply a great part of Physic. And the one sort that is made with
Ale, Possets used at breakfast in Lankashire.
is commonly used in the morning and at breakfast for their servants, and found
by experience to be as good in health, as in sickness, but every Country has
his fashion according to the old adage. There is yet an other kind of butter
made of Almonds with Sugar and Rose water, Almond Butter
called Almond Butter: which being well made and eaten with Violets especially
in Lent, when Violets be most fragrant, is very wholesome and commodious for
students, for it rejoices the heart, it comfort the brain and qualifieth
the heat of the Liver.

CHAP. 197. Of Cheese.
CHeese generally in Physic is reckoned unwholesome, and is thought to annoy
the stomach, to cause oppilations, to engender ill humors, to breed the
colicke and stone. Wherefore it is no good meat for students, though laboring
men commonly use it without harm. The nature of Cheese stands chiefly in
three points, as it is in Schola Salerni. First in that it is cold, which is
to be understood of new Cheese. Cap 37.
Secondly in that it binds the belly, and makes one costiue. Thirdly in
that it breeds gross humors, which is the property of all sorts of Cheese
as Galen writes, saying, Lib. 3^ de Ali. fa^ cap. 17.
Vitium omnium Caseorum est commune, craessum generare succum. The foresaid
three properties are briefly expressed in this manner.

Caeseus est gelidus, stipans, crassus quoque durus. Where durus and stipans
have one signification, yet of all sorts of cheese, that which is soft being
well made, does least harm, yea as it is in Schola Salerni, cap. 9.
it both nourishes and makes far, for so it is said, Nutrit triticum and
impinguat, lac, caseus infans.

Now what Cheese is well made or otherwise may partly be perceived by this old
Latin verse. What cheese is best.


Non nix, non Argos, Mathusalem, Magdalanaeue,
Esau non Lazarus, caseus ille bonus.
That is to say, Cheese should not be white as snow is, nor full of eyes as
Argos was, nor old as Mathusalem was, nor full of whey or weeping as Marie
Magdalen was, nor rough as Esau was, nor full of spots as Lazarus. Master
Tusser in his book of husbandry adds other properties also of Cheese well
made, which who so lists may read. Of this sort for the most part is that
which is made about Banburie in Oxford shire: for of all the Cheese (in my
judgment) it is the best, though some prefer Cheshire Cheese made about the
Nantwich, and other also commend more the Cheese of other Countries, but
Banburie Cheese shall go for my money, for therein (if it be of the best sort)
you shall neither taste the renet nor salt, which be two special properties of
good Cheese. Now who so is desirous to eat cheese, Cheese should be eaten after
meat.
must eat it after other meat, and in a little quantity, A penny weight
according to the old saying is enough, for being thus used, it brings two
commodities. First it strengthens a weak stomach. Secondly it makes other
meats to descend into the chief place of digestion, that is the bosom of the
stomach, which is approved in Scho. Sal. in these words.

Cap 37.
Languenti stomacho caseus addit opem,
Si post sumatur, terminat ille dapes.
But old and hard Cheese is altogether disallowed; and reckoned in Schola Sal.
among these ten manner of meats which engender melancholy, Cap. 7.
and be unwholesome for sick folks, as appears before in the Chapter of
Beef, yet an old hard Cheese is good for something, Lib. 10. Simp.
for Galen shows, that an old Cheese cut in pieces, and sodden with the broth
of a gammon of Bacon, A good plaster for the gout made of an old cheese.
and after stamped with a little of the broth, and made in manner of a plaster,
and laid to the joint where the gout is, will break the skin, and dissolve
those hard knots which the gout causes, which experiment he first proved
himself, and was afterward used of others. Whereby it appears that old
Cheese, though it do no good within the body, yet it may do good without. And
surely for students I think an old and hard Cheese is better in their coffers,
than in their bellies: yet I know that laboring men eating it daily, feel no
inconvenience thereby. But that is not to be mervailed, cap. 37.
for (as I say often) Labor improbus vincit omnia, and that sort of men have
commonly good stomachs, and so says Scho. Sal.

Caseus and panis bonus est cibus been sanis.
Si non sunt sani, tunc hunc non iungito pani.
And surely the state of body that many laboring men have, is very sound and
perfect, and is named of Galen absoluta (...)* And contrariwise the state of
students, I mean of those which be students in deed, Apho 3 com. 1.
and not loytering Lurdeines, I say the state of their bodies is rather (...).
For they be commonly ^aletudinarii, that is sickely, and therefore they have
more need to forbear such meats as be of hard digestion, and of evil
nourishment, as hard Cheese and such like. The welsh folks of all other use to
eat much Cheese, and oftentimes roasted, Roasted Cheese.
which they think to be a good meat. But I think, roasted cheese is more meet
to bait a trap, to catch a mouse or a ratte, than to be received into the body,
for it corrupts in the stomach both it self and other meats, and sends
up ill vapors and fumes, which corrupt the breath. Wherefore let students let
Cause bobi alone. Some folks by nature do abhor Cheese which comes of a
natural property of the stomach, Why some by nature abhor cheese. Lib. 1. de
temp. Lib. 1. de Consu.
by reason of the temperature thereof, for that reason Galen yields, Cuilibet
corpori proprietas quaedam temperamenti est, quae huic naturae consentit, ab
hac vero dissentit. And again, Omnibus animalis partibus inest desiderium
quoddam, etc. Hitherto of white meats.

CHAP. 198. Of Sauces.
NExt after meats I have thought good to speak somewhat of Sauces, because
weak stomachs, as commonly of students, do need oftentimes to be provoked.
Yet I will not say much thereof, because the making of Sawces does belong to
the Cook and not to the Physician, and diverse meats require diverse sawces,
and diverse men have diverse appetites, so that it were an infinite matter to
discourse fully therein. But I will briefly set down some things very
profitable in this behalf, which if students shall follow, they shall find
thereby great commodity touching their health. Two principal Sauces. Lib. 5.
Tus.
Of all Sawces, those two are the best, which were commended by Socrates, as
Tully reports. That is, Cibi condimentumest fames, potionis sitis. And
thereof Tully gives two notable examples in the same book, which I will
recite in Latin, because my English is in no wise able to countervaile Tullies
Latin. Two notable examples in two Kings, of hunger and thirst.
First of hunger, that it is the best sauce for meat, he proves by
Ptolomaeus king of Egypt in this manner, Ptolomaeo peragranti Aegyptum,
comitibus non consequutis, ^uum cibarius in casa panis datus esset, nihil visum
est ill^ pane iucundius. And that thirst is the best sauce for drink, he
proves by the example of Darius the great king of Persia, as follows, Darius
in (...) cum aquam turbidam and cadaveribus inquinatam bibisset, negavit unquam
se bibisse iucundius: nunquam videlicet siticus biberat. To these may be added
that worthy apophthegme of Dionysius King of Sicilie, mentioned by Tully in the
said book, Cum Tyrannus coenavisset Dionysius, These Lacedemonian sauces are
good for such as feed at full.
negavit se iure illo, quod cenae caput erat delectatum, is qui illud coxerat,
minime mirum, condimenta enim defuerunt* Quae tandem? in quit ille, labori^
venat^, sudor, cursus ab Eurota, fames, sitis. His enim rebus Laced^moniorum
epulae condi^^tur. So that hunger and thirst are the best sawces for meat and
drink, and the means to get hunger and thirst, are exercise and abstinence
for a time. This did Socrates well perceive, the author of this golden
sentence, for as Tully writes in the foresaid book, How Socrates procured
hunger.
Quum usque ad vesperum contentius ambularet, quaesitumque esset ex eo quare
ita faceret, respondisse, quo melius caenaret, obsonare ambulando famem. But
this kind of sauce is natural, and every man does bring it with him to the
table: but there be other sauces that be artificial, of which I will set down
those that be most usual.

CHAP. 199. Of Salt.
THe sauce most common of all other is Salt, which is so necessary that we
cannot well live without it, and therefore it is the first thing that is to set
on the Table, and should be last taken away, according to those old verses
mentioned by Arnoldus upon Schola. Sal.

Sal primo poni debet primoquerepo^^,
Omnis mensa male ponitur absque sale. cap. 52.

The necessity of salt in seasoning of meats, and preserving of meats is
such, that almost it is used with every kind of meat. The virtues thereof be
chiefly two, in the Chapter aforesaid. Two virtues of Salt.
The first is that salt resists venom, by reason that it is a dryer. The
second is, that salt makes a man's meat savourie, which needs no proof.
These two properties are thus expressed in meeter in the said Chapter: Sal
virus refugat, recte insipidumque saporat,
Nam sapit esca male quae datur absque sale.


There be two kinds of Salt in use among us in England, that is, Bay salt and
whitesalt, Two kinds of salt used in meats.
which is chiefly made in Cheshire, at the towns called the Wiches, where
there be certain pits or Wells of salt water, whereof by boiling they make the
white salt. And the same water is as good to powder any kind of flesh, as
brine: for (as I have heard them say that dwell about the wiches) within 24.
hours it will powder Biefe sufficiently. A great blessing of God to raise up
such Springs for our use so far within the land. There be also other sorts of
salt used in Physic, but not used in meats, wherefore I let them pass: and
although salt do make the meat more savourie, yet I advise all students not to
eat much salt nor salt meats, for much salt eaten (as it is said of old) will
make one to look old soon, and salt meats breed the discommodities aforesaid
in the Chapter of salt-fish: and this experiment I have of my self, which
peradventure may do others good, that being troubled with an itch diverse
years at Oxford, by forbearing salt altogether and salt meats, I was cured
thereof thoroughly within one year, and I was so precise in that point, that I
would eat no salt with an egg, which at the first I thought unsavory* but
afterward by use it waxed pleasant enough.

CHAP. 200. Of Vinegar.
THe second sort of sauce which is in common use, is Vinegar, whose nature is
to cool and bind, as Dioscorides writes. It is good for the stomach,
provokes appetite, Lib. 5. cap. 17
and is very wholesome to be used in time of pestilence. cap. 46.
For (as Avicen says) to use Vinegar with meat in time of pestilence, is a
good preservative. cap: 46
In Scho. Sal. there be five properties ascribed to vinegar. First, that it
dries. Secondly, F^ve properties of vinegar.
that it cools. Thirdly, that it makes lean. Fourthly, that it engenders
melancholy. Fifthly, that it diminishes seed of generation, all which
properties are contained in the verses following.

Frigidat and modicum: Sed plus desiccat ace^um,
Frigidat emaceratque Melanch. dat, sperma minorat,
Siccos infestat nervos, and pinguia siccat.
The last verse shows, that Vinegar hurts the sinews, and makes one
lean, which is to be understood, if it be taken fasting, A practice to make
one lean and low colored.
as I have known some maidens to drink Vinegar next their heart to abate
their color and to make them fair, and sometime to eat ^ostes dipped in
Vinegar: but if it be often used, it will breed many inconveniences. A go^d
water to cleanse the mouth.
One spoonefull of Vinegar mingled with three spoonefulls of Rose water, or for
want of Rose water with well water, is a good lotion to cleanse the mouth and
gummes from filth which corrupts the breath. There be two sorts of Vinegar in
common use, that is to say, white and red. For the color it makes no matter,
so that it be rightly made: for some use to mingle Ale and Wine together, and
so to make Vinegar, and some make it of Ale only, giving it a color afterward
with Turnsall, or such like: but that is rather Aliger than Vinegar, for right
Vinegar is made of Wine only. And if any list to make a perfect kind of
Vinegar, that is not only toothsome but wholesome also, Rose vineg^r.
let him take a gallon or two of good Vinegar, in some little barell or glass,
and put into it, for every quart of Vinegar, one handful of Rose leaves,
gathered before they be fully budded forth, and withered half a day before
upon a fair board, put them into the Vinegar, and stop up the barrel or
glass very close with cork and clay, and set it so that the sun may have
power upon it, but yet defended from the rain, and let it stand so a month or
six weeks or longer, and at the end of Summer strain the Vinegar from the
Roses, and keep it for your use. Or if you would have it stronger of the
Roses, strain forth the old Roses, and put in fresh oftentimes, or if you
suffer the Rose leaves to remain all the year in the vinegar, it is not
amiss, for they will not putrify. After the same manner you may make Vinegar
of Giloflowers, Vinegar of Giloflowers.
which I have spoken of before where I entreated of that flower. Likewise of
Violets and such like: but the Vinegar of Roses and Giloflowers is best, and is
indeed of great virtue, Preservatives from the Pestilence.
as well in meats as in medicines, specially against the Pestilence. And if a
man cannot abide to drink it, yet to drench an Handkerchiefe, or such like
cloth in it, and to smell to it, is a good preservative, or to heat a slate
stone or other stone in the fire, and to power vinegar upon it, and to receive
the smoke or fume thereof with open mouth. Verjuice, which is made of Crabbes
pressed and strained, Veriuice.
is like to Vinegar in operation, saving that it is not so strong. A posset or
Selibub made of Verjuice, is good to cool a choleric stomach, and I have
known some to use them in hot Fevers with good success. With Vinegar also is
made Oximel, Oximel.
which is very good to open obstructions of the inner parts of the body, whereby
Fevers may be prevented which commonly proceed of obstructions. It is to be
made in this manner: Take a quart of fair water, and a pint of pure Honey,
boil them both together leasurly, always scumming as froth arises. And when
they are boiled to the third part, that is to a pint, then put in of strong
white Vinegar (if you can get it) half a pint, boil them again a little,
and scumme it clean with a Fether, then take it off, and use it at your
pleasure. This is named Oximel simplex. Some put in Rosemary at the first
boiling, and so they make it more pleasant. But if you put in roots of Persely
and Fenel and their seeds, it is then Oximel compositum, and is more effectual
in opening obstructions. Lib. 7. de Meth.
Fernelius prescribes as much Honey as water. Anti. lib. 2.
Weckerus appoints a pottle of Honey a quart of water, and another of Vinegar,
to be made as before is said, so that you may follow whether author you will.

CHAP. 201. Of Mustarde.
THe third sauce which is in common use is Mustard, which as it procures
appetite, and is a good sauce with sundry meats both flesh and fish, so is it
medicinable to purge the brain, as I have showed in the treatise of herbs,
which effect may easily be perceived, by that, if the Mustard be good, if a
man lick too deep, it straightway pierces to the brain, and provokes
neesing, How neesing proceeding of Mustard may be helped.
which extremity maybe soon helped by holding bread at your nose, so that the
smell thereof may ascend up to the head, for that kills immediately the
strength of the Mustard. The best Mustard that I know in all England is made at
Teuksbery in Gloucester shire, and at Wakefield in Yorkshire. Of the three
foresaid sauces, Salt and Mustard are hot: but Mustard much hotter than Salt,
and Vinegar is cold, which difference must be applied to seasons of the year:
for in hot seasons we should use cold sauces, and in cold seasons contrariwise.

CHAP. 202. Of a Common sauce.
IN Scho. Sal. is set forth a common sauce, to be made with six things, Cap. 22.
that is to say, with Sage, Salt, Wine, Pepper, Garlic, Percely, as appears
by these verses: Salvia, Sal, vinum, piper, Allia, Petrocelinum.
Ex his fac salsa, ne sit commixtio falsa.


But I do not think that all these together should be made in one sauce, for
that were a mingle mangle indeed, and a sweet sauce for a sick Swine: but I
take it, that all these are good to be used in common sauces, especially for
the Winter season, because they be hot. Yet I know one sauce which is common,
and very good for diverse sorts of meats, and that is Onions sliced very
thin, fair water and gross pepper, for this sauce will serve well for Capon,
Hen, Fesant, Partrich, Woodcocke. The Onions will do the less harm if they
be boiled in water, until they be in a manner dry, then may you put some of
the dripping to them, and Pepper gross beaten, for so it will serve also for a
Turkye. But I will enter no further into the art of Cookery, lest some cunning
Cook take me tardy, and say unto me as the Tailor said to the Shoemaker, Ne
suitor ultra crepidam. Wherefore of the goodness or substance of meats this
much. It follows now that I speak of the quantity of meats.

CHAP. 203. Of the quantity of meats.
THe second thing that is to be considered in meats (as appears by my
division) is the quantity, which ought of all men greatly to be regarded, Cap.
1.
for therein lies no small occasion of health or sickness, of life or death.
For as want of meat consumes the very substance of our flesh, so does excess
and surfeit extinguish and suffocate natural heat wherein life consists. So
that the word Mediocre which Hippocrates applies to all those five things,
spoken of in this book, must especially be applied to meats, that is to say,
that the quantity of meat be such, as may be well digested in the stomach.
That it be according to the nature of him that eats, and not always
according to appetite. For the temperate stomach only (which is rare to be
found) desires so much as it may conveniently digest. Three differences of
stomachs.
Contrariwise the hot stomach does not desire so much as it may digest. The
cold stomach may not digest so much as it desires. Wherefore, the surest way
in feeding, is to leave with an appetite, according to the old saying, and to
keep a corner for a friend. Which also is approved by Hippocrates, where he
says, Sanitatis studium est non satiari cibis, and impigrum esse ad laborem.
Epid. Sect. 4. Apho. 20. Two chief points of preserving health. Cap. 31.
The same also is taught in Ecclesiasticus after this manner. How little is
sufficient for a man well taught, and thereby he belcheth not in his chamber,
nor feels any pain. A wholesome sleep comes of a temperate belly, he
rises up in the morning, and is well at ease in himself: but pain in
watching and choleric diseases, and pains of the belly are with an
unsatiable man. This rule although it be very hard, (for hardly may a man
withhold his hands until his belly be full) yet I advise all men as much as
they may, to follow it, and to bear well in mind these two latin verses
following: Two verses to be followed of all that would live in heal^h.
Pone gulae metas, ut sit tibi longior aetas,
Esse cupis sanus? sit tibi parca manus.


But the greatest occasion why men pass the measure in eating, is variety of
meats at one meal. Which fault is most common among us in England far above
all other Nations. For such is our custom by reason of plenty (as I think)
that they which be of hability, are served with sundry sorts of meat at one
meal. Yea the more we would welcome our friends, the more dishes we prepare.
And when we are well satisfied with one dish or two, then come other more
delicate, and procures us by that means, to eat more than nature does
require. Thus variety brings us to excess, Variety of meats, breeds
excess and surfeit.
and sometimes to surfeit also. But physic teaches us to feed moderately upon
one kind of meat only at one meal, or at the least wise not upon many of
contrary natures. Which the Poet Horace notably declares in this manner, Se^.
li. 2. Sa. 2.
Accipe ^unc victus tenuis quae quantaque secum
Afferat, inprimis valeas been, nam variae res,
Vt noceant homini, credas, memor illius escae,
Quae si^plex olim tibi sederit, at simul assis
Miscueris elixa, simul conchilia turdis,
Dulcia se in bilem vertent, stomachoque tumultum
Lenta feret pituita.


And thus much I can testify of mine own experience, that a man, who was
before very gross and fat, An experiment to (...) one slender.
by feeding upon one dish only at one meal, and drinking thereto but small
drink, within a year or two became slender. Also another I knew, that by
eating one meal only in one day, though diverse sorts of meats, was made
thereby much smaller. But hereof we have no better a proof than is in the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, where the Students have commonly but one
kind of meat at a meal, and do live and like very well therewith, and before
the most part as clean men of personage, as lightly may be seen. Yet I
condemn not variety of meats, especially with us in England that be daily
accustomed thereto, so that there be no great contrariety between them, as
there is between fish and flesh, between Martlemas biefe and chickens, and so
that we exceed not the mean in eating: for excess brings surfeit, and surfeit
brings sudden death oftentimes, as Galen shows. Lib: 1. Apho. 3.
The reason is alleged in the same place. Quum vasa cibo ac potu fuerint supra
modum repl^ta, periculum est, ne aut ipsa rumpaniur* aut calor ipse nativus
suffocetur atque extinguatur. This disease, (I mean surfeit) is very common.
For common is that saying and most true, Plures mori crapula quam gladio. And
as Georgius Pictorius says, Omnis repletio mala, sed panis pessima. Dialo. 3.
And if nature be so strong in many, that they be not sick upon a full
gorge, yet they are drousie and heavy, and more desirous to loyter than to
labor, according to that old meeter, Disten^^s venture vellet d^rmire libenter.
Yea the mind and wit is so oppressed and overwhelmed with excess, that it
lies as it were drowned for a time, A full belly is unfi^ for study.
and unable to use his force. Which thing the Poet Horace worthily sets
forth in the foresaid Satyr as follows: Vides ut pallidus omnis,
Caena desurgat dubia, quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitijs animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque ^f^igit humo divinae particulam aurae.
Alter vbi dicto citius curata sopori
Memb a dedit, vegetus praescripta ad munia surgit.


Wherefore I counsel all students to follow the advice of the Poet Osellus,
mentioned by Horace in the said Satyr, in these words, Discite non inter
lances, mensasque nitentes,
Dum stupet insanis acies fulgoribus, and cum
Acclivis falsis animus meliora recusat.
Verum hic impransi mecum disquirite cur hoc?
Dicam si potero, male verum examinat omnis
Corruptus i^dex.


Lib. 5. Tus. Two notable sayings of Tully touching the quantity of meat.

Three sorts of diet.


And Tully himself is of the same mind, where he says: Mente recte vti non
possumus, multo cibo and potione completi. And in Cato mayor he says, Tantum
cibi and potionis adhibendum est, ut reficiantur vires, non opprimantur, But
that the quantity of meat may be fully declared, it is necessary that I propose
three sorts of diet prescribed by Physicians as well in health as in
sickness. Which be, Plena, moderata, tennis: a full diet, a mean diet, a
slender diet. Or if you will apply it to meats, much enough, enough in a
mean, and little enough. The full diet does not only sustain the strength of
the body, but also increase it. The mean diet does only preserve the strength
and maintain it, The slender diet abate and diminish it. The full diet (for
example sake) may be such, as is used at Oxford upon gaudy days. The mean
diet, such as is used commonly. The slender diet, such as is used upon fasting
nights, as a little bread and drink and a few raysons or figs. Now as the
mean is best in all things, so in diet, Lib. 2. Apho. 4.
as Hippocrates teaches, Non satietas, non f^mes, neque aliud quicquam quod
naturae modum excedat bonum. Nam omne nimium naturae est inimicam. Yet if a man
shall decline from the mean toward either of the extremes, for it is very
hard always to hold the mean, it is better in health to decline to a full
diet than to a slender, so it be not a plain surfeit. For so teaches
Hippocrates. Quoduis peccatum, grauius in tenui, quam in paulo pleniore victu
esse solet. 1 Apho. 5.
Eadem de causa sanis etiam valdetenuis, stataque and exquisita victus ratio,
parum tuta, quia errata gravius ferunt. So that in health we should keep no
precise diet, but always seek to augment the strength of the body, by a full
diet, or at the least wise to maintain it by a mean diet, and in no wise to
diminish it by a slender diet. And this is the cause (in my judgment) why some
men observing no diet at all, be more healthful and stronger, than those who
tie themselves continually to certain rules in diet. Quia videlicet, natura in
illis fortior nulli non morbo resistere valet, materiam morbi mire expellend^.
But yet in sickness sometimes a slender diet is necessary, especially in
morbi^ acutis, Diet in sickness. 1 Apho. 4.
as Hippocrates teaches. And in long sickness the mean diet is to be used,
as well as in health. For otherwise the strength of the patient were not able
to endure till the end of the sickness. But in a sickness that will end
within three or four days, we should use a diet which Galen calls in his
commentary upon the aforesaid Aphorism, Sum tenuis victus, that is to eat
nothing at all, or else, but a little melicrate: and surely this kind of diet
is good in some diseases, Fasting drives away sickness.
and I have known many that have driven away sickness by fasting. That is to
say, by eating nothing for a time, which is named in latin Inedia And for this
cause (as I think) that ancient Physician Thessalus, mentioned of Galen, first
devised this Diatriton, Lib. 4. de meth. med. cap. 4.
that is to say three days abstinence, for his patients, whom notwithstanding
Galen refuteth in the same place, because he used it in long diseases, and by
that means brought his patients to utter weakness. Wherefore he concludes,
that the Physician in dyeting should regard chiefly two things. That is to say,
the force of the sickness, and the strength of the party that is sick, and
thereafter to prescribe less or more to be received. More shall be said
touching this point, where I shall entreat of custom, time, and order. Now if
a man being in health, take more than nature may well bear, let him follow the
counsel of Jesus Sirach. If thou feel that thou have eaten too much, cap. 31.
arise, go thy way, cast it out of thy stomach, How surfeit may be eased.
and take thy rest, and it shall ease thee, so that thou shall bring no
sickness unto thy body.

CHAP. 204. Of Quality.
THe third thing that is to be considered in meats, The qual^ty of meats.
is the quality, that is to say, the temperature or state thereof: As whether
it be hot or cold, moist or dry, gross or fine, thick or thin, which is
greatly to be regarded both in health and sickness, for in health such meats
should be used as be like in temperature to the body. As to them whose natural
complexion is moist, as is of children, ought to be given meats that be
moist in virtue or power. And to them whose natural complexion is dry, ought
to be given meats dry in virtue or power. Contrariwise to bodies untemperate
and in sickness, such meats or drinks are to be given, which be in power
contrary to the distemperance. As to them which be very choleric or sick of
a fever, should be given moist meats and cooling. For true is that saying of
Galen, Augetur quidque ac nutritur a similibus, De inequ^inte. cap. 6.
perimitur a^ corr^mpitur a contrariis. Itaque etiam sanitatis tutelaper
similia perficitur: morborum sublatio per contraria. Whereof springs that
common Maxima, contraria contrariis curantur. But here we must take heed that
the meats do not much exceed the distemperature of the body: As those do
which be named Cibi medicamentosi, as hot wines, pepper, garlic, onyons, and
such like. For these being hot and dry, far above the mean, if they be given
to a choleric person, they be very noisome, because they exceed the just
temperature of man's body in that complexion. But to them which be flegmaticke
they be oftentimes wholesome. Contrariwise cold water, cold herbs, and cold
fruits moderately used, be wholesome to choleric bodies, by putting away the
heat exceeding the natural temperature. But to them which be flegmatike, they
be unwholesome, and do bring into them distemperature of cold and moist, but
what meats be hot or cold, moist or dry, gross or fine, thick or thin,
may he learned by perusing the treatise before, concerning meats of all sorts.

CHAP. 205. Of Custom.
THe fourth thing that is to be considered in meats is custom. Which is of
such force in man's body both in sickness and in health, that it
countervaileth nature it self, and is therefore called of Galen in sundry
places, Lib. de Con.
Acquisititia, sieve altera natura. Whereof he gives anotable example, L^b. 3.
Simp. Two merveilous examples of poison eaten without hurt. Lib. de Secret.
where he shows that an old woman of Athens used a long time, to eat
hemlocke (whch is a rank poison) first a little quantity and afterward more,
till at length she could eat so much without hurt as would presently poison
another. The like story is told by Albertus magnus, where he declares that a
child by long use and custom would eat spiders out of the wall without any
harm: Notwithstanding that spiders (as all men do know) are a present poison.
So that custom in process of time may alter nature and make that harmless,
which is otherwise hurtful. And in meat and drink every man feels in
himself, Custom in meat and drink.
that whereunto he has been of long time accustomed, though it be not so
good as other, yet does it less harm than that whereunto he is not used. And
this is approved also by Hippocrates, 2 Apho. 50.
Quae longo tempore assuet a sunt, etiam si de^eriora sunt, minu^iis quae
insueta sunt molestare consueverunt. Convenit igitur etiam ad insueta
permutari. Custom also brings liking, and liking causes good concoction.
For what the stomach likes, it greedily desires: and having received it,
closely incloseth it about until it be duly concocted. Which thing is the
cause that meat and drink wherein we have great delight, though it be much
worse than other, yet it does us more good. 2 Apho. 38.
Which Hip. also teaches, Paulo peior, sed suavior cibus ac potus, meliori
quidem at ingrato preferendus. Which is not so to be taken as many Phisicians
do think, as if it were lawful for them to suffer their patients to have
whatsoever they desire, although it be contrary to their disease: But it is
meant conditionally as Hipp. teaches, to wit: Si parum noce^t, and noxa quae
infertur reparari facile potest. Epid. 6. Sec. 4. Apho. 7.
And of what force custom is in labor, Hip. teaches, Quotidianis laboribus
assueti, etiamsi invalidi sint aut senes, insuetis quamvis robustis and
iuvenibus, 2 Apho. 40. Custom in labor.
facilius consueta ferunt exercitia. And this is the cause that Craf^smen and
Husbandmen, although they be old and weak, can do that which stronger and
younger men, being not so inured, may not do. As a feeble old milner to lift a
great weighty sack, an old smith to wield and labor with a great hammer, than
a younger man not thereto accustomed. Wherefore whosoever will be strong and
endure labor, must accustom himself to labor. Custom likewise is of great
force, in sleeping and waking, and other things called not natural, which I
shall entreat of hereafter. Good therefore is that counsel in Sch. Sal. cap.
55.


Omnibus assuetam jubeo servare dietam,
Approbo sic esse, ni sit mutare necesse.
Where it is to be noted, that sometime custom is to be changed if necessity
so require. A diet for healthy men.
Neither is it good for any man that is in perfect health, to observe any
custom in diet precisely, as Arnoldus teaches upon the same verses in these
words: Quisque corpus suum sic disponere debet, ut caloris and frigoris patiens
esse possit, and ad motiones and cibaria sibi necessaria aptum reddat, and ut
somni and vigiliarum horas, atque mansiones and domos sine laesione per^^utare
possit. Fortassi^enim ex necessita^e hoc aliquando agere cogetur. Quod quidem
fieri poterit, si consuetudo non observetur ad unguem, sed interdum ad
inconsueta transeamus, which sentence of Arnoldus agrees very well to that of
Cornelius Celsus, Lib. 1. Men in perfect health should keep no precise order
in diet.
Sanus homo qui and b^ne valet, and suae spontis est, nullis obligare se
legibus debet, ac neque medico, neque alipta egere. Hunc oportet varium habere
vitae genus, modo ruri esse modo in urbe, saepiusque in agro, navigare, venari,
quiescere interdum* sed frequentiu^ se exercere. But some man may demand of me
how this may agree with that saying of Scho. Salerni. Cap. 1.


Si tibi deficiant medici, medici tibi siant
Haec tria, men's hilaris, requies, moderata dieta.
Whereunto I answer, that a moderate diet is always good, but not a precise
diet: for a moderate diet is as Terence speaks in Andria, How a custom in
diet may be changed without ha^me.
Vt ne quid nimis, which always is to be observed. But if a man accustom
himself to such meats or drinks, as at length will breed some inconvenience
in his body, or to sleep or to watch, or any other thing concerning the order
of his life, such custom must needs be amended and changed, yet with good
discretion, and not upon the sudden, 6 Epi. Sect. 3.
quia repentinae mutationes noxam imbecillitatemque pariunt, as Hip. teaches.
He therefore that will alter any custom in diet rightly, must do it with
three conditions, which are expressed by Hip. Mutatio ipsa quidem non parum
conducit, si eius recta fit translatio, hoc est st fiat sanitatis tempore, and
per otium, Lib 2. ^ict. acu^. cap. 18.
ne^ fit repentina, and this much of custom.

CHAP. 206. Of Time.
THe fifth thing that is to be considered in meats is the time, which stands
chiefly in three points, that is to say: Time of the year: Time of the day:
Age of the party. Concerning times of the year, no better counsel can be
given, than that of Schola Salerni, Temporibus veris, modicum prandere juberis,
Cap. 19.

Sed calor aestatis dapibus nocet immoderatis.
Autumni fructus, caveas ne sint tibi luctus.
De mensa sum quantum vis tempore brumae.


For the better understanding whereof, it is necessary, that we know the four
seasons of the year, and their temperature. That is to say, the Spring time,
Summer, Autumn, or fall of the leaf, and Winter. The four seasons of the year
The spring time begins in March when the Sun enters into Aries, and is
in temperature, not hot and moist after the old opinion but in a mean without
all excess, as Galen proves, Lib. 1. de temp. cap. 4.
and the equal mixture of the four qualities in it, to wit, of heat and
cold, moist, and drith, is the cause both of the mean temperature, and also of
the wholesomenesse thereof: for of all seasons of the year, the spring time is
most wholesome. as Hip. teaches. 3 Apho. 9. Versaluberrimum and minime
exiliosum.
Yet it cannot be denied, but that the beginning thereof does participate with
Winter, and the end with Summer. Wherefore in the beginning of the Spring, the
diet should be according to Winter. And in that sense Hip. joins Winter and
the spring together in like diet Ventres hyeme ac vere natura calidissimi, 1
Apho. 15.
and somni* longissimi, per ea igitur tempora, plus cibi dare oportet, si
quidem plus nativi caloris habent. Quo fit ut copiosiore alimento egeant. But
Scho. Sal. in the first verse aforesaid, means the latter part of the Spring,
The diet of the Spring time.
wherein we should eat but a little meat much like as in Summer, yet not so
much as in Winter, nor so little as in Summer. But as the time is temperate: so
then to use a temperate diet. And that which we do eat at that time
especially, should be of good nourishment, because then blood chiefly
increases, and such meats such blood, and such blood, such state of body. Now
what meats be of best nourishment, I have declared before, and here again I
say, that generally flesh is of greater and better nourishment than fish, Lib.
2. insti. Sect. 2. cap. 9.
Quia piscium alimentum est frigidum and humidum, as Fuchsius teaches.

CHAP. 207. Of Summer.
SVmmer begins in June, when the Sun enters into Cancer. This season is
naturally hot and dry, because therein heat exceeds cold, and dryness
moisture. In this time of the year by reason of the heat of the air without,
the pores of the body are more open, whereby the spirits and natural heat are
the more resolved and wasted, and by that means the virtue digestive is
infeebled, so that the stomach and inner parts then are not so well able to
digest as at other times. The best diet in Summer.
Wherefore to eat much meat in Summer is hurtful according to the second
verse, 1 Aph. 17. Aestate saepe and pa^um dandum*
Sed calor aestatis, etc. But we must eat a little at once and often as Galen
teaches: Quia and accessione alimenti majore indigent, vt pote per id temporis
cute perspirabili exhausti, and quia vires exolutae sunt ac dejectae. And that
which we eat should be rather boiled than roasted. Pottage or brothes made of
cold herbs, as Lettuse, In Summer drink much and eat little.
Endive, Succory, Violets, are then good to be used. Drink in more abundance,
Wine allayed with water, to hot complexions much, to cold natures less.

CHAP. 208. Of Autumn.
AVtume or the fall of the leaf begins in September when the Sun-entreth
into Libra. This season of the year is variable, and the air changeable in
heat or cold. Sib. 1. de temp. cap. 4.
Wherefore it is not cold and dry after the old opinion, but of unequal
temperature as Galen proves. And the distemperature thereof is the very cause,
Quae maxim Autumn^^ morbiferum facit, as he avoucheth in the same place. The
diet most convenient for this season is to eat somewhat more in quantity than
in Summer, and more often roasted meats, Diet in Autumn.
and to drink some deal less and a little stronger. And especially we must
beware of Summer fruits, which are most plentiful at this time of the year,
for as much as they make ill juice and wind in the body. But how they may be
eaten with lest hurt, I have showed before in the treatise of fruits.

CHAP. 209. Of Winter.
WInter begins in December, when as the Sun enters into Capricorn. This
season by nature is cold and moist, for therein cold does surmount heat, and
moisture drought, by reason whereof, the heat of our bodies within is greater
and the virtue digestive stronger, for the coldness of the air without,
environing our bodies about, must needs keep in, and unite and fortify the
inward heat, ( ex antipe ristasi) as the Philosopher speaks, that is to say
by position of the contrary. Wherefore digestion being stronger, one may eat
as much as he will, that is to say, more than in other seasons* and not only
more but also meats of grosser substance: as Biefe, Pork and such like, Quia
vires validae sunt. And this also is approved by Hip. Ventres h^eme and ^ere
natura calidissimi, etc. alleged before in the spring. And meats roasted are
more convenient for this time than sodden, and flesh and fish powdered, is now
better than in Summer. As for herbs and fruits especially raw, at all times are
to be refused. Drink in Winter should be stronger, yet taken in little
quantity, because of the moistness of the time. Hip. briefly sets down
the diet of all four seasons of the year. 1 Aph. 18.
Aestate and Autumno cibi copiam ferant difficillime, Hyeme facillim^, Vere
minus. This much concerning times of the year.

CHAP. 210. Of the times of the day*
COncerning times of the day usual to eat and drink which we call meals,
they are diverse in diverse Countries. But here in England commonly three, that
is, Breakefast, Dinner, and Supper, which I shall speak of in order as they
be proposed, if first I give forth that notable Caveat, cap. 6.
which is in Schola Salerni, always to be observed before we take any
sustenance: So that it is, as it were a preparative to meat.

Tu nunquam comedas, stomachum ni n^veris esse
Purgatum vacuumque cibo, quem sumpseris ante.
Ex desiderio id poteris cognoscere certo.
Haec sunt signa tibi subtilis in ore (...).
In which verses, two things are chiefly to be noted. First if the stomach
be oppressed with ill humors, that we eat nothing until they be avoided.
And whether or no there be corrupt humors in the stomach, it is to be known
Enidoribus and ructibus, Lib. 1. cap. 4* de locis. aff.
as Galen teaches, and such ill humors as be in the stomach, may best be
avoided vomitione ac ventris solutione, as Galen shows. And for the one
practice, Lib. 1. de Sa. ti^* cap. 9.
that is by vomit, what ease it works to a choleric stomach. I my self
have prooved these many years, following therein the counsel of Galen, where
he allows the advice of ancient Physicians touching vomit to be used once or
twice every month, Lib. 5. cap. 4. d^ usu par.
not fasting but after meat, yea and such things eaten before, as be acres
and abstersoriae. But I use it commonly at the Spring or fall of the leaf, and
no oftener, except great occasion offered, because often vomiting weakeneth the
stomach, and fills the head with vapors. And how vomit may most easily be
procured, I have showed before where I spoke of Olives. The second thing to be
noted in the verses aforesaid, is, that we eat not again, until the meat
eaten before, be first concocted, and avoided out of the stomach: for
otherwise the one will let the concoction of the other, and breed great crudity
in the body, which is the original of the most part of diseases. Now to know
when the stomach is void of the meat before eaten, Hunger is the best token
of an empty stomach.

What hunger is and how it comes. Insti. lib. 1* Sect. 7. cap. 5.


the chiefest token is hunger, which if it be a true hunger, rises by
contraction of the veins, proceeding from the mouth of the stomach, for want
of meat, for, so Leonhartus Fuchsi^^ teaches in these words, Vera fames a
penuriae sensu (...) quum venae ex ipso ventriculo veluti emulgentes
sugentesque trahunt. Also an other sign of emptiness of the stomach is showed
in the last verse, to be slender diet before going. For when appetite
follows upon small sustenance taken before, it is a plain token that
digestion is ended. These things being observed, and exercise used according to
the order set down upon the word (labor) I say with Master Eliot that worthy
and worshipful Knight, English folks may eat three meals a day.
that in England men and women, until they come to the age of forty years,
may well eat three meals in one day, as breakefast, dinner and supper, so
that between breakfast and dinner be the space of 4. hours at the least, for
4. hours is the due time assigned to the stomach for the first concoction: And
between dinner and supper six hours, and the breakefast less than the
dinner, and the dinner moderate, that is to say, less then satiety or
fulness of belly, and the drink thereunto measurable, according to the
dryness or moystnesse of the meat. But touching breakefasts, Whether
breakfasts are to be used in England.
whether or no they are to be used, it may be some question, because they are
not mentioned in Galen and other ancient authors of Physic, neither are they
appointed by order of the Universities, but only two meals of the day spoken
of, which be dinner and supper. But to this question the answer of Hippocrates
may suffice: Quibus etiam semel ne an bis, and plus minus^e and
gradatimpraebere cibum conveniat, spectandum. 1 Apho^^.
Dandum vero aliquid tempori, regioni, aetati, and consuetudini. And doubtless
the temperature of this our Country of England is such, (as I have showed in my
Preface) that our stomachs for the more part, are hotter by reason of the
coldness of the Clime, and therefore may digest better, and naturally require
more meat, and sooner, than other nations that inhabit hotter Countries:
wherefore I think it good for Englishmen not to be long fasting, if their
stomachs be clean and empty, least that happen to them which Galen speaks
of. Lib 3. cap. 13. de ^atu. fa.
That the stomach for want of meat draw unto it corrupt humors, whereby
happens headache, and many perilous diseases, for true is that saying of the
ph^sicians Diutius tolerare ^amem, ventriculum malis complet hu moribus. But if
the stomach be unclean, it is better to refrain than eat, for true is that
saying of Hip. Impura corpora quo plus nutriveris, eo magis laeseris. 1 Apho.
10.
But when the stomach is cleansed after the manner before mentioned, then may
you eat safely And for breakfast (as I think) those meats be most
convenient, especially for students, Break fast meats for students.
which be of light digestion, as Milk, Butter, Eggs, and such like. Howbeit
herein appetite and custom bear great sway, as they do in every part of
diet. And if nothing else be to be had, I think it better to take a little
bread and drink, that the stomach may have somewhat to work upon, than to be
altogether fasting until noon. Yet I know there is great difference among men
in this respect, and some may better bide without meat than others may, which
Hip. notably sets forth. Iejunium senes non decrepiti ferunt facillime
secundum hos, 1 Apho. 1^. Who may best abide fasting.
qui constantem aetatem agunt: minus adolescentes, minime omnium pueri, at que
inter eos maxim qui acriore sunt and vividiore ingenio praediti. Children then
and young men until they come to the age of 35. may not be long fasting
without inconvenience. Men of middle age, that is from 35. to 49. years, may
better bear it, for so constans aetas is to be taken in Hip. and Galen as
Fuchsius shows, Lib. 1. Instit. Sect. 3. cap 5.
Old men being not decrepit, that is to say, from 50 to 70. years, may best of
all abide fasting, but after seventy years they are to be dieted as children.
Nam bis pueri senes, as the old proverb is. But some doubt may be made what
the word ( Ieiunium) should signify in Hip. whether or no it be to be taken as
the Divines use it, that is, for abstinence from flesh, taking but one meal a
day, and in the morning and evening instead of breakefast and supper, to use
bread and drink, which kind of fasting is some punishment to the Body, and
subdueth the flesh (as I think) if it be rightly used, and the right use is
this; Vt non nisi id quod convenit and quantum ad virium conservationem ^atis
est, How fasting is to be used.
ingeratur. They therefore that fill their bellies with bread and drink, or
with fish, or with white meats, or with other things being nor flesh, yet
perchance more delicate, do not fast, but break their fast according to that
saying of S. Augustine, Qui sic se a carnibus temperant, In Ser de do 4 in ad.
ut alias escas difficilioris praeparationis, and pretii majoris inquirant,
multumerrant, non enim est hoc suscipere abstinentiam, sed imitari luxuriam.
He therefore that will fast indeed, let him fast after the manner that Gregory
has described. Abstinentia est quae edendi horam non praevenit, In Hom^
ut fecit ^onat has in favo mellis: non lautiora quaerit edere, ut Israelitae
in deserto, non accuratius pa^are, ut fili^ Eli in Silo: no^ ad superfluitatem,
ut Sodomitae: non vile quodlibet, ut Esau edulium in fame concupit. This kind
of fast may be well called Parsimonia and is in a family Magnum vectigal, and
must be observed as well in drink as in meat. For he that does abstain from
the one and not from the other, does fast no more than a swine, that leaves
not drinking until the belly be ready to brea^^. Wherefore this fast is well
defined by Fernelius in this manner, Parsimonia non cibi duntaxat, sed and
potus, Lib. 2. meth. me. cap. 22. The definition of a true fast.
qui magis promptiusque quam cibus, tum viscera, tum venas implet, iisque
negotium facessit. But in the foresaid, Aphorism (as I suppose) Hip. means
that abstinence, which the Latins call Inediam or Famem, which is a forbearing
to receive any meat or drink at all, Inedia.
which sometime is necessary as well in sickness as in health, and is named of
Hip. Sum tenuissimus victus, and is to be used in morbis peracutis, and not
only preventeth, but helps many maladies. For if it be moderately used, and
according to age, time of the year and custom, it is next in force to blood
letting, and works like effect in process of time, as Fernelius declares at
large, for it abateth the blood, it concocteth raw humors, Lib. 2. meth. me.
cap. 20.
it expels all manner of excrements, and is especially good for them which
have very moist bodies, cap. 20.
Quia inedia siccat. And for that cause is reckoned in Schola Sal. for one of
those seven things that cure the rhume.

Iejuna, vigila, caleas dape, tuque labora,
Seven things good for a rheum.
Inspira calidum modicum bibe, comprimeflatum.
Haec been tu serva, si vis depellere rhuma.
Beside all this ( Inedia) is a present remedy for repletion or satiety, when
more meat is received, than the nature of the body may bear, for it is one
kind of evacuation, A remedy for surfeit. 2 Apho. 17.
as Galen shows upon Hip. yet it avoydeth ( ex accidente) and not ( per se.)
For nature by this means being disburdened as it were, from all other actions,
and set at full liberty, uses all her power in digesting and expelling,
whereby sometimes it comes to pass, The commodities of Abstinence.
that the belly is loosed of it self, and vomit breaks forth, and the urine
is more abundant, and the superfluities of the brain fall d^wne, and such
excrements as be far off from the usual ways of evacuation, be dispatched
per insensiles corporis meatus. All these benefits aforesaid we may receive by
moderate abstinence, but if it be above measure, the moisture of the body is
thereby withdrawn and consequently the body dries and waxes lean, and
natural heat by withdrawing of moisture is too much incended, and not
finding, humor to work in, turns his violence to the radical or substantial
moisture of the body, and exhausting that humor brings the body into a
consumption. Notable therefore is that saying of Hip. Non satietas, non fames
neque aliud quicquam quod naturae mo lum excedat, 2 Apho. 4.
bonum. And so I end touching fasting and breakfast.

CHAP. 211. Of Dinner.
WHen four hours be past after breakefast, a man may safely take his dinner,
Dinner time.
and the most convenient time for dinner, is about eleven of the clock before
noone. Yet Diogenes the philosopher, when he was asked the question what time
was best for a man to dine, he answered, Diogenes answer touching dinner time.
for a rich man when he will, but for a poor man when he may. But the usual
time for dinner in the universities is at eleaven, or else where about noone.
At Oxford in my time they used commonly at dinner, boiled beef with pottage,
Oxford diet for d^nner.
bread and beer and no more. The quantity of beef was in value an half penny
for one man, and sometimes if hunger constrained, they would double their
commons. This diet, To eat one only kind of meat at a meal prooved to be
the best diet. Lib. 11. cap. 52.
to eat but one kind of meat at a meal, and that less than fulness of
belly, though it seem very slender, yet it is very wholesome, and good students
like well therewith, and indeed it is the diet that Physic most allows. For
(as Pliny writes,) Homini cibus utilissimus simplex, acervatio saporum
pestifera and condimenta pernitiosiora. And reason may persuade a man that
sundry meats being diverse in substance and quality, that is to say, some
gross and hard to digest, some fine and easy to digest, some hot, some cold,
some moist, some dry, must needs work great trouble to the stomach. Neither
may they be well digested at one time, for as much as they require diverse
operations of nature, and diverse temperatures of the stomach. Notable
therefore is that saying of Avicen. Nihil deterius est, quam si multa simul ac
varia ciborum genera conjungantur, atque justo longius, in comedendo tempus
protrahatur, quum enim postremum accedit nutrimentum, primum jam aliquo modo
consectum est, parts ergo in coquendo non assimilantur atque inde sane
morborum scaturigo* qui ex repugnantium sibi humorum discordia nascuntur.
Hereby we may understand, that it is not only hurtful to feed on sundry meats
at one meal, but also to prolong the time in eating two or three hours, An
hour is a sufficient time for dinner. Schol. Sa. cap. 6.
with talking and telling of tales, as our manner is here in England at great
feasts. But an hours space, by the judgment of Arnol. is a sufficient time
for one meal. And in the Universities commonly less time will serve, for as
it is in the old Proverb, A short horse is soon curried. But the Archbishop
of York, of whom D. Wilson speaks in his Rhetoric, far exceeded this
time, for as the Italian merrily construed it, this great Prelate sat three
years at Dinner. And in time past, when Prelates were as Princes, I mean
before the suppression of Abbeys, as their fare was great, so they sat a great
while at meat. And at this day, Long sitting at meat is hurtful
such as be of great estate, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, they may by
authority sit so long in the glorious chariot of Intemperantia, until they be
carried as prisoners into the dungeon of Crapula, where they shall be fettered
with gowts, racked with fevers, pierced through with plurifies, strangled with
Squinances, and finally, cruelly put to death many times in youth, or in the
flower of their age, when they would most gladly live. But herein I speak
against mine own profit, and the commodity of all them that profess Physic.
Nam intemperantia medicorum nutrix. But for my part, I had rather be without
suck, than that any man through his intemperate feeding should have cause to
fee me or feed me, and to that end I have with my great travel written this
whole book. Wherefore I advise all men not to linger the time long in eating
and drinking superfluously, but to have always in mind that golden verse*
Esse decet vivas, vivere non ut edas.

Man feeds to live, and lives not to feed. Yet a reasonable time to eat in is
necessary, for to eat overgreedily, and to snatch up our meat hastily, is
hurtful, and hinders concoction; and to chew our meat well, and to swallow
it down leasurely, is a great furtherance to the well digesting of the same.
And indeed, it is the very end and purpose why the teeth were ordained. For as
there be three concoctions, Three concoctions, and three preparations of the
meat received.
the first, in the Stomach, the second, in the Liver, the third, in every part
of the body. So there be three places of preparation; the mouth to prepare the
meat for the stomach: the veins called ( Miseraicae) to prepare for the
Liver: and the uttermost veins of every member, to prepare for nourishment of
the parts themselves. Wherefore a dinner while must needs be had. And to sit a
while after dinner is not unwholesome, according to that old English saying;
After dinner sit a while, and after supper walk a mile. Yet in Schol. Sa. it
is counted wholesome, Surgere post epulas, Cap. 1
that is, to stir or walk a little after meat, that thereby the meat may
descend to the bottom of the stomach. Both may be done conveniently: To sit a
while after meat, how it is to be taken
for it is no good manner to rise up from the table eating, or to rise up by
and by after meat is out of the mouth.

CHAP. 212. Of Supper.
ABout four hours or six after that we have dyned the time is convenient for
Supper, which in the Universities, is about five of the clock in the afternoon.
But in the country abroad they use to sup at six, and in poor men's houses,
when leisure will serve. The diet most wholesome to be used at Supper is set
down in Schola Salerni, Coenato parum, and again in this manner. Cap. 1. Cap.
^.


Ex magna caena stomacho fit maxima paena,
Vt sis nocte levis, sit tibi caena brevis.
So that in both places, we are counseled to make a light Supper, because
much meat eaten at night, grieveth the stomach, and lets natural rest,
wherefore of good policy (as I think) was it provided at Oxford, that upon
festival days, when as they fared sumptuously at dinner, yet at supper they
should have little more than ordinary commons. But here rises a great
question, whether a man should eat more at dinner or at supper. Conciliator, a
famous Physician is of that mind, Whether dinner or supper should be greater.
Diff. 121.
that more meat should be eaten at dinner than at supper, because the heat of
the day, joined to the natural heat of the body may digest more, and for that
nature in the night season has enough to do to digest the superfluities of
meat eaten before, and should not therefore be let with much meat taken in
the evening. Institut. li. 2. Sect. 4. cap. 3.
Leonhartus Fuchsius contrariwise proves that the Supper for the most part
should be greater than the dinner, because the coldness of the night and
sleep do greatly help concoction, and the time from Supper, The question
answered touching more meat or less to be eaten at dinner or Supper.
to Breakfast or Dinner, is much longer than between dinner and supper. But
this question may easily be determined, and these great Clerks reconciled
after this manner. They that be lusty and strong of nature, and travel much,
may eat more at Supper than at Dinner, because in them there is no need of
digestion of superfluities but only to strengthen their bodies, which may best
be done in the night time when the senses are at rest. But they that be
diseased or aged, or troubled with rheumes; as the most part of students be,
and others also, ( Qui sedentariam vitam ag^^t,) these I say, should eat little
at Supper, because nature in the night following should not be hindered in the
concoction of raw and superfluous humors. Quos somnus maxim conficit, and
benig^^s reddit. And to these men, the verses aforesaid o^ Scho. Sal. must be
applied. And for as much as the whole book of Scho. Sal. was written specially
for English men, as appears by the Preface, it shall be hurtful for none to
follow the said precepts, considering that there is not any one more annoyance
to the health of men's bodies in this Realm of England, than distillations from
the head, commonly called rheumes, the occasion whereof some impute to much
drinking of Beer* The cause of rheumes in England.
but I think that the great moisture of the air of th^s Realm, for we have
pluvi^m and ne^ulosum coelum, (as Julius Agricola says) and the continual
gou^mandize, and daily feeding on sundry meats at one meal, is the very cause
why English men be so rheumaticke above other nations, for repletion breeds
crudity, and of crudity proceed rheumes, and of rheumes Gowts, Dropsies,
Palsies, and other innumerable maladies. Wherefore it behooves every man that
would live in health, to feed moderatly, whether it be at Dinner or Supper,
and moderate feeding is according to the strength of the stomach, to take more
or less, so it be without grief. 2. Apho. 17.
For as Hippocrates writes, where meat is received much above measure, that
makes sickness. Yet because it is hard always to hold the mean, and diverse
occasions may make a man to forget himself at meat, if he miss the mark, and
shoot over at Dinner, yet let him withdraw his hand, and hit the mark at
Supper. Wherefore let Students avoid that Epicurisme* which is too too much
used in England, and especially of Merchants, to make great Suppers, and to sit
eating and talking for the space of three or four hours. Yea, and after
Supper, for fear lest they be not full gorged, to have a delicate banquet,
with abundance of Wine, not leaving nor scant rising (excepts it be for
necessities) until it be time to go to bed^^ no no^ then neither oftentimes,
but so continuing in ^arowsing and quaffing until midnight, or after, except
they happen to fall a sleep at the board, or to fall down under the board.
But (...) Students remember, that summum bonum is in virtute, Cap. 38.
non in voluptate. (...) remains in Schola Salerni, concerning Supper, which
is this; To drink before supper or dinner, used of some.
Vt vites paenam, de potibus incipe caen^m. Which is not so to be taken, as the
words do seem to import, that one ought to begin his Supper or meal with
drink, though I have known some to use that order, drinking a draught of Wine
before they eat thereby the better to stir up appetite, and to fortify
concoction. And as good drinkers use to say, it is great cleanliness to wash
the pot before we put in meat to be boiled. But the true meaning of the verse
is, (as Arnoldus expounds it in the same place) that we should begin our
Supper with meats moist and easy of digestion, as Pottage, Broths, and such
like; which interpretation, whosoever shall think strange, he may read the
like in Galen upon Hippocrates, where he says; Facilius est impleri potu quam
cibis. And when Supper is ended, 2. Apho. 11.
we must not forthwith go to bed, but according to the old English Proverb,
after Supper walk a mile: or at the least wise, refrain from sleep two or
three hours, What time the stomach requires for concoction.
and if we make a great Supper, then four hours is but a sufficient time for
the consuming of the vapors which ascend from such meat as has been
plentifully received: for, In Medi. li. 2. Sect. 4. cap. 3.
Quatuor hordrum spacium ventriculo ad concoctionem ingesti cibi ascribitur, as
Leonhartus Fuchsius writes. Yet I know this time is longer or shorter,
according to the temperature and strength of the stomach. And if we walk
abroad after Supper, which is the common guise of the Universities, then it
shall be good to follow the counsel in Schol. Sal. annexed to the second
Chapter, as follows; Where we should walk after supper.
Fons, Speculum, Gramen, haec dant oculis relevamen,
Mane igitur montes, sed serum in quirito fontes.


Or after the old Meeter; Mane petas montes, post caenam flumina, fontes.

Which verses I wish all Students to bear well in mind, not only for walking
after Supper* but that in walking they may have a double commodity, as well in
preserving their sight, as in digesting their meat. And now to conclude with
the saying of Arnoldus, if a man could be contented with one meal a day, it
were better to take it at supper than at dinner, so that we be not diseased in
the eyes or in the brain, for then it were better to take it at dinner, for
the repletion of the supper hurts sore the brain and eyes. Wherefore I
conclude, that generally, whether a man make but one meal, or two in a day, it
is more wholesome to take more at noone than at night. One meal a day were
better taken at noone than at night.
Great suppers then, and late suppers, must be banished from all healthful
houses.

CHAP. 213. Of the age of the party.
THe third thing appertaining to diet, is the age of the party, which may the
better be perceived, if first I define what age is, and what difference there
is in age. What age is, and what difference in age. Inst. lib. ^. Sect. 3. cap.
5.
Age after Fuchs^^s, is that race of life, wherein manifestly the state of the
body of it self is changed. And in the same Chapter, according to Galen, he
makes five parts or differences of age, to wit, Childhood from our birth to
fifteen years, hot and moist. Adolescencie, from fifteen years to five and
twenty, of a mean and perfect temperature. Lusty Iuvenius, from twenty five
to thirty five, hot and dry. Middle age or man's age, from thirty five years,
to forty nine, declining to cold and dry. Old age from forty nine years,
until the end of life, naturally cold and dry, as touching the substance of
all parts of the body though accidentally by excrements, as spittle, phlegm,
and such like, it may seem to be of moist temperature. In all this course of
life, there is a continual change of the body, but especially every seventh
year, which of the Philosophers is called, Annus Criticus.
Annus Criticus, the year of judgment, at which time ordinarily (as they say)
we are in greater danger touching life and death, than in other years. How be
it evermore that saying of Job is true, Homo natus de muliere, brevi vivens
tempore, repletur multis miseriis: qui quasi flos egreditur, and conteritur,
Cap. 1^.
and fugit velut umbra, and nunquam in eodem statu permanet. Which Hippocrates
also confesses in the very first Aphorism saying, (...), vita brevis. And if
we consider well the state of mankind in this life, Man begins to die as
soon as he is borne.
we may see that a man begins to die as soon as he is borne into this
world, for that the radical moisture, which is the root of life, can never be
restored and made up again, so good as it was at our nativity, but continually
by little and little decays until the last time of our life. Yet by that
moisture which comes of nourishment, through meat and drink, How meat and
drink do preserve life.
it is preserved and prolonged, so that it is not so soon wasted and consumed
as otherwise it would be. Like as in a Lamp, by pouring in oil moderately,
the light is long kept burning, yet it goes out at the last. And this is it
which Hippocrates speaks; Interficit nos calor ille qui corpora produxit. Ga.
de mar. ca 3. One cause of life and death in man.
Yet in the beginning of our age, while nature is yet strong, more of the
nourishment is converted into the substance of the body, than is consumed: And
that while the body increases and grows. Afterward, so much only is
restored as is wasted, and then the body is in perfect growth: at length nature
waxing weaker, is not able to restore and repair so much as is wasted and
decayed, whereby the body begins to decrease, and the powers and strength
thereof be more and more diminished, until such time as life, even as the
light of a lamp, be clean extinguished. Natural death what it is.
And this is called natural death, which few attain unto, but are prevented
by death casual, when by sickness, or otherwise, the said Humidum radicale*
or Primigenium, is overwhelmed and suffocate. Now the means to preserve this
natural moisture, and consequently to preserve life, is to use meats and
drinks, according to the age of the person. A diverse diet requisite in youth
and age. 1. Apho. 14.
For the diet of youth is not convenient for old age; nor contrariwise, as
Hippocrates teaches; Qui crescunt, nativum calidum habent plurimum; itaque
copioso quum egeant alimento, abunde ipsis suppeditare oportet, alioqui corpus
consumitur. In senibus vero inest calidi parum, paucis propterea suc^endiculis,
egent: siquidem multis extinguitur. Wherefore in youth especially, while we are
in growing, we should feed more largely, and nature it self does crave, as it
appears in children. For (as it is said) children and chicken, would be
always picking. And the nourishment that is most convenient for children,
should be of hot and moist temperature^ The natural diet of all ages.
For in sickness and in health, this Maxima is generally to be observed, Sani
similes semper postulant cibos, aegri autem contrarios. And therefore young men
from 14. years, until they be 25. years old, as they be of most temperate
complexion, so do they require food of equal and like temperature. But young
men above 25. until they draw toward 40. years, as they be hot and dry of
complexion far above the mean, so do they require a contrary diet. Diet of
lusty youth.
And the contrary diet must be understood in substance and quality. And the
degrees, as well of the temperature of the body, as of the meats, ought to be
equal and like, as near as may be. For where the meats do much exceed in
degree the temperature of the body, they anoy the body, in causing
distemperance, as I have showed before, where I have spoken of the quality of
meats. Wherefore in lusty youth we should eat meats more gross of substance,
Diet of old men*
colder and moister. Also salads of cold herbs, and to drink seldom wine,
except it be allayed with water. Old age is naturally cold and dry, and
therefore requires a hot and moist diet. And because natural heat and
strength is decayed, restorative meats are then most convenient, and such as
be easy to digest, often bathing, hot wines, and much sleep, is good for old
men. According to that verse wherein the diet of old age is prescribed; Vt
lavit sumpsitque cibum; det membra sopori.

Aged men should not feed so largely as the younger sort, but to eat often, and
but a little at every time. As I have declared in the diet for Summer, for the
Summers diet is most fit and agreeable for old age. For it fares by them as it
does by a lamp, the light whereof is almost extinct, which by pouring in of
oil by little and little, is long kept burning, and with much oil powered in
at once, it is clean put out. But here I think it good to set down some
particular examples of diet of old men in time past, Sundry examples of old
men's diet.
which notwithstanding every man may follow as he thinks good Terence in
Andria, sets forth the Supper of old Chremes, in this manner; Chremes supper
in Terence.
Olera and pisciculos minutos oholo in caenam senis. But such a supper were
more meet for Ash Wednesday, or good Friday, than for Shrouetuesday. And I
would wish all loytering students to fare no better. Antiochus a Physician, as
Galen reports, De Sa. ^u. lib. 5. cap 4. Antiochus diet. A good b^eakfast for
old men
above 80. years of age, used three meals a da^, with frication, bathing, and
exercise accordingly. His breakfast commonly was, Panis ^um Attico melle,
plerunque cocto rarius crudo. His Dinner was, Primum it is sumptis quae alvum
dejici^^t, post haec maxim piscibus, vel quos saxa^iles v^cant, vel qui in
alto mari degunt, rursus in caena a piscium esu abstinuit, and boni succi
aliquid, ac quod non facile putresceret, sumpsit. Vtique aut far mulso, aut
avem ex jure simplici. Telephus the Grammarian, as it is in the same Chapter,
who lived almost a hundred years, used this diet following; Is hyeme his mense
lavabatur, aestate quater, Teleph^^ diet.
mediis harum temporibus ter. Quibus vero diebus non lavabatur, iis circa
tertiam horam unctus est cum exigua frictione: mox mel optimum crudum alicae in
aqua coctae permistum esitabat, eoque solo contentus pro jentaculo fuit.
Prandebat septima hora and paulo citius, primum oleribus sumptis, deinde
piscibus gustatis, aut avibus, vespere autem tantum panem ex vino misto edebat.
In these two examples I note that these old men brake their fast commonly with
honey. For whom honey is wholesome and for whom not. Lib. 1. de Ali. Fa. cap. 1.
And that for good cause, for honey is very wholesome for old age, and such as
be flegmaticke, and unwholesome for youth, and such as be choleric, as Galen
proves, where he tells a story of an old man and a young man, who contended
about honey, by experience of their own bodies, the one affi^ming that he had
proved it wholesome in himself, and the other avouching the contrary. Which
controversy Galen determines in this manner: Mel calidis and sicci^ est
adversissimum: frigidis vero ac humidis utilissimum. But the benefit of honey
in old men's diet, may likewise be perceived by the examples following: Pollio
Romulus.
Pollio Romul^s, who was above an hundred years old, (as Pliny affirms,
Lib. 22.
being demanded of Augustus the Emperor, by what means he lived so long, and
retained still the vigor or liveliness of body and mind, he answered, that
he did it inwardly with Meade, which is a drink made with honey and water, and
outwardly with oil, meaning friction and unction, which were used in Greece
and some other countries in old time, as I showed in my treatise of exercise.
Democritus also the great Philosopher, Democritus.
being demanded how a man might live long in health, he answered, if he wet
him within with honey, and without with oil. The same Philosopher when he was
an hundred years old and nine, prolonged his life certain days with the
evaporation of honey (as Aristoxe^us writes.) To these may be added the
example of Galen himself, Galen.
whose diet principally should be followed of students. Galen (as he says of
himself) by means of his good order and diet, was never vexed with any
sickness, Lib. 5. de Sa. tu. cap. 1.
after he was 28 years old, until the time of his death, except the grudge of
a fever of one day, and that happened only by too much labor. Auten. Lect.
Lib. 30. cap. 12.
He lived (as Coelius Rhodiginus writes) 140 years, and dyed only for
feebleness of nature, which, (as I have showed before) is called mors
naturalis, when a man dies as an apple that falls from the tree when it is
ripe. The order of his life was thus, He used such abstinence in meat and
drink, that he left off always before satiety or fulness of belly, Galens diet.
which we commonly call, to rise with an appetite, and is indeed the principal
point in preserving of health. Again, he never eat any crude or raw thing, as
fruits, herbs, roots and such like. Which may be a second caution for all men
to observe. Whereby he had always a sweet breath. Moreover as leisure would
suffer, he used bathing, frication and exercise. Yea sometimes in the winter
season when he was in the country, he refused not to cleave wood, and to punne
barley, and to do other country works only for the exercise of his body, Lib.
2. de Sa. tu. cap. 8. Galeni valetudo.
as himself witnesses. Whereof at length arose this Proverb, Galeni
valetudo, and is as much to say, as a most perfect state of health, which I
wish to all good Students, and the way to attain it, is to keep Galeus diet.
And for a conclusion of this point, I will here recite the diet for old and
weak folks, prescribed by master Securis, in his Almanacke 1580. They must
make (says he) in Winter, Securi^.
two or three meals a day, according to their appetite and custom. They
should eat either a soft roasted eggs to their breakfast, or a piece of a toste
and butter, or a mess of hot milk, with crumbs of white bread and Sugar, or a
cawdale, or Almond milk, or such like thing, that may be soon digested
before their dinner. I have known (says he) some old men would eat in the
morning a piece of a t^ste dipped in Muskadell in the Winter, and in Claret
Wine in the Summer, drinking after it a draught of the same Wine, which thing,
his father, a Doctor of Physic, was wont to do many years in his old age,
who was above 80. years when he died, being in hi^ life time seldom on never
sick. And thus much touching diet of all ages.

CHAP. 214. Of Order.
THe sixth and last thing to be considered in meats is order in eating; which
greatly helps or hinders a man's health; for good order in diet is of no
less force than it is in life and conversation. Whereof we need no better
proof, than the example of Galen himself, whose words be these, Post octavum
and vigesi^^um annum, Lib. 5. de Sa. tu. cap. 8.
quum persuasi^sem mihi esse conservandae sauitatis rationem quandam,
praecep^i^ ejus per totam deinceps vitam parui. Ita ut ne minimo morbo post
laborarim, nisi forte (quae tamen rariu^ accidit) diaria sebri: quum alioqui
liceat hanc quoque in totum effugere, si quis liberum vitam sit nactus. The
benefit of an orderly diet.
Hereby it appears that there is an order in diet, which if a man duly
observe, he may preserve himself from sickness all his life long. But some
peradventure will disp^ove me by their own experience* and by the example of
others, who keeping no diet at all, nor observing any order in receiving of
meat and drink, are yet more healthful, and more lusty and strong, than they
that keep a precise diet, and eat and drink as it were by weight and measure.
Whereunto I answer, that a sound body, and strong of nature, may for a time
suffer surfeit, and bear immoderate diet, without any manifest malady: but yet
at length it will fall out according to that principle of Physic which never
fails Intemperan eracta juventuse effetam parit senectutem: A riotous youth
breeds a loathsome age. For as the Lawyer says, Quod defertur non aufertur.
If you sow ill seeds in a Garden, they show not themselves by and by, but yet
in process of time they b^d forth. Even so diseases are bred in men's bodies by
little and little, and at length they are perceived. Notable therefore is the
saying of A^icen, Ille cui mala nutrimenta c^ncoquuntur no gaudeat ex hoc, noxa
enim* etsi ad tempus fortasse delitescit, 3.1. doct. ^. c. 7.
temporis tamen successusese exerit. Et gravissimam certissimamque neglectae
artis medicae poenam affert. With whom Galen agrees also, where he says, that
evil meats. Desucco. boni. and vi^^o cap. 2.
Quamvis protinus nullam juvenum corporibus sensibilem laesionem inferant,
sensim tamen occulteque crescente vitio, cum jam aetas progressu temporis
inclinarit, articulos, nervosque and viscera iis morbis vexant, qui vel
difficulter admodum, vel omnino tolli non possunt. And commonly so it falls
out, that they which lead a disordered life, either live not until they be
old, or if they come to age, they are tormented with sundry diseases, as gowt,
stone, dropsy, leprosy, fevers and such like. Wherefore it is better to
preserve health by sobriety, and temperance, than by surfeit and misorder, to
make the body weak and sickly, and odious both to God and the world. Yet I
think it not convenient for a man in perfect health to observe a precise rule
in diet. But yet where the stomach is feeble, as is of the more part of
citizens, and well nigh of all them that be studious in learning, or weighty
affairs, there ought to be more circumspection, that the meat may be such,
as that either in substance, or in quality, or quantity, or time, or order,
nature being but feeble, be not rebuked or too much oppressed. And the due
order in receiving of meats is thus, The due order of receiving of meats.
that such things as be of light digestion, be taken before those things that
be hardly digested. Also that such things as mollify and loose the belly be
taken before other meats, as pottage, brothes, milk, rere eggs, butter, and
such like, before flesh, and boiled flesh before roasted. And cheese and fruits,
which be stipticke and binding, as Quinces, Medlars, Pears, should be eaten
last after all other things. And this is the due order in eating, and most
wholesome for all men, (in my judgment,) which notwithstanding some men
following their own apperite, do pervert, as I have known an honorable
person, who upon fish days, would eat Eggs last after cheese: and one
worshipful that would eat milk last, which is a common use in Lancashire: for
there the servants think they have not well dyned or supped, unless they have
a soap of cold milk after all, as they use to speak. And the Flemings use to
eat Butter last after other meats. So that almost a man may say: as diverse
men desire diverse meats, so use they diverse orders in eating. But here in
England where we feed on diverse sorts of meats at one meal, the order
commonly is thus: that first we eat pottage or brothes, then boiled meats,
after that roasted or baked, Whether fine meat or gross should be eaten first.
and in the end cheese and fruits. But here rises a question, which I have
heard oftentimes moved at the table: that it were better to eat fine meats
first, and grosser meats afterward, if perchance any corner were left
unfilled. For now we fill our selves before with gross meats, so that when
fine meats and the best meats indeed come to the board, we can eat little or
nothing for want of appetite, but not for want of will, as I think. Wherefore
it were better (say they) to begin our meal where we make an end. And if we
leave any for the Servitors, to leave of the worst meats, and not of the best.
This is a strong argument in some men's opinions, and greatly grieveth those
that be disciples of Epicurus. But this question in mine opinion may be very
well answered in this manner. First I say that one manner of meat agreeable
with the person that eats it, were the most sure diet for every complexion.
And next I say, that for as much as our stomachs in England most commonly be
hot and choleric, The English custom defended, to eat gross meats first,
and fine after.
that gross meats be most convenient to be eaten first, for in a hot stomach
fine meats if they were first taken, would be burned before the gross meats
were digested. Contrariwise in a cold stomach the little heat is suffocate with
gross meat, and fine meat left raw for lack of concoction: whereas, if the
fine meat be first taken moderately, it stirs up and comfort natural
heat, and makes it more able to concoct gross meats, if they be eaten
afterward, so that it be in small quantity. And this is the best reason that I
can yield of our English custom, to begin our meals with gross meats, and
to end with fine. And so I end my treatise of meats.

CHAP. 215. Of Drink.
NExt after the word Cibus, there follows in Hip. (Potus) which is the third
word of the sentence, and is to be used according as it is in order proposed,
that is to say, first exercise, then meat, and thirdly, drink, and not
contrariwise. Wherefore, they that drink before they eat, We should not
begin our meal with drink. Cap 38.
keep not the due order of diet. And the order of England is (as it is ^oted
by Arnoldus upon Schol. Sal.) Communi^er quacunque diei hora bibere voluerint
Angli, bolum sive morsum panis praesumunt. And the very order of service does
confirm the same: for commonly we use to set bread and meats upon the table
before drink, Yet many good Malt-wormes, setting all order aside, begin
strait to cut their meat with the spigot. I deny not but occasion in some may
so serve, that they must needs drink before they eat. But I speak of the
common order which is commonly to be observed. The chief causes why drink is
necessary, Drink is necessary, for two causes.
be two: First, to preserve natural moisture. Secondly, to make the meat that
is eaten to pierce and descend the better into the places of digestion. The
desire of drink and the best sauce to season it, and to make us to like it,
whether it be better or worse is, Sitis, which after Aristotle i^, What thirst
i^ and how it is caused. Lib. 1. Simp. cap. 32.
Appetitio frigidi and humili, and is caused, a calore and s^^citate, as Galen
shows: for hear working upon moisture, for the nourishment of the body,
causes the dryness, whereof comes thirst, the remedy whereof is drink,
which is to be used as Galen prescribes; Fo^ionisis modus erit, ut nec in
ventriculo in^atet, Lib. 7. Meth. cap. 6.
nec stuctuati^nis ullius sensum invehat. And Dioscorides much after the same
manner shows the use of drink, saying, Lib. 5. cap. 7.
Non sitire and mod^^e ^ibes p^olui* optimum est praec^ptum, So that to qu^^ch
thirst, and moderately, The right use of drink.
as it were to water the meat, whereby it may be the more easily conveyed to
the places of digestion, is the right use of drink, and whatsoever is more
than this, is superfluous. The same lesson is taught in Schola S^le^ni. Dequa
p^tetur, stomachus non ind^ graventur. Cap. 18.
That is to say, we ought to drink moderately, so that the stomach be not
hurt thereby, nor drunkenness caused: for much abundance of drink at meals,
drowneth the meat eaten, The discommodities of much drink used at mea^.
and not only lets convenient concoction in the stomach, but also causes
it to pass faster than nature requires* and therefore engenders much phlegm,
and consequently rheumes, and crudenesse in the veins* debility and
slipperinesse of the stomach, continual flux, and many other inconveniences
to the body and members. To drink little and often, is better than to drink
much at once.
And after the better opinion of Physicians, the drink would rather be mixed
with the meat by sundry little draughts, than by one great draught at the end
of the meal. For the mixture well tempereth the meat without annoyance, and a
great draught with much drink, drowneth the meat, rebukes natural heat, which
then works in concoction, and with his weight drives down the meat too
hastily. Yet some I know count it a jolly matter and princelike to forbear
drink unto the end of their meals, and then to carouse lustily, a whole pint
or a quart of Wine, Ale or Beer. But this custom is beastlike rather then
princelike: for what does a bruit beast other than eat his fill of meat, and
drink abundantly, afterward? Better therefore is that counsel of Scho. Sal.
Cap. 3^.


Inter pra^dendum sit saepe parumque bibendum.
Vt minus aegrotes, non inter fercula potes.
That is to say, at meat, whether it be breakefast dinner, or supper, we
should drink little and often. And between meals we should forbear drink,
Drink between meals not good.
except very great thirst do require it, especially if the meat that we have
eaten, be yet undigested in the stomach, and not past the first concoction.
For then to drink interrupteth the office of the stomach in concoction, and
causes the meat to pass faster than it should do, and the drink being cold,
it rebukes natural heat that is working, and the meat remaining raw, it
corrupts digestion, and makes crudenesse in the veins. But after the first
concoction is ended and a little before we take other meat we may drink a
little Wine, Beer, or Ale, yea, though we be not thirsty, Cap. 32. Drink
d^lative.
as Arnoldus teaches upon Sho. Sal. for this drinking (says he) prepares the
stomach to receive other meat, and causes the meat that is once concocted to
depart more easily from the stomach to the liver, where it must be the second
time concocted, yet always foreseen that the drink be in a little quantity,
and if thirst procure it, let it also be small. And this kind of drinking he
calls Potum dilatinum, for so he distinguishes of drink, Notandum triplicem
esse potum, permixtivum scilicet, delativum, and sitis sedativum. The first is
to be taken at meals, though we be not thirsty: The second between meals:
Three sorts of drink.
The third at the meals end of such as be in good temper. And if any of these
three uses of drink be omitted, the drink delative may be best spared, for it
is most wholesome either not to drink between meals, or else to drink but
little, and that small. But some I doubt will abuse this distinction, and
drink more often then they need, and will allege that they do it for one
purpose or other, and so will all day be occupied in permiscendo, deferendo,
or sitim sedando. But I advise them rather to follow the counsel of Cato,
Quod satis est bibe. And concerning drink at meals, What drink should be
used in the beginning of meals, and what after.
at the beginning the drink would be strongest, and so toward the end more
small, if it be Ale or Beer, and if it be wine, more and more allayed with
water, and if we have both Ale and Wine, cap. 18.
it is better (says Arnold) upon Schola Sal. to drink Ale or Beer in the
beginning of dinner or Supper than wine. For if we begin with wine, by reason
nature greatly desires it, the superfluities gathered together already in the
stomach, together with the wine, shall be drawn off the stomach, and conveyed
into all the parts of the body, but nature does not so desirously draw Ale. And
again, the grosser, dryer, and colder meat is, the stronger should the drink
be, and the more subtle, hot and digestible the meat is, the weaker the
drink ought to be. Wherefore we ought to drink stronger wine with Beef,
than with Chickens, and stronger wine with fish than with flesh, yet very
strong Ale or Beer, or hot wines and sweet, as Muskadell or Malmesey, or made
with spices as Hippocras, are not commended at meals, Strong drink or spiced,
is not good to be used with meat.
except it be for a draught or two at the beginning of gross meats, for the
meat by them is rather corrupted than digested, and they make hot and stinking
vapors to ascend up to the brain, yet if the stomach be very windy, or so
cold and feeble that it cannot concoct such a quantity of meat as is required
to the sufficient nourishment of the body of him that eats, or has eaten raw
herbs or fruits, whereby he feels some annoyance, then may he drink last
incontinent after his meal, a little quantity of Sack or good Aqua vitae in
small Ale. Sack or aqua vitae when they may be drunk after meat.
But if he have much choler in his stomach, or a headfull of vapors, it were
much better that he did neither drink the one nor the other, but rather eat
some coriander comfits, or a piece of a Quince roasted or baked, or in a
marmalade, and after rest to amend the lack of nature wi^h sleep, moderate
exercise, and playsters provided for comforting of the stomach. This much
generally of drink, and the use thereof. Now I shall particularly handle all
such sorts of drinks as be commonly used with us in England, which be as I
Judge seven in number, to wit, Water, Seven sorts of drink used in England.
Wine, Ale, Beer, Cider, Metheglin, and Whey.

CHAP. 216. Of Water.
WAter is the chiefest of all liquors, not only because it is one of the four
Elements, but also for that it was the very natural and first drink appointed
by God to all manner of creatures. And as it appears by the holy Scriptures
in Genesis, there was none other drink used nor known but water, Water is the
most ancient drink.
from the creation of the world until Noah his flood, during which time men
lived eight or nine hundred years. Also after the flood of Noah, both Princes
and people in all ages drank water, especially in Asia and the East Countries,
as appears by the history of Moses, and the children of Israel in Exodus. And
in Greece likewise it was used for a common drink, as Galen declares in
diverse places of his works, but especially in the first book, where he
affirms, De Sa. tu. c. 11. What water is best after Galen.
Aquam puram omni aet^ti utilissimam esse. And that water to be best, cujus ad
orientem solemn fons erumpit, quaeque permeatu aliquem mundum, aut puram colatur
terram, eademque calefit ac refrigeratur ocyssime. But leaving Asia and Grecia
aside, and returning home to England, if any shall demand whether or no it be
as wholesome for English men to drink water, Whether it be good for Englishmen
to drink water. cap. 18.
as for them that dwell in other Countries, M Eliot in his Castill says, that
if men from their infancy were accustomed to none other drink but water only
moderately used, it should be sufficient to keep natural moisture, and to
cause the meat that is eaten to pierce and descend into the places of
digestion, which are the purposes which drink serves for. As in Cornwall
although that the country be in a very cold quarter, yet many of the poorer
sort, Cornish men drink much water.
which never or very seldom drink other drink than pure water, be
notwithstanding strong of body, and live and like well until they be of great
age. Adeo a teneris assuescere multum est. But otherwise except the custom of
drinking of water, I think as it is in S. Sal. cap. 27.


Potu^ aquae sumptus comedenti incommoda praestat.
Hinc friget stomachus, crudus and inde cibus.
That is to say, the drinking of water with meat, cools the stomach over
much, and so lets digestion, and makes the meat that is eaten to be raw.
The like effect it has, if it be drunken after meat, except it be after a
great surfeit, When cold water may be drunk.
or when thirst happens after drinking of much wine. For in these cases, cold
water drunken is a general remedy, and I have known many by drinking a good
draught of cold water to bedward, have thereby had quiet rest all night after,
and in the morning also it is right wholesome for him that drank too much
overnight, to drink fasting a cup of cold water, especially if he be
thirsty: for that will cleanse the stomach, and repress the vapors and fumes,
and dispose it to retain new sustenance. Some also have I known that would
oftentimes in a morning fasting, Cold water and Sugar good to cool and clear
the stomach.
drink a draught of cold water with a little white Sugar, of purpose to clear
and cool the stomach, and have by that means (as they thought) avoided much
phlegm. But herein always respect must be had to him that drinks it, for to
young folks, and them that be hot of complexion, it does less harm, and
sometime it profits. But to them that are feeble, old, flegmaticke or
melancholy, it is not convenient, for it destroys natural heat, it grieveth
the breast, and takes away the appetite of the stomach, and is very hurtful to
all the sinewy members, and this caveat I will give to all such as be thirsty
through great labor and travail, What drink is best when one is hot.
that they drink not much cold water in their heat or thirst, for thereby I
have known many f^ll into sickness, and I think it better to drink a
draught of Sack or good wine, or as they use in Lankashire, a hot posset at
such times, than small drink or cold water. For though small drink or cold
water seem to quench thirst better than wine because it moystneth and cools
more, yet wine being more agreeable with nature, and of more subtle substance
and operation, is sooner drawn off the members, and consequently sooner
satiffies and fills the veins, and so quenches thirst without any great
alteration of the body: whereas water or small drink by the great coldness
thereof, suddenly changes the body from heat to cold, which is a dangerous
thing, as Hip. testifies. Semel multum and repent vel vacuare vel replere, 2
Apho. 51.
vel calefacere vel refrigerare aut alio quovis modo corpus movere,
periculosum, omne si quidem nimium naturae inimicum. And as Galen teaches, Si
cum vino bibatur aqua, sitim efficacius, extinguit, quam si sola, Simp. li. 1.
ca. 31.
scilicet vino ipsam ad distributionem promovente. But whether you drink water
with wine or of it self, Water mixed with wine quenches thirst the better.

How a man may prove which water is best.


you must always provide that it be of the best sort, which may be known by
Galens description aforesaid, and by these notes also. First by the lightness,
for the lightest is best. Secondly by little skim or froth in boiling. Thirdly
by drenching of linen clothes in the water, and laying the same to dry, for
that which is soonest dry, shows the best water. But how water may be drunk
without any inconvenience as well in sickness as in health, F^rnelius
declares. Lib. 5. meth. ca. 5.
Vt aqua tutius and citra viscerum offensionem pro potu, ac vice vini sumi
possit, in ea integrum hordeum coquitur, dum crepuerit, vel Glycyrrhiza, vel
pruna Damascena, How water may be drunk without harm Liquorise water.
vel Saccharum, cum praesertim ulla est pectoris affectio, adiecto sub finem
Sinamomi momento, si ventriculi robur servandum est. And in places where I have
been, the common people have used to cut liquorise very thin, and to lay it
in cold water, and after it had steeped a time, to drink of the water in hot
agues, or in stuffing of the breast with phlegm, and this they call liquorise
water, and account it very wholesome.

CHAP. 217. Of Wine.
NExt to water in antiquity and use is wine, which liquor (as it is in
Ecclesiast.) was made from the beginning to make men glad and not for
drunkenness. Cap. 31. v 28.
Howbeit Noah as it appears, who was the first that ever planted a vineyard,
Genesis 9. ver. 20.
soon after he had drunk of the fruit of the grape, was drunken. So that wine
and drunkenness, that is to say, the use and abuse began in a manner both
together, Wine and drunkenness be of like antiquity.
much like as Adam soon after he was placed in Paradise, fell through
disobedience. So ready is Satan to turn Gods blessing into a curse. But of
the abuse afterward, when I shall have declared the use. Wine after Galen is
hot in the second degree, Simp. 8. The temperature of wine.
and if it be very old, it is hot in the third, and must, or new wine is hot
in the first, and it is dry according to the proportion of heat. But this
limitation of the temperature (in my judgment) cannot be generally applied to
all wines, for who does not know that sack is hoter than white Wine or Claret,
and Malmsay or Muskadell hotter than Sack, and Wine of Madera or Canary to be
hottest of all? Wherefore I think rather that Galen means of some one sort of
Wine, Lib. 3. de vict. r^. in mor. acu. com. 6.
and of one country, for so he speaks, saying, that white wine inflameth or
heateth least of all wines. Which saying is true, if comparison be made
between while wine and wine of other colors of one Country, and not
otherwise, as to say, the white wine of France is not so hot as the Claret or
Red of the same Country. For otherwise the red wines of France are not so hot
nor so strong, as the white wines of some other countries. The diversities of
wines and the countries that bring them forth.
France yields those wines that be most temperate, as White, Claret, and Red:
Spain brings forth wines of white color, but much hotter and stronger, as
Sack, Rumney and Bastard. Italy gives wines most sweet and pleasant, as
Muskadel, and such like. And in Galens time the chief praise was given to the
wine of Italy, as now it is by Mathiolus, but especially to that wine which was
named Vinum Falernum, most commended among all Nations. Yet the wine of the
Island of Creta* now called Candy, which I suppose to be Malmsey, is of greatest
force in Physic, Malmsey kills worms in children.
for by a certain natural property it kills worms in children, if they
drink it fasting. As for wine of Madera and Canary, they bear the name of the
Islands from whence they are brought, likewise as Rhenish wine bears the name
of that famous river Rheine of Germany, because the Vines whereof it is made,
grow thereabout. But this our Country of England for the coldness of the Clime
wherein it is situate, England brings forth no wine, and why.
brings no vines to make wine of, though in other things more necessary, it
far surmounteth all other Countries. So God has divided his blessings, that
one Nation might have need of another, one Country might have intercourse with
an other. But although wine be no necessary thing, (that is to say) such as
Englishmen cannot live without, (for there is, and has been many a one in
this our Realm that never tasted wine) yet is it without doubt a special gift
of God, for as it is in Deuteronomy God gives wine unto those that love him.
Cap. 11. v. 13.14
And those that obey not the commandments of God, De^t. 28.39.
shall not drink wine of their vineyards. And as it is in Ecclesiast. Wine
soberly drunken, cap 31.27.28.
is profitable for the life of man. Wine measurably drunken and in time,
brings gladness and cheerfulness of the mind. The commodidities of wine.
Of it self it is the most pleasant liquor of all other, and a special
benefit and comfort of man's life: a great encreaser of the vital spirits, and
a restorer of all powers and actions of the body: and so cheereth and
comfort the heart. So that ( vitis) may seem as it were vita, quia vitam
maxim tuetur. And no marvel, considering that vita, as Aristotle affirms,
stands chiefly in calido and humido. Which two qualities are the very nature
of wine. Life and wine agree in nature.
So that life and wine for the likeness of nature are most agreeable. And this
is the cause, (as I think) why men by nature so greedily covet wine: except
some od Abstemius, one among a thousand perchance degenerate, and is of a
doggish nature, for dogs of nature do abhor wine. Whereof has grown that
Latin proverb Caninum prandium, a dogs dinner, where is no wine at dinner or
supper. But the commodities of wine are briefly and pithily gathered by Avicen,
3.1. doct. 2. ca. 8. Five virtues of wine used moderately.
where he reckons five benefits of wine moderately drunken. First that it
easily conveyeth the of stomach and liberality. Fifthly it resolves and Ovid
as follows, Vina parant animos, faciuntque caloribus aptos. Lib 1. de ar^^
amandi.

Cura fugit, multo diluiturque ^^ro.
Tunc veniunt risus, tunc pauper cor^^a sumit,
Tunc dolor and curae, rugaque ^rontis abit.
Tunc aperit mentes, aevo rarissima nostro,
Simplicitas, arts excutiente Deo.


And now to turn my talk to students, I think (as it has been said of old)
that vinum moderate sumptum acuit ingenium. The reason is alleged by Arn^ldus
upon Sch. Sal. Because of good Wine more than of any other drink, Cap. ^. Why
wine moderately taken sharpneth the wit.

Divines love wine, and why*


are engendered and multiplied subtle spirits, clean and pure. And this is the
cause (says he) why the divines that imagine and study upon high and subtle
matters, love to drink good wine: wherein he erred not much in mine opinion
from the custom of the old Clergy, for they loved a good cup of wine, as well
as any men ^live. But I advise all students, such as be students nomine, and
re, because they have commonly feeble brains, if not by nature, yet through
study, to refrain from strong wines, Strong wines ill for student^*
because they distemper the brain, and cause drunkenness ere a man be ware.
Besides that strong wines are hurtful to them whose Liver and stomach is hot,
because they inflame and burn their bodies inwardly: wherefore they are utterly
to be eschewed, or not to be used except they be well allayed with water. But
such as have strong brains, that is to say, not lightly overcome by the
vapors and fumes which ascend from the stomach, may boldly drink any kind
of wine that they like, so they keep a measure, for otherwise they fall into
drunkenness as well as they that have weak brains, which vice, as it is
odious to God, and without repentance disheriteth us from his heavenly
kingdom: 1 Cor. 10 10.3.1. Doct. 12. Cap. 8.
so it is most hurtful to our bodies, and if it be often used causes
chiefly six inconveniences, Avicen teaches. First it weakneth and corrupts
the Liver, Six inconvenien^es of drunkenness.
making it unable to change the nourishment into blood, whereof ensues
commonly Vinum memoriae more est. Thirdly, it weakneth the sinews, which is
the cause that drunkards tremble both with head and hands, as well in youth as
in age. Propter nimiam vasorum repletionem. Notable therefore is that counsel
of Isocrates in his Oration ad Demonicum, Isocrates against drunkenness.
and diligently to be followed of al students. (...). Thus latined by Antonius
Schorus: Maxim fugias compt^^tiones. Si tamen interesse te aliquando
contingat* ante ebrietatem surgas and abeas. Quum enim men^ vino opprimitur
idem prorsus facit, quod currus qui suis agitatoribus dejectis, nullo ordine
vltro citroque feruntur, prop^erea quod rectoribus destituantur, according to
that saying of the Ancient Poet Theognis. Theognis, against drunkenness.


(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Thus translated by Iacobus Schegkius.

Immodico cuicunque mero praecordia servent,
Haud linguam and mentem continet ille suam.
Turpia quae loquitur, recidunt sine pondere verba,
Ebrius ac nullo cuncta pudore facit.
Diceret haud quae sobrius, haec effert been potus,
Si sapis a nimio disce cavere mero.
So that the excess of wine is to be avoided, and not the Wine, for so he
writes in another place.

(...)
(...).
Pocula quae cavere modo, mihi creed nocebunt,
Vina tamen modice sumpta iuvare solent.
And the excess of Wine is the cause as Leonhartus Fuchsius writes, Insti.
li. 1. ca. 10.
why few young men that be students, come to profound knowledge and ripeness
in these days: for first immoderate drinking of Wine makes them disordered
and unruly: next it weakneth and dulleth the strength and force of the wit and
mind. Why students in these days come not to such perfect knowledge as they
have done in time past.
Wherefore he advises all students to have those golden verses of E^banus
Hessus not only imprinted in their minds, but also ingraved in some table in
their chambers or closets, to the intent that they may have them always before
their eyes. Ita enim crebra horum lectione and inspectione forte fieret, ut
ebrietatem tanquam immanissimam bestiam, and certum illis exitium afferentem
evitarent. The verses be these, Immodici sensus perturbat copia Bacchi:
Hessus, against drunkenness.
Inde quis enumeret, quot mala proveniant,
Corporis exchaurit succos, animique vigorem
Opprimit, ingenium strangulat atque necat.


Wherefore Plato that divine Philosopher utterly forbids Wine in youth
until they be past two and twenty years of age, 2. de logi. Young men should
drink no wine. Lib. 1. de Sa. (...). cap. 9.
because says he (...) Non oportet ignom igni addere. And Galen no^ only
forbids children wine, because they being of hot and moist temperature,
should thereby become over hot, and their heads filled with vapors, whereof
sometimes ensues the falling sickness (as Aristotle affirms,) but also he
forbids young men wine until they be 35. years of age, Quod videlicet, and
ad iram and libidi^em praecipites facit, and partem animi rationalem, hebetem
turbidamque reddit. But to old men, wine is as suck to young children, Wine is
good for old age.
and is therefore called of some Lac senum and the strongest wines for them are
best, except they be choleric: for old folks are cold, and good wine heateth:
they are heavy and full of melancholy, and wine makes them merry and
represseth melancholinesse, they commonly sleep ill, and wine makes them to
sleep well: they are disposed to oppilations, and Wine opens. So that Wine
to old folks is most commodious, although to youth it be hurtful, unless it
be temperately taken. Yet I read in Arnoldus upon Schola Sal. that surfeiting
and drunkenness is sometime expedient, cap. ^5. To be drunken once in a month
allowed of some Physicians.
because thereby we fall to vomit, whereof ensues cleansing of the stomach,
and preventing of many ill diseases of long continuance, and this opinion is
fathered upon Hip. for so says Arnoldus, Consulit Hip. semel in mense
inebriari ut ex ebrietate provocetur vomitus. But I will not say that Hip.
counsaileth us to be drunken once in a month, that thereby may come vomit, for
I rather think it the counsel of some Arabian Physician: but this I know to
be true, Lib. 51. de us^^ par. cap. 4* Cap. 107.
that Hip. bids one to vomit every month, two days one after another, that
the second day may avoid that which the first could not, and this is approved
by Galen, and Scho. Sal. is of the same judgment, where it is said: Quolibet
in mense and confert vomitus, quoque purgat,
Humores n^c^os stomacho, anfract^s levat omnes.


But to procure vomit through excess and drunkenness, as it is ungodly, so it
is beastly: and does more hurt the stomach, the brain, the breast, and all
parts of the body, than it does profit by evacuation of ^^egm and choler:
wherefore if any be desirous to vomit, let them rather go to the Sea, or
drink Salet oil (as I have showed before in the chapter of Olives) or use
Assaraba^^a, or Helleborus, by the advice of some discreet Physician, and let
Wine be used according to the first institution, that is, to make men merry,
and not to make men drunk. And if any be disposed to drink Wine after this
manner, they may learn to choose good Wine by five properties: How to choose
good wine, by five properties.
First by the color, as white, red claret. Secondly by the ta^^e as Scho. Sal.
as follows: cap. 10.
Vina probantur odore, sapore, nitore, color,
Si bona vina cupis, quinque haec laudantur in illis,
Fortia formosa, and fragrantia, frigida frisca.


The choice of wine stands chiefly in three senses.
So that three senses are the chief judges of wine. The eye for the color and
consistence, the tongue for the taste, the nose for the savor. And all these
must be applied to wine in it kind, as for example, if Claret wine have a
right claret color, if it be in savor, in taste, in thinness, or
thickenesse, in age accordingly, then may you be bold to call it good Claret.
And so of all other sorts in suo genere. But it shall be necessary that I
speak somewhat more of these properties. And first touching the color I have
this lesson in Galen Ex vinis albis nullum valenter calfacere potest: Li. 3 de
vict. ra. in amor. acut. com. 6.
quod enim sum calidum est, id continuo and flavum existit: veluti and quod
ab ipso est fulvunt, mo^ ab his rubrum, and deinde dulce, album autem minus
quidem his omnibus calfacit. Whereby I learn that white wine inflameth or
heateth least of all wines, White wine least hot.
which is to be understood of one kind and of one country, as I have showed
before. Beside this white wine is less fumish and less vaporous then other,
and therefore less annoyeth the head. And it provokes or causes one to piss
more then other, White wine procures urine.
whereby it is proved to be more piercing, than other wine, and to have
greater strength to open. And for these properties I think white wine more
convenient for students than any other. Also this kind of wine is good for
those that would be lean or slender, White wine good for those that would be
lean.
because it nourishes little. But red wine and Claret nourish more, because
they are soon converred into blood: and especially red, for that is hotter
than white wine, and nourishes more than claret. Wherefore it is reckoned in
Scho. Sal. for one of those three things which be most nourishing* cap. 8.
as Ova recentia, vina rubentia, pinguia iura.

So that Claret wine for nourishing may seem to be in a mean between white
and red. Yet red wine, if it be a deepered inclining to black as Raspis, being
much drunken causes two inconveniences as it is in Scho. Sal. cap. 12.


Si vinum rubeum nimium quandoque bibatur,
Venture stipatur, vo^ limpida turpificatur.
It binds the belly and makes hoarsenesse. Red wine binds,
Yet sometime it is necessary, especially for such as by debility of stomach
are laxative, and can hold nothing. And I have cured many of a laske, grown in
a manner to a flixe, only by giving them first in a morning and last in the
evening, A good medicine for a laske.
a good draught of red wine well spiced with Cinamome, and the powder of the
pill of a pomegranade. But wines that be yellowish, and sweet withal, as
Malmsey, Muskadine, and such like, as they are most hot, so be they very
nourishing, as it is in Scho. Sal. cap. 11.


Corpora multum angent tibi dulcia candida vina. The reason is because the
sweet wines through their sweetness, Sweet wine for whom it is good.
are greedily drawn of the members. Wherefore they are good to be used of
such as be lean, and weak and low brought, and so have I proved muskadine
excellent in a wast or consumption. Now concerning the age of wine, Dioscorides
writes, Lib. 5 cap. 7.
Vinovetere nervi laeduntur, and reliqui sensus. Novum inflat, aegre coquitur.
Aetate medium utraque vitia fugit. And this must be applied to wines after
their kind. For some will abide longer in their strength and verdure, and
others will sooner pall. But new wine or must is in no wise wholesome. For as it
is in Schola Salerni, it breeds five inconveniences as follows: cap 26. New
wine unwholesome.
Impedit urinam mustum, soluit citoventrem,
Hepatis emphraxim and splenis generat lapidemque.


Whether wine be good fasting
And now to discuss this question, whether or no it be good to drink wine
fasting, I know there be many that in a morning for their breakfast, in the
cold time of the year use to drink a draught of strong wine, as Muskadine or
Malmesey, and to eat tostes dipped therein, and that they think to be very
wholesome and restorative, especially for old folks. But they are reproved by
Fuchsius, saying: Cavendum autem unice ne matutin^ tempore, Insti. li* 2. c. ^.
ventriculo adhuc vacuo and jeiuno, vinum forte, aut offae vino maceratae,
(quod magnates tamen facere consueverunt) ingerantur Quod i^de maxima coporis
mala, ac gravissimi morbi oriantur. Yet I read in Scho. Sal. cap. 54.


Bis duo vipa facit, mundat dentes, dat acut^m
Visum, quod minus est implet, ^inuit quod abundat.
That is to say, Tosts dipped in wine wherefore they are good.
tosted bread dipped in wine cleanses the teeth, sharpneth the sight, digesteth
that which is undigested, and reduces superfluous digestion to a mean. And
master Securis affirms in his Almanacke anno 1580. that his father who was a
Doctor of Physic, used in a morning a piece of a toste dipped in Muskadell in
the winter, and in Claret wine in summer, drinking after it a draught of the
same wine. So that it is not altogether unwholesome to drink wine next the
heart, so there be respect had to the time, to the country, to the age, to
custom. Some I have known to steep a branch of wormwood all night in a cup
of Claret or white wine close covered, An easy practice to cleanse the stomach.
and the next morning after to streine it, and warm it and drink it fasting:
others to cleanse their reins and bladder, use to steep over night a root or
two of persly slit and somewhat bruised, and a little liquorise in white wine or
racked renish, An easy medicine for the stone.
and to streine it in the morning after, and warm it, and drink it for their
breakfast. But these be rather medicines than simple drinks, the first to
cleanse the stomach, the latter for the stone.

CHAP. 218. Of Ale and Beer.
CErvisia or Cerevisia is latin as well for Ale as Beer howbeit in quality
these drinks differ greatly. For though both ale and beer be made of like
matter and substance, that is to say, of barley, wheat or otes, yet there is
great difference in the making* as good brewers can tell. And one thing more is
used in the making of beer than ale, The difference between ale and beer.
which is hops. So that ale requires two ingrediences, that is, water and
malt, and beer is made of three things, that is water, malt and hops, of which
the first two be cold of nature, and the third is hot. These two drinks are
not mentioned in Hippocrates and Galen, (as I suppose) because they are used
only in these north parts of the world. And as for ale, I can neither hear
nor read, (says master Eliote) that it is made and used for a common drink
in any other country, than England, Scotland, Ireland, and Poile. And in
England no doubt ale was the more ancient drink and more usual, as it is at
this day in the north parts of the Realm, where they cannot yet tell how to
make beer, except it be in cities or towns, or in men of worships houses.
And touching ale which is best, in Schola Salerni there be five properties
noted as follows: cap. ^7.
Non sit acetosa haec cervisia, sed been clara,
De validis cocta gr^ais, satis ac veterata.


That is to say, good ale must not be sour, it must be clear, and made of
good corn, well sodden, stale and well purged. How to know where the best ale
is.
But if you come as a stranger to any town and would feign know where the best
ale is, you need do no more but mark where the greatest noise is of good
fellows, as they call them, and the greatest repair of beggars. But withal
take good heed that malt be not above wheat before you part. For it is worse
to be drunk of ale than wine, and the drunkenness indureth longer: by reason
that the fumes and vapors of ale that ascend to the head, are more gross, and
therefore cannot be so soon resolved as those that rise up of wine. Whether
ale or beer be better.
If you ask me the question whether ale or beer be more wholesome, I say
that ale generally is better, namely the small ale, which is used as well in
sickness as in health, and that for good cause, considering that barley,
whereof it is made, is commended and used in medicine in all parts of the
world, and accounted to be of a singular efficacy in reducing the body to good
temper, specially which is in a distemperance of heat. And for this purpose
that kind of ale which at Oxford is called sixteenes, is principal, Sixteenes.
as by common experience is proved both in hot seasons of the year and in hot
diseases. But bear for the heat thereof by reason of the hops, is not so
commendable in sickness, and therefore generally not so wholesome. Howbeit in
health it is a very profitable drink (so it be not strong) for such as be
chollericke and have hot stomachs. For beside the virtue of nourishing, which
it has of the corn whereof it is made, it has also a medicinable property of
the hoppes, whereby it provokes urine, The virtue of beer.
and expels some choler by siege. Wherefore in them that use it moderately,
it increases strength, as appears plainly by the view of those nations that
use it most, for they be strongest and fairest. Beside that it does not so
soon hurt the sinews, nor cause ache of the joints as wine does. But Schola
Salerni, reckons eight properties which may be indifferently applied to ale
or beer as follows, cap. 46. Eight properties of ale and beer.
but chiefly to beer.

Crassos humores nutrit cerevisia, vires
Praestat, and augmentat carnem generatque cruorem,
Provocat urinam, ventrem quoque mellit and inflat,
Frigidat and modicum.
Of which eight (in my judgment) the first four belong chiefly to ale, and
the latter four to beer. For beer does more provoke urine, and more mollify
and inflate the belly, The virtues of beer.
and cool more then ale. Yet it cools more or less, as it is stronger or
smaller, and according to the malt whereof it is made. For beer or ale being
made of wheat malt enclineth more to heat, for wheat is hot. If it be made
of barley malt, It enclineth more to cold, for barley is cold. And if it be made
of Barley and Otes together, it is yet more temperate and of less nourishment.
Yet if a man would exactly scanne the temperature of beer. Euchsius says: Cum
magna ex part in cerevis^s non levis fentiatur amaritudo, Lib. 2. insti. Sect.
2. cap. 11.
non dubium est has omnes esse temperamento calidas. Et quo quaevis amarior, eo
quoque calidior existit. But notwithstanding I think that hoppes in beer
makes it colder in operation, because (as I said before) it purges choler.
And to me verily it is much colder than ale of like strength, Beer more cold
in operation than ale, and better for choleric folks.
having a choleric stomach, and liver inflamed. Neither do I think that
beer more ingendereth rheumes and distillations than ale, although I know many
to be of a contrary opinion. But by experience of mine own body I can
testify, Whether beer breed rheumes
that after I left Oxford and dwelled in the country, where ale is the more
common drink, I was no less troubled with a rheum, but rather more, than
when I continued at Oxford and drank nothing else but beer. Wherefore I
think rather that the chiefest cause why we are now more disquieted with
rheumes than our forefathers were, is our excess, and surfeiting, and delicate
feeding, whereof comes crudity, and crudity breeds rhumes, and rhumes are
the occasion of the most part of diseases that happen to men. The very cause of
rheumes.
Wherefore the Greek Poet Theognis most truly has written.

(...)*
(...).
That is to say, surfeit has destroyed mo than famine. Yea I dare say, that more
dye through surfeit than by the sword. Wherefore I think that of rheumes as
Galen writing upon Hip. thinks of gout. Hip. says, Eunuchipodagra non
labarant, nec cale fiunt. com. 6. Apho. 28. A plain pattern of our time.
Whom Galen expounds in this manner: Hippocratis quidem temporibus pauci omni
no laborab^nt p^dagraipropter vitae temperantiam and moderationem summom,
v^stra vero etate in tantumauctis delitiis, and luxu and voluptatibus, vt nihil
supra addi posse videatur, infi^ita est podagra laborantium multitudo:
nonnallis nunquam se exercitantibus, Wine and women great occasions of the gout.
nulloque praesumpto c^bo fortia vina potantibus and Venere immoderata
utentibus, aliis vero et si non in omnibus, in uno tamen aut alteroex iis quae
retulimu^ delinquentibus. Even so I say of rheumes, that in time past, when men
used more frugality and temperance than now they do, they were not so much
troubled with distillations. Two chief causes of rheumes, otium and
intemperantia.
But now by reason of too much idleness and intemperance, rheumes do more
abound, and the gout also. For the gout is the daughter of a rheum. And those
things that breed rheumes, do likewise breed the gout in such as be given
thereunto, as Desidia, Crapula, Venus immodica, multa and potentia vina potata,
The chief causes of the gout.
maximeque si quis ante praesampium cibum ipsis utatur. He therefore that will
be free from rewmes and gout, must avoid idleness, surfeit, Lechery, much wine,
Who invented beer, and when.
and strong, especially fasting: and not condemn Beer as hurtful in this
respect which was so profitably invented by that worthy Prince Gambrivi^^ anno
1786. years before the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, Fol. 25. p. 2.
as Lanquette writes in his Chronicle.

CHAP. 219. Of Cider.
THe fifth kind of drink usual here in England is Cider. Howbeit Cider is
not in so common use any where within this land as in Worcester shire, and
Gloucester shire, Worcester shire and Gloucester shire most fruitful
where fruits do most abound. And marvel it is to see how plentiful apples
and pears are in those countries, in so much that every hedge almost in the
common fields; and by high way sides are full of good fruits. And if a man
travail through that country, when they be ripe, he shall see as many lie
under his horse feet, as would in some places of England be gladly gathered
up, and laid in store under lock and key. Cider is for the more part cold in
operation, and is better or worse, according to the fruit whereof it is made:
in respect of the coldness it is good for them that have hot stomachs, or hot
livers. Yet if it be used for a common drink (as master Eliote reports) it
makes even in youth, the color of the face pale, and the skin riveled. It
cannot be very wholesome in any condition, considering that fruits do
engender ill humors. Yet it is best after Christmas and about Lent. I remember
when I was a student at Oxford one mistress, G. sold Pery instead of Rhenish
wine, Perie.
and so beguiled many a poor Scholar. And indeed that Cider which is made of
pure pears, being drunk after winter is like in taste, to a small white or
Rhenish Wine, but yet differs much in operation. Sed caveat emptor.

CHAP. 220. Of Whey.
THe sixth sort of drink usual, is whey, the nature whereof I have declared
before in the chapter of Milk. And thus much more I will add, that if it be
clarified, it is passing good for such as have hot stomachs, or hot Livers,
specially in May, and for them that be costive. Whey for a (...) Liver.
And if you would use it to cool the Liver, then boil it in Endive, Succory,
Violet leaves, Hearts tongue, Sorrel, Dandelion. Whey for^^ itch.
And if you would use it for an itch, or breaking out, then boil in it,
Fumitory, Scabious, Liverwort, Hop leaves. Also Fumitory and Agrimony boiled in
clarified Whey, and often used, do not only kill an itch, but also preserve
the Liver from corruption. You must boil it to the half, and then strain it
and drink it fasting, and fast two hours after it.

CHAP. 221. Of Metheglin.
THe seventh kind of drink is Metheglin, which is most used in Wales, and in
the Marches of Wales. How to make Metheglin.
It is made of hot herbs, Honey and Water. And if any list to make it, he may
take of all sorts of garden herbs a handful or two, and let them boil in
twice so much water as he would make Metheglin, and when it is boiled to the
half, and cooled, and strayned from the herbs, then take to every two galons
of the water, one galon of Honey. Let it boil well and s^um it clean, then put
it up into some vessel, and put Barme upon it, and let it stand three or four
days, then cleanse it up as you do Beer or Ale, and put it into some barrel,
and so let it stand three or four months, then draw it and drink it at your
pleasure. If it be perfectly made and not new, it is a very good drink for
Winter season, chiefly for old folks, and such as be flegmaticke, or have cold
stomachs, or be troubled with the cough. It is best in a morning well spiced
with ginger. Mervaile it is to see how the Welchmen will lie sucking at this
drink, sometime until they be as Chr^me^ was in Terence, Vt neque pes, neque
men's satis suum ^fficium faciat. It is as natural a drink for them, as Nectar
for the gods. And I have heard some of that nation defend, that it is the very
Nectar which Jupiter and Juno drank. There is also another kind of drink like
to Metheglin, Mead or Mead.
which is called Meade or Mead, and is made of one part of Honey and fouretimes
so much of pure water, and boiled until no skum do remain, and is much
commended of Galen, drunk in Summer for preserving of health. For if it be
well made* it cleanses the breast and lungs, causes a man to spit easily, piss
abundantly, and purges the belly moderately. This much concerning those seven
sorts of drinks which be in common use among us, which may well be called
simple drinks, for of these sundry others are as it were compounded or made
for our necessities, but yet rather used as medicines than with meats: such is
Aqua vi^ae, Aqua composita, Rosa Solis, Doctor Stevens water, Cinamom water,
Hippocras, Bragger, Butterd Beer, and such like, of which I shall speak
particularly, for the behalf of students, who need now and then such
comfortable drinks.

CHAP. 222. To make Aqua vitae.
TAke of strong Ale, or strong Wine, or the Lees of strong Wine and Ale
together, a gallon or two, as you please, and take half a pound or more of
good Liquorise and as much Anis seeds: scrape off ^he bark from the Liquorise,
and cut it into thin slyces, and Punne the Annis gross, and steep al
together close covered twelve hours, then distill it with a Limbecke or
Serpentine. And of every galon of the liquour, you may draw a quart of
reasonable good Aqua vitae, that is of two galons two quarts. But see that your
fire be temperate and that the head of your Limbecke be kept cold continually
with fresh water, and that the bottom of your Limbecke be fast luted with Rye
dough, that no air issue out. The best Ale to make Aqua vitae of is to be made
of Wheat malt. and the next of clean Barley malt, and the best Wine for that
purpose is Sack.

CHAP. 223. To make Aqua composita.
TAke of Sage, Hisope, Rosemary, Mint, Spike, or Lavander leaves, Maierom, Bay
leaves, of each like much, of all four good handfulls, to one galon of liquor.
Take also of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cinamome, Pepper, Graynes of each a
quarter of an ounce, Liquorise and Anise, of each half a pound: beat the
spices gross, and first wash the herbs, then break them gently between your
hands. Use the Liquorise and Anise as is said in Aqua vitae, then put all
together into a Galon or more of good Ale or Wine, and let them steep all night
close covered in some vessel of Earth or Wood, and the next morning after
distill them as you do Aqua vitae.

CHAP. 224. To make Rosa Solis.
FIrst, because this drink bears the name of a certain herb called Rosa
Solis, which is not every where, nor at all times to be found, it shall be
necessary to speak somewhat concerning the gathering of the same. I find by
experience that it grows most plentifully in marish grounds and fennes, The
growing of Rosa Solis.
and is most flourishing in June, July, and August. In Lankashire in their
moss grounds where they dig their turns, there is great store of it, and
there the common people do call it youth grass, and they think that it
rotteth sheep, howsoever it preserves men. If it be gathered about noone, you
shall find upon it like as it were an oil or dew, and if you touch it with
your fingers, they will be slymy. When you would occupy it, gather it in dry
weather, and about the mid time of the day, How to make Rosa Solis.
and pick it clean from dyrt and pelf, and cut off the roots, or if it be
rank, you may cut it hard by the roots in gathering. Now when you have
prepared it in this order, and would compound Rosa Solis, take a pot of good
Aqua vitae, or Aqua composita, and put into it two good handfulls or more of
the herb called Rosa Solis, and half a pound of fine Sugar, half an ounce of
whole Mace, of Ginger pared, of Nutmegs, of Cinamome, of Anise seeds, all
gross beaten in a mortar, of each half an ounce, Liquorise an ounce, first
made clean from the bark, then cut in small pieces and a little punned, Dates
four ounces, cut small, and the stones, and the white skin that is within
taken out, put all together into a large pot or bottle, and stop it close, and
so let it stand for three months shaking it, or stirring it together now and
then, afterward (if you list) you may strain away the stuff, or let it
remain in all the year, and when you would occupy some of it, cast a cloth
over the mouth of the bottle to keep in the spices. Some do put in red rose
leaves also in the making.

Another way to make Rosa Solis.
I Learned also another way to make Rosa Solis, of an honest Gentlewoman, in
this manner: Take of strong Ale or wine two galons, of Annis seeds and
Liquorise, of each half a pound, beat them gross. Take also of Rosemary,
Sage, Time, Camamel, Majerom, Mint, Avens, Fenel, Dyll, Pelitory, Lavander or
Spike, Hysope, Roses, of each a handful, of Rosa Solis three or four
handful, and put all into the Ale or wine, then take of Cinamom, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, Ginger, Graynes, Long pepper, Galingale, of each a quarter of an
ounce, beat them gross, and put them to the other, and let all steep together
twelve hours, in some vessel of wood or earth close covered, then distill
them, and of the two gallons, you may well draw two quarts; and it will be as
Aqua composita, which after you may color in this wise, put it into one glass
or two, and put to it for either quart, two ounces of brown Sugar Candy, and
as much of Dates dressed as I have showed before, and put in every week fresh
Rosa Solis as much as may go into the glass until it have the color of the
herb, and if they will have it quickly to receive color, you may set the
glass warily within a stillitory, upon such things as you distill, and still
nevertheless, neither will the glass lightly break, especially if it be full.

CHAP. 225. To make Cinamom water.
HOw Cinamom water should be made, I have partly declared before in the
Treatise of Spices. Notwithstanding I will here set forth other ways to make
it, drawn out of Gesner. Take of Cinamom one pound grossly beaten, on the
which pour a wine quart of pure water, which being close covered, let stand to
steep eighteen hours, after distill it as ye do Aqua vitae.

Another way.
TAke of the best Cinamom finely brought to powder in a mortar, but not searsed
half a pound, this so charily power into the distillitory body, that none
cleave to the sides falling in, on which power three quarts of clear conduit
water, then set on the head close to the body, after distill it in the
beginning with a very soft fire, and increase the fire by little and little, as
you see the drops come either quick or slowly. But the best way to make
Cinamom water, is that which I have showed where I spoke of Cinamom it self.

CHAP. 226. To make Doctor Stevens water.
TAke a galon of good Gascoyne wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Canel,
Cinamom, Nutmegs, greyns, cloves, mace, annis seeds, fenel seeds,
caraway-seeds, of every of them a dram. Then take Sage, Mint, red Roses, Time,
Pellitory of the wall, wild Maierom, Rosemary, wild Time, Camamel, Lavander,
Avens, of every of them one handful, beat the spices small, and bruise the
herbs, and put all into the wine, and let it stand 12. hours, stirring it
diverse times, then still it in a Limbecke, and keep the first pint of the
water, for it is the best: then will come a second water, which is not so good
as the first.

The sundry virtues and operations of the same many times proved.
THe virtues of this water be these. It comfort the spirits, and preserves
greatly the youth of man, and helps inward diseases coming of cold against
shaking of the palsy, it cures the contraction of sinews and helps the
conception of women that be barren, it kills worms in the belly, it helps
the cold gout, it helps the tooth ach, it comfort the stomach very much,
it cures the cold dropsy, it helps the stone in the bladder and reins of
the back, it cures the canker, it helps shortly a stinking breath, and who
so uses this water now and then, but not too often, it preserves him in good
liking, and shall make one seem young very long. You must take but one
spoonful of this water fasting but once in seven days, for it is very hot in
operation. It preserved Doctor Stevens that he lived 98 year, whereof twenty
he lived bedridde.

CHAP. 227. A Censure upon Doctor Stevens water.
THis much I find written both touching the making and touching the virtues of
D. Stevens water. But how true it is I refer to every man's own experience. I
for my part having made it right according to the prescription, found the water
so weak of the wine, so strong of the herbs, so unpleasant in taste, that I
was feign to distill it again, and to make it after an other manner. So taking
double the spices aforesaid, that is of every sort a quarter of an ounce, and
of every kind of herb but half a handful, and not Cascoyne wine but Sack or
very strong Ale, I made a water very strong in taste, and as I suppose of great
virtue in all the properties aforesaid. This who so list to try shall find
true, and let no man condemn me until he have proved.

CHAP. 228. To make Hipocras.
TAke of Cinnamon two ounces, of Ginger half an ounce, of Grains a quarter of
an ounce, punne them gross, and put them into a pottle of good Claret or white
wine, with half a pound of Sugar, let all steep together a night at the least
close covered in some bottle of glass, peuter or stone, and when you would
occupy it, cast a thin linen cloth, or a piece of a boulter over the mouth
of the bottle, and let so much run through as you will drink at that time,
keeping the rest close, for so it will keep both the spirit, odor and virtue
of the wine and spices, and if you would make but a quart, then take but half
the spices aforesaid.

CHAP. 229. Another way.
TAke a galon of wine, an ounce of Cinamom, two ounces of Ginger, a pound of
Sugar, twenty cloves bruised a little in a mortar, twenty corns of Pepper
gross beaten, let all these steep together a night or more, in a bottle or
pot close stopped as before. To half the wine take half the stuff.

CHAP. 230. Another way excellent for a weak stomach.
TAke Cinamom half an ounce, Ginger a quarter of an ounce, Cloves, long
Pepper, Nutmegs, of each half a quarter of an ounce, beat them all gross,
and with half a pound of Sugar mix them together in a pottle of pure white
wine or Claret. Let all soke twelve hours, or all night in a close pot or
bottle, and when you would occupy of it, cast a cloth over the mouth of the
pot, and streine it and use it at your pleasure, and if you list to make but
half the quantity, then take but half the spices and Sugar, and use it as
before.

CHAP. 231. Another.
TAke an ounce of Cinamom, half an ounce of Ginger, Galingale and Greynes, of
each a quarter of an ounce, Cloves half a quarter, beat them gross, White
Sugar half a pound, of the best wine a pottle, use it as before.

CHAP. 232. To make Nectar after Arnold, which is a notable restorative.
TO a pint of Malmsey or Muskadell take of Ginger pared, Cloves, Cinamom, of
each a quarter of an ounce of Greynes half a quarter, Sugar two ounces, Musk
a grain, use it as before.

CHAP. 233. Sugredwine for such as be in a consumption.
TO three pintes of good wine take two pounds of Sugar, let it boil until it
come to the thickness of Live Honey, the use whereof is with liquid meats or
drinks. It may stand in stead of meat and drink, and will refresh nature
sufficiently. Or else take one pound of the best Sugar to three pintes of wine,
let them be so sod with a soft fire in manner of a syrup, keep it and use it
with two parts of water or otherwise, as need requires. It is good for old
persons, cold and feeble, and in whom natural moisture and heat are
diminished.

CHAP. 234. Hippocra^ made with water.
TAke of chosen Cinamom two ounces, of Ginger scraped half an ounce, long
Pepper, Greynes, Galingale, of each a dram, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, of each
half a dram, Spring water three quarts, let it boil to the half or to one
quart, then strain it hard through a cloth, and put to it half a pound of
Sugar, boil it a little again and skimme it, then put it into some close pot
and use it. To make Hippocras of Aquavitae, excellent for one that is very
weak. Take a quart of Aqua vitae, and put it in a glass, then take two ounces
of Cinamom, one ounce of Ginger, two pennyworth of Cloves, as much of Greynes,
a penny worth of Nutmegges, beat them all gross, and put them to the Aqua
vitae* and shake it together every day often for nine days together, then
drink it with wine or ale, half a spoonefull or a quarter, with half a pint
of Ale.

CHAP. 235. Hippocrat to preserve in time of pestilence.
TAke of the best wine a pottle, half an ounce of Angelica, Nutmegs two drams,
Galingale, ^^ng Pepper, Coriander, Ginger, Bole Armoniacke, of each a dram,
Cinamom three quarters of an ounce, Sugar half a pound, use them as before is
said, and drink thereof always fasting a good draught.

CHAP. 236. Hipocrat laxative for any fever.
TAke of Sena an ounce, of Rubarb and Agaricke, of each two drams, Cinamom
half an ounce, Cloves, Mace, Greynes, of each a quarter of an ounce, Ginger,
A^ise, Coriander, Nigella Romana, of each a dram, Sugar half a pound, white
wine or claret a pottle, make it as before is said.

CHAP. 237. To make wormwood wine upon the sudden to comfort a weak stomach.
TAke Aqua vitae and Malmsey like much, and steep in it some leaves of
wormwood dried. Of this you may take a little spoonefull, and so mix it with
a draught of wine, and so give it to drink.

CHAP. 238. To make Bragget.
TAke three or four galons of good Ale or more, as you please, two days or
three after it is cleansed, and put it into a pot by it self, then draw forth a
pottle thereof, and put to it a quart of good English Honey, and set them over
the fire in a vessel, and let them boil fair and softly, and always as any
froth arises, skumme it away and so clarify it, and when it is well
clarified, take it off the fire, and let it cool, and put thereto of Pepper a
penny worth, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Nutmegs, Cinamom, of each two pennyworth
beaten to powder, stir them well together, and set them over the fire to boil
again a while, then being milk warm, put it to the rest, and stir all
together, and let it stand two or three days, and put barme upon it, and drink
it at your pleasure.

CHAP. 240. To make Buttered Beer, which is good for a cough or shortness of
wind.
TAke a quart or more of double Beer, and put to it a good piece of fresh
Butter, Sugar Candy an ounce, of Liquerise in powder, of Ginger grated, of
each a dram, and if you would have it strong, put in as much long Pepper and
Greynes* let it boil in the quart after the manner as you burn wine, and who
so will drink it, let him drink it as hot as he may suffer. Some put in the
yolke of an egg or two toward the latter end, and so they make it more
strengthfull.

CHAP. 241. Of sleep.
THe fourth thing to be regarded in preserving of health, is Somnus, Sleep,
which after Aristotle is defined to be Impotentia sensuum. Lib. de S^m. and
vigilia.
Because in sleep the senses be unable to execute their office, as the eye to
see, the ear to hear, the nose to smell, the mouth to taste, and all sinowy
parts to feel. So that the senses for a time may seem to be tied or bound,
and therefore Sleep is called of some ligamentum sensuum. And for this
imbecility, for that Sleep after a sort makes a man senseless, and as it
were livelesse, it is called in Latin Mortis imago, as Ovid writes.

Stulte quid est somnus, gelidae nisi mortis imago? Lib. 2. Elegi. Sleep the
image of death and the brother of death.

Longa quiescendi tempora fata dabunt.
And in Seneca, in Hercule Furente, Sleep is said to be the Son of Astrea,
that is to say, of Justice, and the brother of death, as Volucer matris genus
Astreae,
Frater durae languidae mortis.


And the holy Scripture in sundry places does call death by the name of sleep,
Death called by the name of sleep.
which is meant in respect of the resurrection: for as after sleep we hope to
wake, so after death we hope to rise again. But that definition which Paulus
Aegineta makes of sleep, in my judgment is most perfect, where he says,
Somnus est animalium facultatum quies, Lib. 1. cap. 97. What sleep is.
ab utili humore cerebrum malefaciente proveniens: for here is showed by what
means sleep is caused. That is, by vapors and fumes rising from the stomach
to the head, How sleep is caused.
where through coldness of the brain, they being congealed, do stop the
conduits and ways of the senses, and so procure sleep, which thing may
plainly be perceived hereby: for that immediately after meat we are most
prone to sleep, because then the vapors ascend most abundantly to the brain,
and such things as be most vapourous do most dispose us to sleep, as Wine,
Milk, and such like. The benefit of sleep, or the necessity rather needs no
proof, for that without it no living creature may long endure, according to
that saying of the Poet Ovid.

Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est. The commodities of sleep
For sleep helps digestion and makes it perfect, it recovereth strength, it
refreshes the body, it reviveth the mind, it pacifieth anger, it drives away
sorrow, and finally, if it be moderate, it brings the whole man to good state
and temperature. Wherefore Ovid in another place, Metamor. 11.
calls sleep a god, as: Somne quies rerum, placidissime somne deorum,
Paxanimi, quem cura fugit, tu pectora duris
Four things to be observed in sleep:
Fessa ministeriis mulces, reparasque labori.


But that I may fully declare the order of sleep, and how it is to be used in
preserving of health, four things are to be observed therein. First the time,
secondly the place, thirdly, the lying of the body: and fourthly, the quantity
of sleep. Concerning the time, Hip. following the very order of nature,
Presag. 2.
gives forth a general rule: Quod ad somnos attinet, quemadmodum secundum
naturam consuetum nobis est, interdiu vigilare oportet, noctu vero dormire: Si
vero hoc fuerit transmutatu^, peius est. Minime vero laedi aeger poterit,
sidormiat mane ad tertiam partem dici: qui vero ab hoc tempore fiunt somni,
deteriores sunt. Wherefore in sleeping and waking, we must follow the course of
nature, that is, to wake in the day, and sleep in the night, meaning by the
day, that space which is from Sun rising to Sun setting, and by the night,
from setting of the Sun to the rising again of the same. And if you demand a
reason why the night should be more convenient for sleep than the day, Why
the night is better to sleep than the day.
I answer* Quoniam nox naturali humiditate silentioque animum in somnum
deduce^s, absolutam molitur concoctionem: non solum alimenti, sed humorum etiam
superfluentium. And if this order be changed (says Hip.) it is worse: for the
natural heat, spirits and humors in the day time draw to the outward parts of
the body. Wherefore if we sleep then, we violently resist the motion of
nature: for sleep draws natural heat inward, and the heat of the day
draws it outward, so there is made as it were a fight and combat with nature.
Yet one that is sick or weak, and can take no rest in the night, may well
sleep in the morning Ad tertiam partem diei (as Hip. says) that is, three
hours after the Sun is risen: Afternoon steep unwholesome. cap 1. cap. 3.
but afterward sleep is not so wholesome, especially at after noone.
Profitable therefore is that counsel of Schola Salerui. Somnum fuge
meridianum. And again.

Sit brevis aut nullus tibi somnus meridianus,
Febris, pigrities, capitis dolor, atque catarrhus,
Haec tibi proveniunt ex somno meridiano.
For afternoon sleep makes undigested and raw humors, whereof grows
oppilations, which oppilations engender Fevers. Also it makes a man slothful,
by reason that superfluous humors, remain still in the muskles, veins and
joints. Again, it causes head ach, because gross and undigested meat,
remaining yet in the stomach, sends up gross vapors to the brain. And
last of all it breeds rhumes, by reason that the stomach is full of raw
humors, whereby vapors and fumes, rise up to the head, which being engrossed
by coldness of the brain, distill to the lower parts. All which
discommodities might have been dissolved and consumed by watch. Yet
notwithstanding: How sleep in the day may be used with least harm.
if any will needs sleep in the day time, it is less hurtful (as ^ertrucius
says) if these five conditions therein be digently observed. First, if it be
customably used. Secondly, if it be not taken immediately after meat, but half
an hour, or an hour after. Thirdly that one sleep not lying, but rather
sitting with his body upright. Fourthly, that he sleep not overlong. Fifthly,
that he be not waked suddenly and fearfully, but with good moderation. But
after Fuchsius, Dormiendum a prandio, In Li. 2. Sect. 4. cap. 3.
si nequii evitari somnus, aut minimum aut plurimum: minimum, ut calor solum
colligatur, and vires recreentur ex negotijs and vigilijs dissolutae. Plurimum,
ut perficiatur concoctio. Is enim qui eam inchoat, nec absoluit, illa parit
incommoda quae paulo ante commemorata sunt. And he that will sleep quietly in
the night, must put in practice that notable precept of Schola Salerni,
mentioned before, where I have spoken of supper.

Vt sis nocte levis, sit tibi cae^a brevis. And moreover to take heed that we
go not to bed straightway after supper, but to tarry the time until the meat
be well mingled and gone down to the bottom of the stomach, which may the
better come to pass, if we walk softly an hour or two after supper: for as
Fuchsius writes in the same Chapter: Duabus minimum a cae^a horis vigilandum
est, How long we should wake, after supper.
priusquam nos quieti mandemus. Or if we walk not abroad, then it shall be
good to hear the noise of instruments, songs, mirth, and pleasant histories,
and to confer and talk with our friends of merry matters until such time as
the meat be settled. As concerning the place most convenient for sleep, What
place is ^ost fit to sleep in.
it must be somewhat dark, defended from the Sun beams, and from the light:
it must be temperate in heat and cold, yet rather inclining to cold than heat,
for so says Hippocrates, Somnus in frigore vestibus contecto: Epid. 6. com: 4.
for if we sleep in a place very hot, we are in danger to fall into a swoune
by reason of the contrariety of sleep and heat. For natural heat, which by
means of sleep is drawn inward, through the heat without is contrariwise
drawn outward. Wherefore the place where we sleep, should not be very
close, neither should we sleep upon the ground, nor upon cold stones, nor
near the earth, for the coldness of stones, and the dampe of the earth, are
both very hurtful to our bodies. But let your lodging be in an upper chamber,
yet severed from the roof with some small floor, Chamber Bed
let the bedsted be large and long, and no higher than a man may easily fall
into it standing upon the chamber floor. Let the bed be soft, well shaken, The
making of the bed.
and made rising up toward the feet, so that the bulk or chest of the body may
be lowest. I remember when I was at Oxford in the second year of the reign
of her highness, one M. Atkins being for disobedience put in prison at London
had a chamber to himself but no bed, and at length waxing weary of the bare
boords, upon a night, A merry tale of b^^ting a bed.
having gotten a cudgel or two fell to beating and knocking of the floor, so
long and so loud, that his keeper awaked, who in a rage coming to him, and
demanding of him whether he were mad or no, that made such a noise? No forsooth
master keeper (quoth he) I do but beat my bed to make it soft if it would be.
For it is so hard that it makes my bones to ache. Such beds have prisoners and
soldiers now and then, but I pray God send all good students soft lodging.
Concerning the manner of lying, while we sleep, Praefa. cap. 5. How we should
lie while we sleep.
Hip. says* Optimi sunt decubitus qui sauorum decubitibu^ simile^ existunt.
And sauorum decubitus is, as he shows in the same place, in latus dextrum aut
sinistrum, and manus, and collum, and cura modice inflexa habere, and totum
corpus flexibile situm. And Galen affirms that Hippocrates Vtrunque damnat,
Lib. 2. de motu m^s. cap. ^.
and supinum iacere, and hiare dormientem, decubitus autem in alterum laterum
laudat. Where he concludes, that Supinum jacere, and hiare dormientem, non
absque action stertendi, aut exolutionis, aut ebrietatis, aut ignaviae sunt
signa. Yet Alexis says, that he that sleeps with his mouth close, Lib. 4
S^^re^.
has commonly an ill breath, and foul teeth. Hereby it may be gathered, that
to lie on either side, is good. But to lie upright upon the back, or grovelling
upon the belly is unwholesome. And it is most wholesome to sleep first on the
right side, that the meat may the better descend to the bottom of the
stomach, and be nearer to the liver. Which is to the stomach as fire to the
pot, and after to turn to the left side. For this change does greatly ease the
body, and helps concoction. But to lie upon the back, causes phlegm and
other humors to fall into the hinder part of the head, where is the original
of the sinews, and by that mean the spirits being stopped, the nightmare (as
they call it) and palsy, and such like maladies be engendered. Again to lie on
the belly, draws the humors to the eyes, and so hurts the sight. Yet it
helps them that have feeble digestion. And we must not only regard that we
lie on the tone side, but also that we lie with our heads somewhat high, well
bolstered up, having sufficient clothes upon us, least that while natural
heat is within about digestion, the outward parts be grieved with cold. It is
good also to wear a kerchiffe, or some such like thing in the night on our
heads. But to have the feet covered with shoes or otherwise, is very hurtful
to the sight and memory, and distempereth the whole body with heat. How long
we should sleep.
Concerning the quantity or time, how long we should sleep, it cannot be
certainly defined a like for all men, and for all seasons. But it must be
measured by health and sickness, by age, by time of the year, by emptiness
or fullness of the body, and by natural complections. For such as be healthy
and strong, need less sleep than they that be sickely and weak. Children
and old folks need more sleep than youth and middle age. In winter longer
sleep is requisite than in summer. Choleric persons need less sleep than
flegmaticke, yet in health for the most part, 7.8. or 9. hours at the most is
a sufficient time for the continuance of sleep, as it may be gathered by
Galen. Lib. 6. de Sa. tu. cap. 5.
And as moderate sleep does help digestion and confirm the body, and comfort
the mind: So contrariwise, immoderate sleep makes the body slow, and unapt
to honest exercises, and subject to many diseases, and the wit dull and unable
either to conceive or to retain. Wherefore they that sleep a great part of
the day, and do as it were strive with the Dormouse, who shall sleep longest,
it is no mervaile if they be both unhealthy in their bodies, and in wit, like
the horse and mule in whom there is no understanding. Notable therefore is that
common sentence, and to be followed of all students, Sanctificat, sanat, ditat
quoque surgere mane.

And the Poet Ovid most worthily has written, Infelix tota quicunque quiescere
nocte
Sustinet, and somnes praemia magna putat.


Wherefore I trust that all good students will rather follow that example of
Demosthenes, mentioned before in the treatise of exercise, than learn of
Thraso in Terence stertere noctesque and dies, least they be likened to
Epimenides, Epimenides and Endymion how they slept and what is meant by it.
who slept forty seven years continually, or Endymion, who slept always (as
the Poets feine.) Yet I would they would prove like unto these two. For the
first became a noble Philosopher, and wrote of the nature of things, and of the
divine generation, and had the gift of prophecy as some suppose. And Endymion
first found out the course of the moon. Wherefore the Poets feined, that the
moon loved him, and descended down to kiss him while he slept. So they both
for their continual and earnest contemplation, were feined to sleep, But I
would all good students would so sleep, or at the least wise take a little nap
after their manner. For as the Poet Horace says: Est aliquid prodire tenus, si
non datur ultra,

And this is Impallescere chartis, Inhaerere libris, which never yet was
reproachful to a student. And if we sleep but at ordinary times, yet we
sleep half the time of our life, for as Aristotle writes; Lib. 1. Ethi. ca.
ult Man sleeps half his time.
Bonus ab improbo in somno minime internoscitur. Hinc negant inter beatos ac
miseros, per dimidiatum vitae tempus quicquam interesse. And Seneca says in
Her. fu.

Tu O domitor
Somne malorum, requies animi
Pars humanae melior vitae.
But the natural time of sleep is Durante concoctione, and the natural time
of waking is when concoction is finished. For so says Aristotle, Expergiscitur
animal cum concoctio absoluta, ad finemque deducta fuerit. De Some. and vi. cap.
3. How to know when sleep is sufficient.
Now to know when all concoctions are complete and ended, it is to be
discerned by the sensible lightness of all the body, specially of the brain,
the brows, and the eyes, the passage down of the meat from the stomach, the
will to make urine, and to go to the stool. Contrariwise heaviness in the
body and eyes, and savor of the meat before eaten, signifies that the sleep
was not sufficient. Also the color of the urine to those that be skillful
declares the perfection or imperfection of digestion, for if it be whitish or
pale, it betokens that digestion is not yet complete. If it be yellow like
pure gold, then it signifies that digestion is sufficient. But the judgments
of urines I refer to the Physician. And as digestion is diverse in diverse men,
for some digest sooner than others, so the times of sleeping and waking, are
likewise diverse according to the complexion, strength, age of the party, time
of the year, etc. And for waking, what time students should rise, and how they
should order themselves first in the morning, I have showed before in my
treatise of exercise. So this may suffice for sleep.

CHAP. 242. Of Venus.
NOw that I have spoken sufficiently of labor, meat, drink, and sleep, it
remains only that I speak of Venus, which in Galen is reckoned the fifth
and last thing to be regarded in the preservation of health. Lib. 2. de Sa.
tu. cap. 1.
And as it is the last in order of the words, so ought it to be the last in
use. For so he says, Hippocrates in proposing that sentence, Labor, Cibus,
Potio, Somnus, Venus, omnia mediocria, has not only declared the measure in
using, but also the due time of using every thing by the very order of his
words. Quippe sanitatis tutelam a labor est auspicandum quem excipere debent
cibus, How Venus should be used and in what age.
potio, deinde somnus, mox Venus, in iis videlicet, quibus Venere est utendum.
Nam reliqua certe omnia cuinsque aetatis sunt communia, Venus aetatu tantum
florentium est utique quo tempore etiam ejus usus est. Quae e^im hanc vel
praecedunt aetates, vel sequuntur, aut plane semen non effund^nt aut certe
infecundum, aut male fecundum effundunt. By the which words of Galen we
understand not only the time most convenient for the use of Venus, (that is
after sleep) but also what age is most fit for that purpose, videlicet aetas
florens: Which after Galen begins at 25 years, Aph^. 3. com. 30. and Aph^.
5. com. 6.
and continues until 35 years. But some man will say, is Venus requisite to
the preservation of health? How then lived Priests in health in time past
unmarried? Whether Venus be requisite for all men.
Or how live students at this day in the Universities that be of any society,
who may not marry while they have interest in their College? To this I answer,
Commune animantium omnium est coniunctionis appetitus procreandi causa. And
this appetite or lust, was given by God to mankind from the beginning, as
appears in Genesis. So that none, neither male nor female is clean without,
Cap. 1. ver. 28.
although it burn more in some than others, according to age and complexion:
although some can better bridle it and subdue it than others, according to
their gift and grace. How lust grows in mankind.
Now to enter more deeply into the nature of mankind, and to consider from
whence this concupiscence does arise, you shall understand, that as every
living creature does feed, and as the meat received is altered and changed
three times, that is to say, in the stomach, liver and parts before it nourish
the body, and as every concoction has his superfluity, or excrement, as the
stomach ordure, the liver urine, the veins sweat: So after the third and
last concoction, which is done in every part of the body that is nourished,
there is left some part of profitable blood, not needful to the parts,
ordained by nature for procreation, which by certain vessels or conduits,
Semen est quaedam pars utilis excrementi.
serving for that purpose, is wonderfully conveyed and carried to the
genitories, where by their proper nature, that which before was plain blood, is
now transformed and changed into seed. Neither is this any strange alteration,
for the breasts of a woman by a like special property, do change that into
milk which before was very blood, for milk whether it be of woman or beast, is
nothing else but blood twice concocted. Semen emittunt ^am saemin^ quam viri.
Li. 1. Inst. cap. 5.
And in the seed or nature of man and woman rests the whole hability of
procreation, as says Leonhartus Fuchsius. Procreatrix facultas in semine tota
posita est, quod quidem prolificum cum suapte natura sit, unius cujuspiam sibi
similis procreandi, insitam vim habeat omnino necesse est. And as blood is
daily engendered of such nourishment as we receive, so likewise of blood is
nature bred continually, and needs therefore sometime to be abated. For
otherwise, it is an occasion of many grievous maladies, Lib. 6. de lo. aff.
cap. 5.
as Galen declares. And if it be not sometimes avoided by other means, of it
self, Ad sui excretionem ui quadam stimulat, as every man almost does feel in
himself now and then. And the commodities which come by moderate evacuation
thereof are great. The benefits of Venus.
For it procures appetite to meat, and helps concoction, it makes the body
more light and nimble, it opens the pores and conduits, and purges phlegm,
it quickneth the mind, stirs up the wit, reviveth the senses, Venus morbis a
pituita nati^ utilis est Hip. ^pid. 6. Sect. 5. Apho. 23.
drives away sadness, madness, anger, melancholy, fury. Finally it
delivers us utterly from lecherous imaginations, and unchaste dreams. Which
although in some men's opinions they seem none offense, because they proceed
only of abundance of nature, Yet I am of an other mind, for that I read in
Deuteronomy, cap. ^3.
If there be among you any that is unclean, by that which comes to him by
night, he shall go out of the host, and shall not enter into the host. But at
even he shall wash himself with water, and when the sun is down, he shall
enter into the host. But to return to my purpose, Venus is worthily reckoned
of Hippocrates one of those five things that chiefly preserve health. But in
the use thereof we must have a special regard, Ne quid nimis, The
discommodities of immoderate Venus.
for to exceed the mean in labor, in eating and drinking, in sleeping or
waking does not so greatly impair a man's health* as Immoderatus coitus. For
upon the sudden it brings a man to utter weakness, and bereaveth him (as
it were) of all his senses. And therefore is likened by Hippocrates to the
falling evil; and Avicen in his Book de Animalibus says, Si quid spermatis
supra quam natura tolleret, coitu profluat, obesse magis, quam si quadragies
tantundem sanguinis emanarit. And no mervaile, considering that the very root
and foundation of our life, does consist in semine and sanguine, as Galen
teaches in his book written against Licus: And this is the cause why such as
use immoderate Venus, be short lived, and as the Sparrowes, through
incontinency consume themselves. But GOD of his infinite goodness, who from
the beginning ingraffed in man's nature this carnal appetite, to the end, that
by procreation the world might be replenished with people, has yet
notwithstanding bridled the same, and restrained it by special commandment,
that mankind should not couple together without difference, after the manner
of bruit beasts, but being joined in lawful marriage, Deuteronomy. 5.18. Exodus 20.
which estate was established between man and woman, as holy and undefiled by
God himself in Paradise; Genesis 2.22.
and that for three causes chiefly: First for procreation of Children, to be
brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord, and praise of GOD. Secondly,
for a remedy against sin, and to avoid fornication, that such persons as have
not the gift of continency, might marry and keep themselves undefiled members
of CHRIST'S body. Thirdly, for the mutual society, help and comfort that the
one ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity. So that
marriage is the only lawful means to remedy this infirmity of Nature, and
all other means are abominable in the sight of GOD; as Fornication, Adultery,
Buggerie, incest, and that practice of Diogenes mentioned of Galen, De lo. ass.
cap. 5.
Genitalia contrectando semen ejicere. And now to the question proposed before,
touching Priests and Students, how they have lived or do live unmarried. Saint
Matthew in his Gospel sets down two estates of men in general, Cap. 19.
ver. 12.
both good and godly: the one married, The difference of men concerning
chastity.
the other unmarried. And of the unmarried he makes three sorts as follows.
For there are some chaste (says he) which were so borne of their mothers
belly. And there be some chaste, which be made chaste by men, and there be
some chaste, which have made themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven. He
that is able to receive this, let him receive it. Here the Holy Ghost utters
that some by nature are impotent and unable to fulfill the duty of marriage;
others by Art (as by gelding, or so) are made unable; and the third sort is of
them which have the gift of continency, and use it to serve God with more free
liberty; which gift notwithstanding is not common to all men, but is very rare
and given to few; whereupon I gather, that some may and do live honestly
unmaried; and so I judge of Priests, Students, and all other degrees of men or
women whatsoever. Yet I do not think the gift of continency so general, as
it was supposed in time past, when all the Clergy were restrained from marriage;
for it is said in Matthew, All men cannot receive this thing, save they to whom
it is given: wherefore marriage ought to be free to all that are so disposed,
even as it is honorable among all, by the judgment of the Apostle Paul to the
Hebrews: Ver. 11.
For how hard a matter it is, and how rare a gift to live continently, the
greater part of a man's age, I refer it to every man's own conscience. Nam quis
potest dicere, mundum est c^r meum? Cap. 13. ver. 4.
And (as the Poet Virgil writes) Omne adeo genus in terris hominumque
ferarumque,
Et genus aequoreum, pecudes, pictaeque volucres, Pro. 20. ver. 9. A^oris and
libid ni^ insanin omnibus animalibus est communis.

In furias ignemque ruunt, amor omnibus idem.


And this rage is called of the Physicians (...) f^ror quo fere omnes correpti,
per adolescentiam iuvencu^is depereunt; and as the Poet Mantuan says, Res
vulgaris amor, semel insanivimus omnes.

Yet I know there is great difference among men and women in this respect, not
only touching thought, but also touching deed; for of all complections, the
sanguine, which is indeed the best complexion, is yet most inclined to Venus,
What complexion is most given to Venus Lib. 6. de lo. aff. Cap. 5.
by reason of abundance of blood, hot and moist; and so says Galen, Non parva
est hominum differentia. Sunt enim non^ulli, quos protinus a i^ventute
eoncubitus imbecilliores efficit: alii nisi assid^e coeant, capitis gravitate
molestantur, cibos fastidiunt, ac febribus obnoxii fiunt, atque ut deterior est
ipsis appetentia, ita and concoctio minor, hos Plato arboribus immodice
fructiferis comparat. Again he says; Innoxia Venus iis tantumest, q^i calidi
humidique sunt, Lib. 6. de Sa. tu. ca. 4.
tum vero qui genitura naturaliter abundant. As for those that be of dry
temperature, as the chollerick sort, or cold and dry as the Melanchollick, to
them Venus is most hurtful by Galens judgment in the same place. But although
the most part of men and women be naturally given to this infirmity, especially
in youth, yet there be certain means whereby to abate it, even in the
lustiest complexions. Three principal means to abate concupiscence 2 Cor.
12.7, 8, 9.
The chiefest is that which was given to Saint Paul, after he had prayed to
the Lord thrice, that the prick of the flesh might depart from him; that is,
Sufficit tibi gratia mea, nam virtus in infirmitate perficitur. The next (in my
judgment) is for a man to keep himself out of the company of women. For as it
is in Ecclesiasticus, Qui tetigerit picem* inquinabitur ab ea. ca 13. ver. 1.
And S. Paul says: Bonum est homini mulierem non tangere: for certainly, the
nature of women is such, that a man by their company shall be greatly inflamed.

Lib. 3. Georg.
Carpit enim vires paulatim, uritque videndo Femina, as Virgil writes, is much
like to a wild beast called a Panther, Women compared to a Panther.
to whom it is said, that herds of cattle do resort, being marveilously
delighted in the sweet savor that comes from him, and in beholding of him.
But when the Panther has them within his reach, he easily preyeth upon the
poor cattle, being utterly dismayed with his fierce looks: or as the
Mermaydens whom Poets faigne with their sweet melody to draw such unto them as
pass by, Women compared to the Mermaydens Syrenes were Sea monsters, half a
woman and half a fish.
and then to devour them. But if students must needs be in company with women,
as occasion oftentimes requires, yet let them do as Ulysses did, who sailing
that way, where these monsters abode, stopped the ears of all his company, to
the intent they should not hear the Songs of the Syrenes, and caused himself
to be bound to the mast of the ship, and so escaped. Even so should students
that would lead a single life, either forgo the company of women, or if they
be in company with them, stop their ears, that is to say, bridle their senses,
or bind themselves to the mast, that is to say: pray unto God for grace, lest
they be entangled ere they be ware. And the like counsel is given by Ovid.
Li. 1. de r^me. amo.


Manat amor tectus* si non ab amante recedas,
Turbaque in hoc omnes ingeniosa sumus.
Proximus a tectis ignis defenditur aegre:
Vtile finitimis abstinuisse locis.
Non facile esuriens posita retinebere mensa,
Et multum saliens incitat unda sitim.
The third mean whereby to abate this carnal appetite, is that which is
mentioned in Saint Paul: 1 Cor. c. 9 v. 27. Ordinary means to subdue the flesh.
Castigo corpus meum, and in servitutem redigo, which may be done diverse
ways: As by earnest study and meditation, by often fasting, by much labor, by
hard fare, by hard lodging, and such like: for as it is in Plato, when Lady
Venus threatened the Muses, that unless they would follow her Sacrifices, she
would arm her son Cupid against them, they answered, Marti O Venus, Marti
talia minitare: tuus enim inter nos Cupido non volat. And Terence says in
Eunucho. Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus. And Diana flying the company of
men, to the intent that she would not be moved with carnal lusts, did
continually exercise her self in hunting wild beasts, and for her chaste
life was honored of the Paynims for a goddess: which fable declares unto us,
that exercise of the mind or body drives away fleshly fantasies, and that
idleness is a great occasion of Lechery, Idleness a great occasion of
lechery. Lib. 1. dear. amo.
and so says the Poet Ovid well experienced in such matters.

Finem qui quaeris amoris,
Cedit amor rebus, res age, tutus eris.
Quaeritur Aegistus, quare sit factus adulter,
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
And again he says: Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaeque iacent, and sine luce faces.


Lib. 1. de Sa. tu. cap. 14. Diverse practices to abate concupiscence.
There be also other means to extinguish carnal lust, partly mentioned in
Galen, as to anoint the reins with some cooling ointment, which may be made
of Wax, Oil of Roses, and the juice of some cooling herb, as Houseleek,
Lettuce, Purslain, Nightshade, or to use plates of lead upon the reins, or to
apply Rose leaves, or Agnus Castus leaves to the back by night or by day, or
to use daily to eat the seed of Agnus Castus, or the seed of Rue, or the herbs
themselves: As once I knew an old Priest that lived chastely unmarryed all his
life, that would daily put Rue in his drink, and sometime eat it with bread
and butter, and make it in a posset, and use it in posies, and all to destroy
nature the original of lust. To these may be added the practices of Arnoldus.
Si voluptatem Veneris volueris extinguere, The practices of Arnoldus to abate
lust
inungantur genitalia ex succo Apti vel Rutae and praedicti suc^i in potu
sumantur. Item odorare Camphoram multum valet. Sed^re etiam supra lapidem
marmoreum, vel supra lapidem multum frigidum, vel supra terram humidam, and
insunde testiculos and virgam in aqua frigida, vel a ceto forti, and iisdem
lavare Perit^neum and renes. Last of all to conclude these means whereby to
abate carnal lust, I will recite certain examples gathered out of our English
Chronicles of some men in time past, who supposed all chastity to consist in
single life. Elphlegus Bishop of Winchester, put upon him Dunstanes a Monks
apparel, that he might thereby avoid both the fire of concupiscence and the
fire of hell. John Bale.
S. Petrock an hermit of Cornwall, was feign every night from the crowing of
the cock, to the spring of the morning to stand naked in a pit of water to
abate the movings of his flesh, yet could he never have remedy of that disease,
until he went on pilgrimage to Rome and Jerusalem. S. Aldelme Abbot and Bishop
of Malmsbury, when he was stirred by his ghostly enemy to the sin of the
body, Fabian. lib 6. cap. 141.
would hold within his bed by him a fair maiden so long time as he might say
over the whole Psalter, to the intent to do the more torment to himself and
his flesh. These men (as you see) as holy as they seemed, were yet captives to
Cupid, and could hardly get loosed out of his bands, or whether they were
loosed at all, it may be doubted, yet would they not follow Saint Paul's
counsel, Melius est nubere, quam uri: But rather the contrary. Vri potius
quam nubere maluerunt. But if I had been their Physician, Corin. 1. c. ^.
they should have had the same remedy that Master Smith a canon of Hereford
practiced upon himself in the beginning of the reign of the Queens Majesty
that now is, The translator of Salust into English.
videlicet abscissionem testiculorum. For this is the surest remedy that can
be devised for Cupids colts. Notwithstanding, for such as can abstain, I
think it much better for themselves, and for the common wealth, especially if
they be of the Clergy that they should live unmarryed. For as S. Paul says.
The unmarryed cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord:
But he that is married, cares for the things of the world, 1 Cor. cap. 7.
ver. 3, 33, 34.
how he may please his wife. There is difference also between a virgin and a
wife. The unmarryed woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be
holy both in body and spirit: but she that is married, cares for the things of
the world, how she may please her husband. So that the state of man or woman
unmarryed is more free from the cares of the world, The single life more
convenient for Divines.
and consequently more free for the service of God, then of the married sort,
and therefore more to be desired of all them that would wholly dedicate
themselves to serve the Lord. For as Basilius Magnus writes to Gregorius
(...). Devi. in some. age^. The discommodities of marriage.
Coniugio mancipatum curarum agmen excipit. Inorbitate desiderium prolis,
uxoris custodia, domestica procuratio, servilium officiorum constitutio, damna
civilibus in contractibus accepta, digladiationes cum vicinis, forenses
concertationes, negotiationis alea, agriculturae labores, unaquaeque dies suam
adfert animo caliginem, noctes vero diuturnas curas excipientes, per easdem
rerum species imposturam menti factitant. And Demea in Terence says in
Adelphi. Duxi uxorem: quam ibi miseram vidi? Natifilii, alia cura. So the first
dish that is served up at the marriage feast, Two of the first dishes that be
served up at the marriage feast.
is Miseria, and the second is Cura. Which both if they be well weighed, are
but sour sawces to sweet meat. Nevertheless, let every man do according to
his gift. For every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and
an other after that. I exempt no estate nor degree from marriage, 1 Cor. ca. 7.
v 7. D^ s^nct. vi.
yet I say with Saint Augustine, Bona pudicitia coniugalis, sed melior
continentia virginalis vel vidualis. And if any be disposed to marry, if they
would follow the rule of Aristotle, Lib. 7. cap. 16. How man and woman should
ma^ry after Arist.
in his Politiques, they should so marry tha^ both the man and the woman might
leave procreation at one time, the one to get children, and the other to bring
forth. Which would easily come to pass, if the man were about eight and thirty
years of age, when he married, and the woman about eighteen for the ability
of getting children in the most part of men cease at seventy years, and the
possibility of conception in women commonly cease about fifty* So the man and
the woman should have like time for generation and conception. But this rule of
Aristotle is not observed of us in England, nor else where now adays, that I
wot of, but rather the liberty of the civil Law put in practice, that the
woman at twelve years of age, and the man at fourteen, are marriageable,
Ra^he marriage is the cause why men be now of less stature then they have
been before time.
which thing is the cause that men and women in these days, are both weak of
body, and small of stature: yea in respect of those that lived but forty years
ago in this land: much more then in comparison of the ancient inhabitants of
Britain, who for their talenesse of stature were called Giants. Which thing
also is noted by Aristotle in the same place. Est adolescentium coniunctio,
improba ad filiorum procreationem. In cunctis enim animalibus, iuveniles partus
imperfecti sunt: and faeminae crebrius quam mares, and parva corporis forma
gignuntur: quocirca necessa est ho^ idem in hominibus evenire. Hujus autem
coniectura fuerit, quod in quibuscunque civitatibus consuetudo est,
adolescentes mares puellasque coniugari, in iisdem inutilia, and pusilla
hominum corpora exist^nt. And the best time of the year to marry in after
Aristotle, What time of the year is best to marry in.
is the winter season: because in the summer time natural heat is dispersed,
and digestion feeble: But contrariwise in winter, by reason of the cold
without, closing up the pores of the skin, natural heat is made stronger
and digestion better, and thereby the body is more able for generation. The same
reason may serve also for the spring of the year, and I think that the better
time of both, for that crescite and multiplicamini, is then in greatest force.
But Diogenes was of another mind: for to one demanding when best season were
to wed a wife, Diogenes opinion concerning the time of marriage.
for a young man (quoth he) it is too soon, and for an old man overlate. So
that no time by his judgment was fit for that purpose. But Diogenes was (...),
being moved peradventure with that reason which ^ias, one of the seven wise men
of Greece made against marriage. Bias argument against marriage out of Aulus.
Gel. lib. 5. (...). 11. Socrates wife.
Non est ducendauxor, nam si fo^mosam duxe^is, hab^bis commu^e m^sin deformem,
moles^am, or else was afraid lest he should have as ill lu^ke as Socrates had
in marriage, whose wife Xantip had all properties of a shrew, videlicet ware a
kerchiefe, had a long nose and a longer tongue. But if Diogenes, or that Timon
of Athens, who was for his hatred of mankind named (...), had used the company
of a woman, perchance he would have thought as the Hermit did, whom P^ggius
the Florentine montioneth in his fabl^s, A Hermits repen^ance.
who by the advice of his Physicians, having used the company of a woman for a
certain disease which he had, not otherwise to be cured, when he had done,
fell a weeping. And being demanded why he wept, considering that it was done
for his heal^h sake, and not for any voluptuousness, tha^ God would easily
forgive it: No no (quoth the Hermit) I weep not for that cause, but I weep
because I never felt how sweet a woman was before this time. But if that Hermit
had so small experience in Venus Court, yet I think many others of the same
profession were better practiced. As John ^^le in his Chronicle merrily
tells, how that at York the Monks of Saint Mary Abbey, and the Nuns of
Olement Thorpe, m^t together at ^hey making, the Abbots fool being with them.
A merry battle between Monks and Nuns.
And as the Abbots enquired of him at supper for pastime where he had been
all that day, he fell into a great laughter, and declared before all the Abbots
guests, that a sore battle had been fought that afternoon, betwixt his
Monks, and the Nuns of Clement Thorpe. Nuns.
But he thanked God that his monks had the best, for they were ever aloft.
Such battles (I doubt) were fought very often, by those that had made a vow
to the contrary. But if the Law of God had then prevailed, or might now
prevail among us, which punishes adultery with death, and simple fornication
by dowry and recompense of marriage, Levit. cap. 20. ver. 20.
both they would have been, and we should be more fearful to offend in
that behalf; or if the Law of Justinian were in force, Quae temeratores
alienarum nuptiarum gladi^ ^unit, and poenam irrogat stupra^oribus, si honesti
sunt, I^sti^ lib. ^. Titulo. 18. leg. 2.
publicationem partis dimidiae bonorum: si humilesecorporis c^ertionem cum
relegatione. And until some streighter punishment be ordained, that sin will
never be reformed. For standing up in a sheet is not much greater punishment
than the Nun was enjoined to, The Nuns penance.
that had trodden her shoe awry, videlicet, that she should say every day the
first verse of the 55. Psalm, Misere mei Deus, quoniam conculcavit me homo,
with great threatening, that if she should do so again, she should be bound to
say over the whole Psalm. But such fleabitings as these will not restrain us
from that sin, whereunto we are so prone by nature, except we have this
continually before our eyes, that our bodies are the members of Christ, that
they are the temples of the holy Ghost, consecrated to God, 1 Cor. 6.15. 1 Co^.
6 13.19. Ephe. 4.^. 1 Cor. 6.18.
and not unto fornication, and therefore that we will keep the vessels of our
bodies in holiness and honor, to the end God may be glorified thereby, as S.
Paul wills us, and for them which cannot live chaste otherwise, God of his
goodness has appointed the holy estate of matrimony, from the which none was
exempted, except he will himself. 1 Cor. 7.12.
But yet as Saint Paul says, it were good for a man not to touch a woman:
Because marriage, through man's corruption* and not by Gods institution,
brings cares and troubles. And for this difficulty (as I suppose) Metellus
Numidicu^ a Censor of Rome, Aulus Gel. l. 1. cap. 6.
making an exhortation to the people to move them to marry, because the city
could not otherwise be preserved, used this reason, which may seem as well
against marriage, as with it, Si sine ^xore possemus esse, omnes ea molestia
careremus. Sed quoniam ita natura tradidit, Metel^us argument to persuade
marriage
ut nec cum illis satis commode, nec sine ^ltis ullo modo vivipossit saluti
perpetuae potius, quam brevi voluptati consulendum. And for this cause (as I
think) Aristotle counts a woman Necessarium malum. Necessary, because a man
cannot be well without her: Evil, because women are commonly shrewd. Howbeit
(as I have heard say) there is but one shrew in all the world, but every man
thinks he has that one. As old Laches in Terence says, a man of great
experience, In eo^^m omnes mihi vide^ter ludodoctae ad malitiam, H^ci. act. 1.
S^. 1.
and ei ludo (si ullus est) magistram hano esse satiscerto scio, meaning his
own wife. But if any have so ill luck as to marry a shrew, let him learn
this lesson of Marcus Varro, Vitium ^xoris au^ tollendum, Au. gel. lib. 1. cap.
17. Varro his counsel how to deal with a shrewd wife.
aut ferendum est. Qui toll^t vitium, ux^rem cummodiorem praestat, qui fert,
sese meli^rem facit. This then is Varro his counsel, Vitiam ux^ris si corrigi
non p^ssit, ferendum esse. And this was the best remedy that Socrates had
against Xantippe. And this was the only help that Job had in all his
afflictions, therefore let no married man look to speed better, for he that
will not marry a shrew, must marry when the sign is not in Coelo. Under what
sign a man man avoid the marriage of a shrew.
And now to such as be married, to whom God has granted the liberty of Venus,
I say, I^primis provideant, ut ne quid nimis. And ne quid nimis after Arnoldus
is expounded in this manner: The right use of Venus stands in three points.
Quidam dixerunt quod vti coitu semel in hebdomada satis est: Alij bi^, alij
ter, and hoc concordo, and si homo ulterius procedat, ille coitus est
immoderatus. But how ( Concordo) is here to be applied, I refer it to every
man's own discretion. The second caution in Venus is: Vt non a cibo statim, and
ante somnum sed cibo jam confecto, ac jam fere sub auroram Venere ^tantur, and
mox se iterum somno and quieti dent. Tum ^t aestate, praesertim vero Iunij and
Iulij mensibus, vel nunquam vel raro Autum^o etiam parceac sobrie coeant. Hieme
vero and maxim vere liberius. Tutissima enim est Venus temporibus and naturis
calidis simul and humidis, hoc est vere ac iuventute. But these precepts, and
all other before given, must be applied particularly to every man's own
estate, or constitution of b^dy. AEthi. 5. cap. 10.
For as Aristotle speaks of Laws, Because they be general, therefore they
cannot provide for every particular case that may fall out, yet is there no
fault in the Law, nor Law maker, but in the uncertainety of matters, which be
altogether casual and variable. So I say, notwith^tanding that every rule
prescribed in this book, cannot agree with every man's complexion, yet the
rules, are not to be disallowed, but to be followed accordingly as every man
shall find them good and wholesome in himself. And this is the best Physic
of all for every man, to know thoroughly the state of his own body, and to mark
diligently what things are wont either to do him good or harm, which also is
given out by Tully in this manner, Valetudo sustentatur notitia sui corporis,
Ossi. 2. in sine. Tullies Physic.
and observatione quae res aut prodesse soleant aut obesse, and continentia in
victu omni atque cultu, corporis tuendi causa, and praetermittendis
voluptatibus: postremo art ^orum quorum ad scientiam haec pertinent. And the
same likewise is taught by Galen himself, Lib. 6 de Sa. ^u. cap. 14. Galens
counsel to every man touching the observation of his own body.
which I will add as a conclusion of this work, even as he has made it the
end of those excellent books. His words be these, Omnibus qui haec legent,
communiter illud suasum velim: praesertim qui tamet si medicinae artis sunt
ignari, cogitationem tamen habent exercitatam, ne veluti vulgus, ita ipsi
quoque pecorum ritu, victus ratione utantur, quin potius usum explorent quinam
ipsis cibus, potusve sit noxius, quae praetorea quantaque dimotio. Pari modo
and de Venere observent, number noxia sibi innoxiave sit: tum ex quanto intervallo
utentibus, noxia innoxiave sit: Nam sicut retuli, non nulli immodice laeduntur,
alij citra noxam usui ejus ad senium usque su^ficiunt. Verum haec ambo genera
rara, nempe eorum qui magnopere laeduntur, and qui nullum sentiunt incommodum.
Totum vero quod in medio est, id cum majoris minorisque discrimine, ad magnum
hominum numerum se extendit: quorum qui non rudes sunt, sed ratione probe
exercitata* (non enim quorum libet est haec noscere) iis suadeo observent ex
quibus laedi se iuvarique sentiant, The authors physic to preserve health
very good for a choleric stomach. The quantity of Aloes was a quarter of an
ounce.
ita enim fiet, vt in paucissimis medicorum opera indigeant, quoad in sanitate
sunt. Hereunto I will add that Physic which I my self was won^ to use for
preservation of my health. Every year in the spring when the sign was in
Pisces, I took two mornings together Aloes Hepatike, shaven with a knife into
half a pint of white wine, or Beer, or Ale, with a little Cinnamon grated,
fasting two hours after it, and the third morning I took seven leaves of
Assarabacc^ a little punned and steeped all night in like quantity of white
wine, with a little Cinnamon, then strained and warmed.

A SHORT TREATISE OF the Plague, and other like contagious diseases, how they
may be avoided.
CHAP. 243.
AS I have declared (according to my knowledge) the whole order of dye^,
contained in those five things which chiefly concern man's life, that is to
say: Labor, Meat, Drink, Sleep, and Venus, so now also for the benefit of
students, (whose health I tender most of all) I shall briefly and plainly set
forth, by what ways and means they may avoid such diseases as be contagious:
namely the pestilence, which was twice in Oxford in my time within twelve
years, being brought from London both times: once by clothes, and another time
by lodging of a stranger, and after dispersed throughout the city, by
receiving of bedding and other clothes from the places infected. This disease
of all other; is common to all men of all complections, (as Aristotle teaches,
Proble. Sect. 1. quaest. 7.
) because the air compasses all men about, and is drawn into all men's bodies
alike, which if it be corrupt, must needs infect them also that receive it,
though sooner or later, more or less, according to the disposition or state of
the body: for as Galen writes: Magnam in generatione aegritudinum partem habet
ejus qui passurus est habilitas corporis. And again: Li. 1. de diff. ^e. cap.
4.
Nulla causa sine patientis aptitudine agere potest. The pestilence is defined
of Marsil^us Ficinus, Venenosus quidam vapor in a^re concretus, Epid. an. cap.
1. What the pestilence is.
vitali inimic^s spiritui. Not that the air is venomous of it self, but
through corruption has now gotten such a quality or property, that being
drawn into man's body, it inflameth the humors, especially, where they be
superfluous, and brings them to a venomous temperature. And this is called
febris Pestilentialis: as Fuchsius defines: Quod a venenata qualitate adeo a
Pestilentialis ac venenati aeris inspiratione oriatur. Ins^i. lib. 3. Sect. 1.
ca. 10.
Now the reason why the air is more corrupt at one time than at another, or in
one place rather than in another, is diversely assigned by the Astronomers and
Physicians: Four causes of the Pestilence.
and is imputed both to celestial causes and terrestrial, which be specially
four, videlicet: The influence of sundry stars, great standing waters never
refreshed, Carraine lying long above ground, much people in small room, living
uncleanely and sluttishly. But leaving those particular causes to such as write
of this matter at large, I make one principal or general cause, that is the
wrath of God for sin: for so God threatens, Exodus 15.2^. Deuteronomy. 28, 35.
That he will send sickness and diseases unto those that will not hear his
word, and disobey his commandments. Which came to pass evidently in the time
of King David, when 70 thousand perished with the Pestilence in one day. Sam.
24.15. The first remedy to be used against the plague. Eccles. 38.9.
Wherefore if Plague and sickness be Gods punishment (as they be indeed)
then first of all we ought to have recourse unto God by prayer, as Jesus
Syrach counsaileth us. My son, fail not in thy sickness, but pray unto the
Lord, and he will make thee whole. And next we ought to use those means for
recovery of health, The second preservative. ver. 4*
which God has ordained. For as it is said in the same Chapter: The Lord has
created Medicines of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them. Now
the chief remedy for the Plague, to preserve from infection, is to avoid the
infected air. For as much as the Plague does come of corruption of the air,
(as I have showed before:) and if you may not, or will not avoid it: (for some
of necessity must still remain in the place where the Plague is,) then the
remedy stands in correcting and purifying of the air, The third preservative
and in taking such things into the body, as may strengthen the heart and
vital spirits, thereby to make them able to withstand the poyso^. And in those
three points shall this treatise be absolved. As for the cure of such as be
infected with the Plague, or visited with any other sort of sickness, I refer
it to the discretion and knowledge of the learned Physicians and expert
Chirurgians. The first way then of preservation from the Plague, is, with speed
to go far from the place infected, and there to remain until all the
infection be past. This remedy is merrily termed of Iordanus a late writer: The
electuary of three adverb^.
Electuarium etribus adverb^is, which in Latin verse he reports thus: Haec
tria tabificam pellunt adverbia pestem,
Mox, long, tarde, cede, recede, redi.


In prose as much to say, as Fuge cito, Procul, ac tarde revertaris. Fly
quickly from the place infected, Cito fugere quid.
abide far off, and return not soon again. Cito fugere, is expounded by
Marsilius Ficinus, Epide. (...) cap. 25.
to depart away as soon as any certain signs of the Plague do appear. Now
the signs of the Plague to come (as he says) are, Signs of the plague to
come.
where the air of that place varieth from his natural temperature, declining
to heat and moisture, when it seems clowdy and dusty: When the Winds are
gross and hot: when the Waters and fields smoke and smell: and the fishes are
ill both in savor and taste: When many Worms breed of putrefaction of the
earth: Toadestooles and rotten herbs abound: The fruits and beasts of the earth
are unsavory: The winds become muddy: Many birds and beasts fly from that
place, strange Agues arise, raging continual, burning, phrantike, when the
small Pocks, and Measels are rife, and worms abound in children and old
folks: when many women are delivered before their time. Finally, when cruel
wars and monsters against nature, or such like strange things do appear.
But this I refer to every man's own providence to be directed herein by the advice of the Phisician. Procul fugere, Procul fugere quid?
is to fly to those places where neither the things, neither the people, nor
the noise, nor any rumors, of the place infected may come. And so to be
separated that high mountains be between, whereby the venomous vapors may
be let, lest by blowing of the wind, or dilatation of the air, they
approach unto us. And here we are to consider the disposition and situation of
the place we go unto, that in no respect it be like the infected air in heat,
What is to be observed in changing of the air.
cold, moisture, dryness, in clouds, rain, winds and such like: for this
policy is of effect, not only in the Plague, but in all other diseases, which
we seek to amend by change of the air. For if we remove to a like air, it
will rather increase the sickness than remedy it. And so says Aristotle,
where he moves the question: Proble. Sect. 1. quast. 3.
Cur temporum statuumque mutationes morbos intendant, tollantue, ^udicent, vel
committant: for so he answers: Quod si per humidam frigidamve materiam
morbus constiterit, tempus accedens contrarium tollere illum po^^^it^, sed si
minus contrarium subsecu^^m sit, sed similis status temporis* supervenerit,
intende^ sane atque in^erimet. Wherefore, we must not only remove from the
place infected, but we must so remove, that we change the air as well as the
place, according to the Latin Proverb: Ita fugias no praeter casam. Tarde
reverti quid sit.
The third point of preservation is: Tarde reverti. That is, to take good heed
that we return not until all be clear at home: for they that come out of a
pure air into a corrupt air, are in greater danger than they that never fled
away, and less occasion may infect them, because Nature may better endure that
which is usual, than abide any sudden or new alteration. Neither is the air
to be judged sound as soon as the Plague cease, but a time is* requisite
for the purifying of the air, which after Marsilius, is at the least one
quarter of a year. AEpide^anti. ^. 2^.
So that if none have dyed of the plague in three months before, then we may
think the air sufficiently purged. Yet must we be circumspect in approaching
to the persons who have had the plague, and much more in entering into the
houses that have bin infected: and most of all in touching the clothes of those
persons or places where the plague has been. For these things retain the
infection longer than the air it self. How long the infection remains in
the body, in the houses and clothes
For in those persons that have bin infected, the poison remains the space of
two months. The houses and the household stuff, unless they be purified with
fire, perfumes, washings, and such like, keep their venom for the space of a
year or more. The clothes especially of woollen, except they be washed, fumed,
aired, and laid forth oftentimes in the wind and Sun, continue contagious
by the space of three years, and more. For as oil feeds the fire, so wool
above all things fostereth this infection, and does not only preserve it, but
increase it and fortify it, which in my time in Oxford was proved most true,
The plague brought to Oxford and dispersed there by woollen clothes.
for both the plague was brought from London thither by woollen clothes, and was
set abroad in the town through buying, and selling, and receiving of bedding,
and other furniture infected. Let this therefore be a warning. Nam scitum est
periculum ex aliis facere. But against this counsel of departing away from the
place infected, many that otherwise be wise, and discreet, and of good
judgment, do vehemently inveigh, saying: that either it is needless or
bootlesse to shun the plague. Needless, because God may preserve us as well
present as absent: Bootlesse, because God may strike us as well absent as
present. And upon this presumption, many, specially in London and other Cities
where the Plague chances, oftentime do not only refuse to avoyde the place,
but not so much as to forgo the house or persons infected, no more than they
would do in any other sickness whatsoever; nay some are so fantastical,
that they will deride and mock at those that seem more fearful or
circumspect than they themselves be. Whether it be lawful to fly from the
plague.
But against this presumption (for so I may worthily call it because it is
grounded upon Gods power, and not upon Gods will) I will first use that reason
which Leonhartus Fuchsius brings for the same purpose. Insti. li. 2. Sect. 1.
cap. 2.
It is lawful for Christians to use Physic as the gift of God in all
diseases, either to prevent them, or to cure them: but the chiefest means to
prevent the plague is to avoid the place infected, Ergo it is lawful for
Christians upon such occasion to change their habitation. The mayor is proved
sufficiently in Ecclesiasticus. And I think no man doubts that God has
created both physic and the Physician for the help, cap. 38.
comfort, and succor of mankind in sickness. The minor is approved by the
general consent of all physicians of all ages, and is grounded upon this
reason taken of experience, for that the more part of them which tarry in the
corrupt air be infected with the plague, and they which flee from it do
escape. As for the reason before alleged may serve as well for departing as
abiding. For so I reply, it is needless to abide in the place where the plague
is, because God may preserve us as well absent as present. Nay God will rather
preserve us if we absent our selves, even as he preserved Abraham, Genesis 12.10.
who to avoid the famine in the land of Canaan, went down into Egypt. For why
should it be more lawful to flee from famine than from the pestilence, seeing
that it is likewise Gods punishment for sin, and God is as well able to
deliver us in the one as in the other? Christ himself flees into Egypt, to
avoid the tyranny of Herod, and wills his Apostles, Math. 2.14.
if they be persecuted in one City to fly into another. What means this but
that it is lawful for Christians, Math. 10.23.
(so far as may stand with the glory of God) fugere a ventura ira, as John
the Baptist speaks? Hezekiah was sick unto death, Matthew. 3.7.
(as it may seem of the plague,) and the Prophet Isai^b caused a lump of dry
figs to be laid on a bile which he had, and so he recovered. Kings ^.7.
Old Tobias was restored to his sight with the gall of a fish, which his son
did on his eyes, by the advice of the Angel Raphael. Tob. 11.13.
Christ our Savior heals him that was borne blind, with his spittle. What
means this, Mark. 8.22.
but that God although he can preserve us and heal us; without other means
and medicines: yet that he will not have these inferior means contemned?
What folly then, nay what madness is in them that so presume of Gods power
that they neglect and despise those ordinary and necessary means, which GOD
has ordained, much like the Carter in Aesope, who perceiving his cart to
stick fast in the mire, whipped not his horses, nor set not his shoulders to
the wheels to lift them out, but fell down straight upon his knees, and made
his prayers to Jupiter to help out his cart: to whom answer was made from
heaven: thou fool whip thy horses, and lift thy self at the wheels, and then
Jupiter will help thee, as much to say: as Iuva temet (inquiunt) ipse tum
iuvabit te Deus. The whole world, as it was created by God, so is it governed
and preserved continually by his power. Yet it is done by means, the Sun and
the Moon, and the Stars are set in the firmament to shine upon the earth.
The earth is to bring forth fruit for the use of man. The fowls of the air,
the fishes of the Sea, the beasts of the field, are subject to man. Kingdoms,
Nations, and countries, are ruled by Princes and other Magistrates. And shall
we think that man whom God has created a most excellent creature, and for
whose cause all things else were created, is destitute of means to preserve
himself, so long as God will prolong his life? Vain therefore is that Goddess
of the Stoics called in Greek (...) or (...), What Fatum is. Au. Gel. lib. 6.
c. 2.
in Latin Fatum, in English Destiny, which Chrisippus defines Sempiterna
quaedam and indeclinabilis series rerum, and catena, voluens semet ipsa sese,
and implicans per aeternos consequentiae ordines, ex quibus apta connexaque
est. And vain is that argument against Physic, which the Stoickes urge, and
many foolish folks follow mentioned of Tully in his book de Fato. The Stoics
argument against Physic.
Videlicet, Si fatum tibi est ex hoc morbo convalescere, sive medicum
adhibueris, sive non, convalesces. Item si fatum tibi est, ex hoc morbo non
cavalescere, si tu medicum adhibueris, sive non, non convalesces. Et alterutrum
fatum est, medicum ergo adhibere nihil attinet. This kind of argument, although
it seem strong in many foolish folks fantasies, and utterly to take away the
use of physic and physicians, yet it is called by Tully in the same place,
Ignavum and Iners, quod eadem ratione (says he) omnis evita tolletur actio,
and is thus refuted, Sive tu adhibueris medicum, sive non adhibueris,
convalesces, captiosum: tam enim est fatale medicum adhibere, quam
convalescere. Much like as the Judge answered the thief, who alleged for
himself, that his destiny was to steal, and therefore he could not do
otherwise. Then said the Judge, as thy destiny was to steel, so is it my
destiny to hang thee. These kinds of copulative sentences, are called of
Chrisippus the Stoicke philosopher, Consatalia, because they be conjoined with
destiny, if there be any destiny at all. But the same argument is somewhat
otherwise answered by a Simile of that great Doctor Origines, in this manner:
Lib. 2. contra Celsum.
Si praestitutum est ut suscipias liberos, sive cum faemina congr^diaris, sive
minus, liberos susscepturus es. At si praestitutum est ut liberos nullos
suscipias, sive cum muliere coiveris, sive minus, liberos nequaquam suscipies.
Frustra ergo cum muliere coiueris. Quemadmodum enim in hac ipsa re, quia fieri
non potest, ut qui cum muliere non coeat, suscipiat liberos, haudquaquam
frustra assumitur, ut cum mulieribus coeat, ita ut a morbo quis sublevetur, cum
id medicae artis interventu efficitur, necessario admittitur medicus, and
falsum esse deprehenditur* frustra medicum introducis. So this famous Clerk
Origin judges physic no less necessary in sickness, for the recovery of
health, than a woman is for the begetting of children. But these Stoicall
Christians do utterly deny this, saying: that many escape in sickness that
use no physic at all. To whom I may answer, as the Philosopher Diagoras did,
Diagoras.
who was called (...), because he thought the Gods had no care of worldly
things, who being advertised by a friend of his, that many by prayers made to
the Gods, had escaped the force of tempests, and came safe to the shore, which
thing he would prove by a painted table, wherein their pictures were set forth.
Ita sit (inquit) illi enim nunquam picti sunt, qui nanfragium fecerunt, in
marique perierunt. Even so I say, that as many have escaped, and do escape in
sickness without physic, so many have dyed, and do dye for want of
Physic. For I think there is none so blind, or so impudent, The necessity
of Physic.
but will grant that a plurifie is present death without blood letting. Yea the
yellow Iaundise, which is a very common disease, as is proved by experience, at
length brings death if it be not helped by medicines. As for the worms in
children, and old folks too, how dangerous they be, I refer it to every man's
own judgment. Wounds and sores without salves, corrupt the sound members, and
finally bring the whole body to destruction. Wherefore Physic is absolutely
necessary, in some cases. Yet I grant that light diseases may be cured without
any physic by the only benefit of nature, yet in the lightest disease that
happens, if some physic be used, it is not unprofitable, but to nature
very comfortable. But if the sickness be great* and nature sore oppressed,
then physic is necessary to assist and to aid nature, whereby she may the
better overcome her enemy. And so it comes to pass that the physician
cures, Cooperante eo quod in nobit adhuc s^num est nutriendi principio, Lib.
7. Ethi. ca. ult.
as Aristotle teaches, or as others say, Adi^vante natura: for otherwise
physic prevails not, as Cornelius Celsus writes. Natura repugnante nihil
medicina proficit, Lib. 3.
when nature will no longer work, then farewell physic, and carry him to the
Church. And much less does it prevail if God be against it. For (as Fuchsius
that famous physician writes, Medicorum est conatus, at Dei aeterni
gubernatoris est oventus. But if God first and nature next do work with the
medicine, then no doubt shall that notable effect come to pass, which is more
to be desired than gold or precious stones, that is to say, health. So physic
if it be rightly used is profitable in all diseases, and so necessary in many,
that without it, life cannot be preserved. Vain therefore is their fantasy
that think it ungodly to flee from the place where the plague is, and to use
the help of physic in their infirmities. I have been somewhat longer in
this digression, for that it was my hap to live in a country, where a great
number were carried away with that heresy of the Stoics, that they thought
physic of no force, and of less value, yet would they visit the physician
sometime with the urine, marry with this Dilemma, that if the patient were like
to live, then would they be at no cost, but let nature work: And if the
patient were like to dye, then would they be at no cost, because it were but
vain. So Parcatur sumptui, made no Doctor to live in that country. But let
them go with their desperate destiny, and let me return to the second way of
preservation from the pestilence, which consists in correcting and purifying
of the air, wherein we continue: The second way of preservation from the
plague.
if there be no remedy but needs you must or will abide where the plague is,
then first of all humble your self before God, and desire of him mercy and
forgiveness of your sins: And if it be his will, that he will vouchsafe to
preserve and defend you from all infection. And if his will be otherwise, yet
that you are willing to abide his visitation patiently and readily (if his good
pleasure be so) to depart out of this wicked world. That done, have always in
mind, and practice in your life, this short lesson following: Aer, esca,
quies, repletio, gaudia, somnus,
Haec moderata iuvant, immoderata noceut.
Air, labor, food, repletion,
Sleep, and passions of the mind,
Both much and little, hurt a like,
Best is the mean to find.


For in these six points as it were in so many lute strings rests the whole
harmony of man's life, Wherein moderation bears the burden of the song. Which
if it be not kept, but that excess be taken in any one of them, there must
needs follow great disturbance in our bodies. Nam omne nimium naturae inimicum.
Hip. Apho. 51. lib. 2.
Wherefore you must avoid all excess and superfluity, specially in eating and
drinking, sleeping and waking, in travail and women, and seek by all means to
maintain and keep your natural and accustomed evacuation, and to be merry
and pleasant, following herein the example of Socrates, who by his continency
and good order of diet, escaped the plague at Athens, never avoiding the City,
nor the company of the infected, when as the greatest part of the City was
consumed. And touching the air, first look that the house wherein you dwell
be kept clean and sweet, and all things in it as neat as may be. Open not
your windows toward the West or South, but toward the East or North. And come
not forth of your house until an hour or two after the Sun rising, and take
your house again as long before the sun setting. And it shall be good,
specially at night and in the morning, to perfume your house or chamber with
frankinscense, or Juniper, or storax Calamita, or Ladanum, or if you will not
be at cost, with dried Rosemary, or as poor folks use to do in great towns,
with rushes or broom, or hey laid upon a chafing dish and coals, and the
windows and doors being close shut up for the time. Or to heat a brick or
slate stone in the fire, and when it is hot, to take it out, and pour vinegar
upon it, and to receive the fume with open mouth. But among all things that
purify the air, either within the house or without, none is better than fire:
for fire by nature does consume corruption: Fire is a special pres^rvative
against the plague. L^b. de pest.
and as Holerius says: Inspiratus halitus ignis, est antidotus contra pestem
et putredin^^. And it is well known how that Hippocrates delivered the City of
Athens from a great Plague, only by causing many great fires to be made in
sundry places within the City and round about it. Wherefore it shall be good to
make fires oftentimes in your chambers, hals, courts, or streets. And if you
list, you may cast into the fires, Juniper, Bays, Rosemary, Spike, Fur or
Cypress wood, and such like. The third and last point of preservation from the
Plague, is to use such things as do resist poison, The third point of
preservation.
and do fortify the heart and vital spirits. For this venomous vapor which
breeds the Pestilence in men's bodies, is conveyed together with the air or
breath, first to the Lungs or Lights, and from thence by the Arteriavenosa to
the heart, How the co^rupt air ^oth infect our bodies.
which is the fountain of life: from whence it is derived and dispersed by the
veins and arteries into all parts of the body. And first it assaulteth the
spirits: next the humors: and lastly, the very firm substance of the whole
body. And after it has once possessed the body, the force of it is such, that
commonly within three or four days it grows to extremity, and sometime
sooner, if the body abound with superfluous humors, chiefly with choler and
blood. What complexion is soonest infected with the plague.
For the Sanguine sort are soonest taken with this infection, and next to them
the Choleric, thirdly the flegmaticke: and last of all, the Melancholic:
because the cold and dry humor is the least apt to inflammation, and
putrefaction: for that the conduits be strait, by which the poison should
pass. And this is the reason why youth, which represents the Sanguine
complexion: and middle age, which represents the choleric: and women,
which represent the flegmaticke complexion are sooner infected than the aged
sort, which represent the Melancholic complexion. Howbeit sometime, if the
pestilence be outrageous, it spares no complexion, nor no age, as it came to
pass in my time in Oxford, when as diverse old folks, men and women above 70.
years old dyed of the plague. But now to arm the heart against this
infection, when you have occasion to go forth of the house, having first eaten
or drunken some what, for it is not good to go forth with empty veins or else
having received a fume, What is to be done when we go forth to avoid infection
(as is before said) you shall put into your mouth a Clove or two, or a little
Cinamome, or a piece of Setwall, or of an Orange pill, or best of all, a piece
of the root of Angelica, or Elecampane, and take in your hand an Orange, or a
posie of Rue, or Mynt; or Balm: Or else carry with you a handkerchiefe, or
sponge drenched in white Vinegar of Roses, if you can get it, if not in common
Vinegar, especially white. But if you would make a perfect mixture, and passing
for this purpose, you shall take Rose water, white Rosevineger, strong white
Wine or Maluasie of each like much, and spice it well with Saffron or Setwall,
An excellent lotion against the pestilence
made in powder, or the powder of Orange pills, and drench a linen cloth or
sponge therein, and carry it about with you. And if you wash your face and
hands in the same, and drink a little thereof, it will do the better. And for
the better strengthening of the inward parts against all infection, you may
easily compound this mixture following, which is highly commended by Marsilius
Ficinus. Take of red Sanders half an ounce, of chosen Cinnamon three drams and
half, of Saffron half a dram, all made in fine powder, which powder you may
spice your meats withal, at all times. And after meat it shall be very good
to use Coriander seeds prepared, and fasting also, after Avicen, who highly
commends them in this case. The common people, says Hollerius, use to steep
Elicampane roots in Vinegar, Lib. de peste.
and to lap them in a linen cloth, and to carry them about with them, smelling
to them oftentimes. Others before they go forth in a morning eat Garlike, and
drink a draught of new Ale after it, or good Wine. But Garlike is thought of
many to be rather hurtful than wholesome in the Plague, because it opens
the pores of the body too much, and so makes it more apt to receive infection.
But I read in the Secrets of Alexis, Lib. 1. fo. 39.
of a mavelous secret to preserve a man from the plague, which has been
proved in England of all the physicians in a great and vehement plague in the
year 1348. which crept throughout all the world, and there was never man that
used this secret but he was preserved from the plague, videlicet: An excellent
preservative for the plague.
Take Aloe Epaticum or Cicotrine, fine Cinamome, and Myrrh, of each of them
three drams, Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloe, Masticke, Bole Armenicke, of each of
them half a dram; let all these things be well stamped in a clean mortar,
then mingle them together, and after keep it in some close vessel, and take
of it every morning two penny weight in half a glass full of White Wine with
a little Water, and drink it in the morning at the dawning of the day. And so
may you (by the grace of God) go hardly into all infection of the air and
plague. Hitherto Alexis. But the prescriptions of preservatives for the plague,
I leave to the skill and experience of the learned physicians, whose advise in
this case is chiefly to be sought for and followed* Yet this much I dare say
by the authority of Galen, in his book de usu Theriacae ad Pamphilianum,
Epide. anti. cap. 6. The virtues of Triacle.
and by the judgment of Marsilius Ficinus, that no one medicine is better,
either to preserve from the plague, or to expel the venom from the principal
parts in such as be infected, than Triacle, and is not only good in the
plague, but also in all other poisons and noisome drinks: yea, and in the most
part of other diseases, as the Cough, the Cholicke, the Stone, the Palsy, the
Iaundise, the Ague, the Dropsy, the Leprosy, the Headache, for dull hearing,
for dimnesse of sight, to provoke appetite, to appease greedy desire, for
Melancholy, sadness and heaviness of the mind. Non enim corporis modo, sed
and animi morbos persanat, as Galen writes in the same book. So that it may
worthily be called Delphicus gladius, because it is profitable in an infinite
number of infirmities. And Galen in his book de Theriaca ad Pisonem,
confirms the same. And concerning the Plague, as well for the cure as for the
preservation, he declares upon the credit of Aelianus Meccius, a famous
Physician, and sometime his teacher, that in a great Plague in Italy, when all
other medicines prevailed not, after that by his advise they fell to the use of
Triacle, very few of them which were infected; Non modo periculum non evasisse,
sed ne in morbum quidem incidisse. Atque mirum hoc alicui videri non debet,
(says Galen) quando si haustum venenum superat, pestilentiam quoque vincere
possit. But it is not sufficient to know that Triacle is good for the Plague,
but we must also know how it is to be used. How Triacle should be used against
the Plague.
Wherefore Galen in the same place sets down the order how it is to be
taken, in this manner. It is given (says he) in three Cyathes, that is (as I
take it) about four ounces, that is, half a gill, or the fourth part of a
pint: it is given I say in a draught of wine the bigness of an Hasill nut,
as well after poison, or after the stinging of venemons worms as before, if a
man suspect any such matter: and after the same manner it is given to them, who
for an outward cause or an inward pine away, as if they were poisoned. So the
quantity of Triacle is the bigness of an Hasill nut, and sometime the bigness
of an Egyptian bean, and the quantity of drink to receive it in, is, How much
drink and how much Triacle should be taken at a time. Epi. anti. cap. ^.
Ex aquae vel diluti vini cyathis neque pluribus tribus, neque pa^cioribus
duobus. And the best time to take it in, is, Primo mane, except it be after
poison, for then it is to be taken as occasion requires. But Marsilius Ficinus
shows more particularly the use of Triacle, saying: Necessaria nobis est bis
in hebdomada, ipsa omnium compositionum regina, caelitus que tradita Theriaca.
Accipiatur post cibum horis novem, and ante cibum horis sex vel septem. Qui eam
sumere non potest, saltem cordi apponat and stomacho nasoque and pulsibus:
frequentius detur dram una provectis, aliis vero dram dimidia, seu
scrupulus unus, Qui calidae sunt temperaturae, bibant aestivo tempore sumpta
Theria^a tertiam partem cyphi aquae rosarum cum modico acetirosati, alii
scilicet alterius complectionis, and alio tempore, sumant cum vino albo
permisto cum aqua Scabiosae aut Melissae. Quod si Theriaca non affuerit, vel
non competens fuerit tuae naturae, sum Mithridatum. Hitherto Ficinus. But here
some doubt may arise: whether or no our Triacle, which now we have in use among
us commonly, called Triacle of Gean, has the virtues aforesaid against Plague,
Poison, etc. Herein to speak what I think, I think verily that it has not,
except othermen can come by better than I have seen: for they make it not now
as it was made in Galens time, the composition whereof is set forth, even in
the same order that Galen himself made it for the Emperor Aurelius Antoninus.
Lib. 1. de Anti. cap. 2.
For as it appears by Galen in that place, that Emperor, as others also
before time, used every day to take Triacle the bigness of a bean, sometime
without water or wine, and sometime mixing it with some liquour, thereby to
preserve himself from poison. Like as king Mithridates did his composition,
bearing his own name: by the daily use whereof, his nature was so fortified
against poison, that when he would have poisoned himself, rather than to fall
into the power of the Romans, he could by no means bring it to pass. But the
receipt which so strengthened Mithridates was not the same which Pompeius after
he had vanquished him, Two sorts of Mithridatum.
found in his Sanctuary having this title, A nullo veneno laedetur, qui hac
antidotoutetur: which Serenus writes in this manner: Bis denum rutae folium,
salis and breve granum,
Iuglandesque dua^ totidem cum corporeficus,
Haec orient die p^uco conspersa lyaeo,
Sumebat metuens dederat quae pocula matter.


But it was that noble confection, which as yet is called Mithridatium in
Latin, in English Mithridate, which because it draws nearest to the ancient
Triacle, by mine advise shall be used instead of Triacle against the Plague,
How to ^ry Triacle whether it be good or not.
and other diseases before rehearsed. And if any man have Triacle which he
thinks perfect, and would feign prove whether or no it be so indeed, then let
him use this experiment of Galen written in his book de usu Theriacae ad
Pamphilianum. Medicinam quae vel alvum subducat, vel vomere faci^t, Scammonium
aut Elleborum, vel quid^is aliud hisce etiam valentius exhibe, perinde atque si
aliquem purgare velles: huic postea bibendum trade tantum theriacae quantum
graecam fabam aequet. Si bona erit, non solum non purgabitur qui assumpsit, sed
ne commotionem quidem u^lam sentiet. Sin contrarium eveniet, vetustate
deprehendes antidoto vires concidisse. And this much concerning strengthening
of the heart against all infection. More you may read for the same purpose in
their proper places, in the treatise of herbs, where I spoke of Sorrel, of
Rue, of Germander, of Burnet, of Dragons, of Angelica, of Walnuts, etc.

Of the sickness at Oxford.
ANd now that I have given mine advise to Students touching the Plague, I will
speak somewhat of other diseases near Cosins to the Plague, which have fallen
out as well in the Universities, as in the country abroad, and may do again
if Gods will be so. The chiefest of which, is that sickness which yet
bears the name of England, The sweating sickness is febris pestilentialis
diar^a.
and is called of foreign nations, Sudor Anglicus, the English sweat, or
sweating sickness (as we term it) A kind of Pestilence no doubt, and so is
it judged of Leonhartus Fuchsius, where he says in this manner: Insti. li. 3.
Sect. 1. Cap. 10.
Quod si venenata ac pernitiosa haec qualitas primum in spiritibus haeserit,
eosque devastaverit, ac corruperit, ^rit ^um febris, pestilentialis, Diaria*
quales fuere quae in lue illa, quam Sudorem Anglicum vocant, Anno 1529. per
universam Germaniam grassabantur. This sickness began first in England, The
swea^ing sickness three times in England.
Anno 1485. in the very first year of the reign of King Henry the seventh,
and was again renewed Anno 1528. in the twentieth year of King Henry the
eight, and sprang the third time, Anno 1551 in the fifth year of King Edward
the sixth. So that three times England has been plagued therewith to the
great destruction and mortality of the people, Cooper in regno Henrici. 8.
and not England only, but Germany also, and Flanders, and Brabant, insomuch
that at Antwerpe there dyed of the sweat in three days space five hundred
persons. And in London and in the suburbs, there dyed in the same disease in
manner within six days space, in the fifth year of Edward the sixth, eight
hundred persons, and most of them men in their best years. The manner of this
disease was such, that if men did take cold outwardly, it struck the sweat in,
and immediately killed them. If they were kept very close and with many clothes,
it stifeled them and dissolved nature. If they were suffered to sleep,
commonly they swooned in their sleep, and so departed, or else immediately
upon their waking. But at length by the study of physicians, and experience of
the people, driven thereto by dreadful necessity, there was a remedy invented
after this manner. If a man on the day time were taken with the sweat, Hall in
his Chronicle.
then he should straight lie down with all his clothes, and garments, The cure
of the sweating sickness.
and lie still the whole 24 hours. If in the night he were taken, then he
should not rise out of his bed for the space of 24 hours, and so cast the
clothes on him that he might in no wise provoke the sweat, but so lie
temperately, that the sweat might distll out softly of it own accord, and to
abstain from all meat, if he might so long sustain and suffer hunger, and to
take lukewarm drink, no more then would delay thirst, and withal to put
forth neither hand nor foot out of the bed, but to avoid cold in every part of
the body, and so continuing without sleep in a moderate sweat for 24. hours;
after that time to sleep and eat at pleasure, yet measurably for fear of
relaps, for some were taken thrice with this disease, and after the third time
dyed of the same. Which relaps happens likewise in the common Plague: for as
Ficinus writes of his own knowledge, Epid. anti. ca. 24.
that a Florentine who had been twice delivered of the plague, Tertio mortem
evadere non potuit. Wherefore, let no man think that if he have once escaped
the sweating sickness, or the pestilence, that he may not fall again into
the same disease. But some man will say, it is needless now to write of the
sweating sickness, because it neither is nor has been of long time. Whereto
I answer, that although it be not at this present (God be thanked therefore)
and God defend us from it always) yet by the judgment of some Astronomers,
namely Francis Keete a man very well learned in that art, in his Almanacke for
the year of our Lord God 1575, it was very like to have renewed in this our
Realm, for as much as the heavens then were in like order in a manner, as they
were at those times before, when that kind of disease so cruelly raged.
Wherein he erred not much, for both that year, and diverse years since, have
fallen out many strange and grievous sickenesses, and dangerous diseases, The
sickness at Oxford.
unknown to the most part of physicians, as that disease specially, which was
at Oxford at the assizes, anno 1577. and began the sixth day of July, from
which day to the twelfth day of August next ensuing, there dyed of the same
sickness five hundred and ten persons, all men and no women. The chefest of
which were, the two Judges, sir Robert Bell, Lord chief Baron, and master
Sergeant Baram, master Doile the high Sheriff, five of the Justices* four
counsailours at the law, and an atturny. The rest were of the iurers, and such
as repaired thither. All infected in a manner at one instant, by reason of a
dampe or mist which arose among the people within the Castle yard and court
house, caused as some thought, by a train and treachery of one Rowland Ienks
book binder of Oxford, there at that time arrained and condemned: But (as I
think) sent only by the will of God as a scourge for sin, showed chiefly
in that place, and at that great assembly, for example of the whole Realm:
that famous University, being as it were the fountain and eye that should give
knowledge and light to all England. Neither may the University of Cambridge in
this respect glory above Oxford, The like sickness at Cambridge that was at
Oxford
as though they had greater privilege from Gods wrath: for I read in Hales
Chronicle in the thirteenth year of King Henry the eight, that at the assise
kept at the Castle of Cambridge in Lent, anno 1522 the Justices and all the
gentlemen, Bailiffes, and other resorting thither, took such an infection that
many gentlemen and yeomen thereof dyed, and almost all which were there present
were sore sick and narrowly escaped with their lives: what kind of disease
this should be which was first at Cambridge and after at Oxford, it is very
hard to define, neither has any man that I know written of that matter. Yet my
judgment is, be it spoken without offense of the learned Physicians, that the
disease was Febris ardens, a burning fever. For as much as the signs of a
burning ague did manifestly appear in this disease, which after Hollerius be
these: De mo^. inter. lib. 2. de ^e. ar.
Extreme heat of the body, vehement thirst, lothing of meat, tossing to and
fro, and unquietness, dryness of the tongue rough and black, griping of the
belly, choleric laske, cruel ache of the head, no sound sleep or none at all,
raving and frenzy, the end whereof to life or death, is bleeding at the nose,
great vomitting, sweat or laske. And this kind of sickness is one of those
rods, and the most common rod, wherewith it pleases God to beat his people
for sin, as it appears in Leviticus. If ye will not do all my
commandments, but break my covenant, cap. 26.15* 16.
then will I also do this unto you: I will appoint over you fearfulness, a
consumption, and the burning ague to consume the eyes, etc. And likewise in
Deut^ronomy: cap. 8.12.
the Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with the fever, and with the
burning ague, and with fervent heat, etc. And this disease indeed, as it is
Gods messenger, and sometime Gods post, because it comes in post* haste,
and calls us quickly away, so is it commonly the pursivant of the
pestilence, and goes before it. For so Marsilius Ficinus notes saying: Sunt
nonnulla pestilentialis febris signa, Epi. an^i. cap. 4.
videlicet febris continua, absque ordinata and manifesta declinatione cum
magna anhelitus and pectoris angustia, cum repentina pulsus debilitate, cum
universi corporis gravamin^, praecipue capitis, phrenesi, anxietatibus, ardore,
siti, sanguineis v^^culis pluribus in locis, cum urina grossa and ^urbida,
qualis est iumentorum. And certainly after that sudden bane at Oxford, the
same year, and a year or two following, the same kind of agew raged in a
manner over all England, and took away very many of the strongest sort, and in
their lustiest age, and for the most part men and not women, nor children,
culling them out here and there, even as you would choose the best sheep out of
a flock. And certain remedy was none to be found. Nay it was with men as the
Poet Virgil describes in a murraine of beasts. Georg. lib. 3. in fine.


Quaesitaeque nocent arts, cessere magistri,
Phyllirides Chiron, Ami^thoniusque Melampus,
Saevit and in lucem stygiis emissa tenebris
Pallida Tisiphone, morbos agit ante, metumque
Inque dies avidum surgens caput altius effert.
Yet some Physicians attempted the common manner of curing used in hot agewes,
The common cure of hot agues.
that is to say, by purging of choler and letting of blood, and ministering
oftentimes cooling conserves, syrups, potions, broths, with cooling herbs and
such like. Which means notwithstanding took small effect in many. Nay at
length it came to pass, that such as were purged or let blood, rather dyed.
And they that took a moderate sweat at the beginning of their sickness, and
did rid their stomach well by vomit, sped much better. Yet thanks be to God,
hitherto no great plague has ensued upon it. But if it do (as I doubt it
will) unless we speedily repent, either the pestilence, or famine, or war,
or all three) I say if it do, then must we do as the Prophet David did, offer
a sacrifice unto the Lord, a contrite and humble heart: and say with the holy
Prophet. Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are great,
Samuel. 2.24.14.
and let us not fall into the hand of man. And I beseech God, that whenever
it shall please him to visit our offenses with his rod, and our sins with
scourges, that we may likewise escape the hand of man, and fall into the hand
of the Lord, to whom be all glory, praise, and honor for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
THE TABLE CONTAINING the principal points of the whole book in Alphabet
order, having relation to the page.
A
Air and the properties thereof. page 7. Anise and the nature thereof, Anise
seed comfitis and bread made with Anise. 51 Artichokes and the virtues of them.
63 Avens and their nature. 75 Alecoast, and how to make Ale therewith. 79
Angelica and how it is good for the pestilence, for shortness of wind, and
for an Impostume. 80 Also for biting of a mad dog, and for the Toothake. 81
Apples, and the difference of apples, raw apples and quod^ins. 100 How apples
may be eaten with least hu^t, cold apples for whom they are good a cold roasted
apple what it works. 101 The English use of eating apples, the best way to
e^t apples, apple tarts, how to preserve apples a long time. 101.102 Almonds,
almond milk how to be made, candles of almonds, and almond butter. 112
Abstinence and the commodities thereof. 212 What age is, and what difference in
age. 220 Of ale and beer. 249 The difference between ale and beer. 250 How
to know where the best Ale is. ead. Whether ale or beer be better. 251 A kind
of small Ale called at Oxford Sixteenes. ead. Eight properties of Ale and
beer. 251 Aqua vitae, and Aqua composita. 257 The common cure of hot Agues.
283
B
The smell of new Bread very wholesome. 26 What bread is ^est. ead. Vnlevened
bread is very unwholesome. ead. Brown bread loses the belly. 27 Barley, and
that barley bread is good for the gout. 29 Beans and their nature. 31 Beans
are windy and hard of digestion, green beans. ead. Borage and the temperature
thereof, that it is good for students. 38 Borage leaves why they are used in
wine, conserva of Borage how to be made, borage water, or any other how to be
drunk. 38.39 Balm and the temperature thereof, Balm water and the properties
thereof. 39 Balm water excellent for students. ead. Basil, and the nature
thereof, and a strange tale of basil. 54 Blessed thistle and the nature
thereof, and the perfect use of Card^us Benedictus. 59 The virtues of blessed
thistle, and a medicine for any kind of fever. 60 Beteine, and how it is good
for the brain and to purge the head. 79.80 Bleete. 87 Beetes. 88 Burnet, and
that it is good for any flux of man or woman, and good also for the plague. 95
Barberies, and how to make conserva, Barberies and the virtues thereof also a
medicine for the yellow jaundise of Barbery bark. 116 Biefe and the
commodities thereof, and that it is a melancholy meat. 129 Great difference of
biefe. ead. Salt biefe. 130 The difference of beasts, as concerning age. 119
The brains of beasts, 140 Blackbirds or Ousills. 155 Bu^tard. 157 Barbill a
delicate fish, for the which was paid xl.l. 164. Butter, and how it may make
one soluble, the virtues thereof, that it is good for the chollicke. 180 May
butter, and how it may heal the wildefire. 181 Almond butter. 182 A full belly
is unfit for study. 195 Breakefast for a weak stomach, good for students. 209
The virtues of beer 252 Beer more cold in operation then ale, and better for
choleric folks. ead. Whether B^ere breed rheumes: 252 Who first invented
beer and when. 254 Bragget, and how to be made. 267 Butterd Beer, and how to
be made. 268 Bed chamber, bed, and the making thereof. 273 A merry tale of
making a bed. ead. A merry battle between Munkes and Nuns. 290
C
Crustes burned are ill. 27. Crustes are good for some. ead. Cressis, and how
they may be used for a laske. 43 Coriander, and the nature thereof. 46
Coriander comfits good for students. 47 Cold herbs. 84 Coriander comfits good
for a rhume. ead. Charvaile. 47 Cummin and the nature thereof. 52 A medicine of
Cummine seeds for an ill breath, and to beau^ifie the face. eadem. Caraway and
the nature thereof. 52 Bread made with carowaies, and caroway comfits. 53
Coleworts and their nature, and how they preserve a man from drunkenness, and
the contrariety between the vine and the colewort. 53, 54 Capers and their
nature, capers very wholesome for the preservation of health. 72 Cinckef^ile
and the nature thereof. 75 Columbine and thereof an easy medicine for the
jaundise. 77 Cam^mell and thereof a good medicine for a fever. ead. Clari^* and
thereof a good medicine for the back in man or woman. 79 Cucumbers and for
whom they are good or evil. 98 Cherries, and when they should be eaten, the
virtues of cheries. 105 How to preserve Cherries, 106 Chestnuts, and how they
are good for a laske 121 Cloves and their nature. 123 Cinamom and how to make
Cinamom water. 125 Cony and rabbets. 136 Capon, hen and chickens. 150 Cock
and to make a coleise of a cock. 151 Cra^e. 157 Carpe. 163 Conger. 166 Cockles
and shellfish when they are best 169 Crevis and shrimps. 169 Cream and the
nature thereof. 179 Cheese and what Cheese is best. 182 Cheese should be eaten
after meat. 184 An old cheese will make a good plaster for the gowt. eadem
Cheese roasted. 185 Why some by nature do abhor cheese. ead. Custom in diet
what it is, and two strange examples thereof. 200 Custom in Labor. 201 How
custom may be changed without harm. 202 The English custom defended to eat
fine meats after gross meats. 229 Cider, and that it is most plentiful in
Worcestershire and Glocestershire. 254 Cinamome water of diverse sorts. 261
Consumption a wine. 265
D
An old man's Diet. 33 Di^l, and the nature thereof. 45 Dragons and how they are
good for the plague 82 Dandelion and Sowthistell. 87 Damask powder to make
sweet water, or to strew among clothes. 92 Deisie and how they purge the head.
96 The alteration of mankind touching Diet. 98 Dates, and how they are good
for a laske or waste. 113 Ducke and mallard. 156 Three sorts of Diet. 196 Diet
in sickness. 197 Diet for healthy men. 202 Diet for the spring time. 204 Diet
for the summer season. 205 Diet for Autumn. 205 Diet for winter. 206 Dinner
time, and Diogenes answer touching that. 213 Oxford dinners. ead. The best diet
is to eat one kind of meat at a meal. ead. An hour is a sufficient time for
dinner. 214 Drink before dinner or supper used of some* 218 Natural death
what it is. 221 A diverse diet requisite both in youth and age. 222 The natural
diet of all ages. ead. Diet of lusty youth, diet of old age. ead. Sundry
examples of old men's diet. 223 Antiochus diet. ead. Telephus diet. 224 Pollio
Romulus Diet. 224. Democritus Diet. 225 Galens Diet. eadem Securis fathers
diet. 226 Of Drink. 230 We should not begin our meal with drink. ead.
Drink is necessary for two causes. 230 What thirst is, and how it is caused.
231 The right use of Drink. ead. The discommodities of much drink used at
meat. ead. To drink little and often is better than to drink much at once.
231 Drink between meals not good. 232 Drink delative. ead. Three sorts of
drink. 233 What drink should be used in the beginning of meals, and what
after. ead. Strong drink or spiced, is not good to be used with meat. 234
Sack and Aqua vitae, when they may be drunk after meat ead. Seven sorts of
drink used in England 234 What drink is best, when one is hot. 236 Six
inconveniences of drunkenness. 242 Theognis against drunkenness 243 Hessus
against drunkenness. 244 To be drunken once in a month is allowed of some
Physicians. 245 Destiny what it is after the opinion of the Stoickes. 304
E.
Exercise what it is, the benefit of exercise. 1 The difference of exercise. 2.
The proper exercises of all parts of the body. 3 The preparation to exercise. 4
The place and time of exercise. 7 The fittest time of exercise. 8 An abuse of
exercise touching the time. 9 The exercise of the Emperor Antonine, 10 Three
things to be observed touching the time of exercise. ead. The measure of
exercise. 11. The remedy of immoderate exercise. 12 Elecampaine, and how to
make conserva thereof, good for a cough, and stuffing in the breast. 82 Endive
and Succory, and their virtues. 86 How they are good for heat of the liver. 86
The ears of beasts. 142 The eyes of beasts. ead. Eggs, and that hen eggs
be best. 173 How to choose an egg. ead. The difference of eggs in dressing.
ead. Collops and eggs. 174 English folks may eat three meals a day. 208
Whether breakefasts are to be used in England. 209 England brings forth no
wine, and why. 239
F
Frumentie. 28 French wheat. ead. Fenell* and the nature thereof. 51 Fenell
seeds, and fenell Comsits, wherefore they are good. ead. Flower Deluce, and the
nature thereof. 57 A medicine for the dropsy, and for running of the reins.
ead. Feverfew and the nature thereof, that it drives away a fever. 73
Fumitory, and the nature thereof, how a country man used Fumitory, great
virtues of Fumitory, to make a fair color in the face. ead. Filipendula, and
the nature thereof. 74 Fruits, and how herbs and fruits were the first meat of
mankind. 99 Figs, and their properties. 110 That they should be eaten
before meals, that they be good for a cough, for swelling in the neck. 111
Of twelve things that breed fatness. 140 The fat of beasts. 148 The feet of
beasts. ead. Flesh of birds lighter than of beasts. 149 Fesant. 152 Of fish and
fish days. 159 A comparison between flesh and fish, between Seafish, and
river fish. 161 What fresh water fish is best. 161 The English proverb
expounded, touching the choice of fish. 162 The best flesh and the best fish.
167 Fasting drives away sickness. 198 Who may best abide fasting. 210 How
fasting is to be used. ead. The definition of a true fast. 211 Fire is a
special preservative against the plague. 309 Filberts. 120
G
The games of Olympus, games unlawful. 20 Grummell, and thereof aneasie
medicine for the stone. 46 Gilifloure, and the nature thereof, that it is good
for sundry diseases. 58 An easy medicine for the plague of Giliflowres, and
vinegar made thereof excellent for diverse purposes. ead. Germander and the
nature thereof, a preservative for the plague, a good medicine for a tertian
fever. ead. An excellent medicine for any kind of fever, made of Germander.
58.59. A passing good medicine for a rheum of Germander. ead. Garlike and the
nature thereof, for whom it is good, and for whom not. 67 Who may best eat
garlic, onyons, leekes, and who not. Sundry virtues of Garlic, Garlike is
the country man's Treacle. 67.68 English men may eat garlic by Galens rule.
ead. Garlic is good for the collicke. ead. A medicine to dry up a rheum
falling to the stomach. 68 A good medicine for the worms, of Garlic. ead.
Galingale, and thereof a medicine for the dropsy. 84 Gourdes, and their
nature. 96 Grapes, and how they should be eaten. 108.109 Ginger and a certain
experiment thereof to take away a phlegm from the eye. 125 Blanch powder of
ginger. ead. Green ginger. ead. Grains, and that they are good for women. 127
Goats flesh and kid. 135 Goose and Goselings. 156 The Gisar of foul. 158
Gurnard. 163 Gogion. ead. The chief causes of the gowt. 253 Galens counsel
to every man touching the observation of his own body. 294
H
The harp the most ancient instrument. 21 Hisope and the temperature thereof.
40 Sirupe of Hysope. ead. Hysope ale. ead. Hearts ease, and the nature thereof,
and how they are good for the falling sickness in children. 76 Hasillnuts, and
how they may best be eaten. 119 Also a medicine for any laske or wast of the
shales of hasilnuts. 120 Honey, and how it should be clarified. 128 For whom
honey is wholesome or not. ead* Hare, and the commodities of the hare. 136 The
heads of beasts. 140 The heart of beasts. 143 Hearon, bittour and shoveler. 157
Herrings white and red. 168 Hempseed has a contrary effect in men and hens.
175 Two chief points of preserving health. 193 Hunger the best token of an
empty stomach. 208 What hunger is, and how it comes. ead. For whom Honey is
wholesome, and for whom not. 224 Hipocras of sundry sorts, and how it may be
made. 264 Hipocras to preserve in time of pestilence. 266 Hippocras laxative
for any fever. 267 An hermites repentance. 290
I
Idleness is against nature. 14 Saint John's wort and the nature thereof, and
how to make an excellent balm to heal any wound. 74, 75 The inward of beasts.
146 Ianocke bread. 30
K
The kidneyes or reins of beasts. 147
L
Laborers are more healthful than learned men. 3 Lovage, and the nature
thereof. 46 Lilie, and the nature thereof. 56 Lavender cotton, and a medicine
to be made thereof for worms. 62 Leeks, and their nature, raw leeks
unwholesome. 63 Leeks boiled and eaten with honey, good for phlegm. ead. Leeke
pottage very wholesome. 64 A good plaster for the collicke of Leeks, a medicine
for the stone, a good medicine for the toothache. 64, 65 Larks-claw, or
Larks-heele. 77 Lettuce, and the old custom of eating them. 85 How Galen used
to eat Lettuce, and why, and for whom Lettuce are ill. 86 A good medicine of
Lettuce seeds, for one that would live unmarried. ead. Limons, and an easy
medicine of them for the stone. 119 Lambs flesh, how it is in wholesomenesse.
132 The Lungs or Lights of beasts. 143 The Liver of beasts. 145 Larks, and
their property. 155 The Liver of birds. 159 Lampraies. 164 An experiment to
make one leans and flender 195 How meat and drink do preserve life. 221 One
cause of life and death. ead.
M
Milo Crotoniates. 2 The morning most fit for prayer. 15 Music, and the
commodities thereof. 21 Meat, and the necessity of meats. 23 Six things to be
considered in meats. 23 The substance of meats. 24 Malt. 29 Mint, and the
temperature thereof. 40 A good lotion for the teeth and mouth, made of mint.
ead. Mint powder good to kill worms. ead. Mustard, for whom it is good. 48 A
medicine of mustard seed to clear the breast. 48 Mustard good to kill a tetter
or a ringworme. ead. Mercury, and the temperature thereof. 49 Rottage of
Mercury, good to loose the belly. ead. Mallows, and their nature. ead. Mallow
roots good to scowre the teeth, but Masticke better. ead. Majoram, and the
nature thereof. 55 That it does provoke nee^ing, and purges the head. ead.
Marigolds, and their nature. 76 That they are good for the redness of the
eyes, and for the toothache, and for women's diseases. ead. Mawdlin. 79 Melons
and Pepons, and a water to be made of them, good to cool the reins, and for
the stone. 97 Medlars, and of them a good medicine for the stone. 115 Maces,
and their virtues. 124 Mutton. 131 Galen disproved, concerning mutton. ead. The
best mutton. ead. Of strange beasts used for meats. 139 The marrow of beasts.
148 Mullet, a fish of a strange nature. 164 Muskles. 169 Milk, and what milk
is, how the windiness of milk may be helped, three substances of milk,
three sorts of milk, that goats milk is best. 176 What time of the year
milk is best, the degrees of milk in goodness. 177 Women's milk is lest in a
consumption. ead. Why milk is unwholesome in agewes, or head ache, and ill for
the chollike and stone, milk is good against melancholy. 177 Whether milk be
loosing or binding, that it is good for a laske. 178 Mustard and how neesing
thereof may be helped. 191 Man begins to dyas soon as he is borne. 221
Malmesey kills worms in children. 239 Metheglin, and how to be made. 256
Meade or mead. 256 The single life most convenient for divines. 288 The
discommodities of marriage. ead. Two of the first dishes that be served up at
the marriage feast. ead. When man and woman should marry after Aristotle. ead.
Rath marriage is the cause why men be now of less stature then they have been
before time. 289 What time of the year is best to marry in. ead. Diogenes
opinion concerning the time of marriage. 290 Bias argument against marriage.
ead. Metellus argument to persuade marriage. 292 Under what sign a man may
avoid the marriage of a shrew. 293
N
Nettle and the virtues thereof. 98 Nutmigs, and their nature, and that they
are the best spice for a student. 124 The Nuns penance. 291 The necessity of
Physic. 270
O
Otes, and ote bread. 30 Oats are bread, drink and meat. ead. Sundry sorts
of meats made of oats. 31 Onions and their nature. 65 Raw Onions unwholesome.
65 Onions sodden be very wholesome. 66 A medicine for the cough, for burning or
scalding, for the plague. ead. Oak of Jerusalem, and how it preserves clothes
from mothes. 78 Orage, and how it purges extremely both ways. 88 Orpine, and
the nature thereof. 95 Olives and their nature, and a medicine for the Cholike
and stone of oil Olive. 117 An easy medicine to provoke vomit of Salet Oil.
ead. Orenges and their properties. 118 Oysters and shell fish 168 Oximel how to
be made. 190 Order in eating and drinking 226 The benefit of an orderly diet.
ead. The due order in receiving of meats. 228
P
Pliny his diligence to be followed of Students. 18 Plantus painfulness. 19
Better to be pale with study than with love. ead. How play should be used.
ead. Play at the dice. 20 Play at the Chesse. 21 Pease, three sorts of pease,
how pease or beans should be eaten. 32 Pease pottage good. 33 What time pease
pottage are best. ead. Preface to herbs. 34 Peniroyal, and the temperature
thereof. 42 Parsely, and the nature thereof, and why it is sometime evil. 50
Pionie and the nature thereof, that it is good for the stone both in youth and
age. 57.58 Parseneps and Carrets and their nature. 71 Parseneps and Carrets
good for the Cholike and stone. ead. Parsneps and Carrets provoke lust, they be
restorative. ead. Parsneps not so good as Carrets. 72 Pellitory of Spain, and
how it is good to purge the head. 81 The same is good also for a rheum, and
for the toothach. ead. Prickmadem. 84 Purslane, and how it is good against
Venus. 93 Poppie and what kind thereof is good for a stitch or pleurisy, and
to procure sleep. 94 Pears, and how they may be eaten raw without hurt. 102,
103 Peaches, and when they should he eaten, and Wine to be drunk with them.
103 Plummes and Damasines, Prunes. 104 Stewed Prunes should be eaten before
meat. 105 Pomegranates, and how they are good for a laske, or any wast in man
or woman. 114 Pepper, and thereof three sorts, and the common opinion of pepper
disproved. 122 The virtue of Pepper, and Diatrion pipereon. 123 Puddings. 146
Partridge. 152 Pigeons, and when they are best. 153 Plover and Peacocke. 156
Pike and pickerell. 162 Perch. ead. Place and Flowkes. ead. Porpos and
Sturgion 167 Puffin. 170 Possets of two milkes, a very cooling drink. 181
Possets used at breakfast. 182 Perie, that is Cider of Pears. 255 Such
Physic as the author used for his health sake. 294 What the Pestilence is.
297 Four causes of the Pestilence. 297 Three preservatives to be used against
the plague. 298 The electuary of three adverbs for the plague. 299 The signs
of the Plague to come. ead. What is to be observed in changing of the air
where the plague is. 300 How long the infection remains in the body houses
and clothes. 301 The plague brought to Oxford and dispersed there by woollen
clothes. ead. Whether it be lawful to fly from the plague 302 How the plague
does infect our body. 309 What complexion is so^nest infected with the plague.
ead. What is to be done, when we go forth to avoid infection. 310 An
excellent lotion against the pestilence. ead. An excellent preservative for the
plague. 311
Q
Quinces, and how they loose the belly. 107 How to make marmalade of Quinces or
any other fruits. 108 Quails and their nature. 154 The Quantity of meats. 193
The Qualities of meats. 109.
R
Rubbing or fricasie, and three sorts thereof. 4 A merry tale of Rubbing. 5 A
kind of Rubbing very good for all men. 6 Rubbing of the teeth. 7 Rise up after
meat. 9 Rye, and Rye bread, and the temperature of Rye. 28 Rise, Rise pottage,
and their property. 33, 34. How Rise pottage should be made for a flix. 34
Rosemarie, and the nature the^eof 36 Rosemary good for students. 36 Plenty of
Rosemary in one part of France. 36 Conserva of Rose-mary flowers. 37 A good
decoction of Rosemary for the stomach, which makes sweet breath. 37 An
electuary of Rosemary and Sage. 37 Rue, and the temperature thereof. 43 Four
properties of Rue. ead. Rue is good against poison and the pestilence. 44 King
Mithrida^es medicine made of Rhue. 45 Radish and their nature. 69 Gallen
defended against master Eliot touching the use of Raddish. 69 Raddish neither
good before meat, nor after meat. ead. How Radish may best be taken. 70
Radish corrupt the b^eath, and wherefore ead. Roses, and how to make conserve
thereof, and the virtues of the same. 90 Rose Water, and how to make very sweet
water of diverse sorts. 91 Sweet-water good cheap, and how sweet-water should
be used of Students. ead. Raysons and whether they be binding or loosing: that
they are good for the liver. 109 Ray and Thornebacke. 166 Seven things good for
a rhewme. 212 Why rhewmes do abound in England. 217 The very cause of Rhumes.
253 Two chief causes of Rhumes. ead. Rosa Solis, and the growing thereof, and
how to be made 258
S
What Study is. 14 Scipio his saying to be followed of Students. 14 How to
begin our study. 15 The best time for study. ead. A good counsel for
Students. 16 An example of a slothful Scholar. 16 How long we should study
without intermission. ead. After-noones study not very good. 17 Study is better
by day than by night. 18 Socrates answer to Alcibiades. 20 Sage, and the nature
thereof. 35 Sage is good for Students. ead. Why Sage is used in sawces. ead.
Sage-wine. ead. Sage-ale. 36. Sage and Rue put in drink, are good against
infection. ead. Savery, and how it may be taken. 42 Sperage, and the nature
thereof. 45 A medicine of Sperage for the Stone. ead. Senvy, and the nature
thereof. 48 Spike and Lavender, and their nature. 55 Spike-water, good for the
Palsy, and to recover the speech lost. 56 Sothernwood, and the nature thereof.
62 Samper, and the nature thereof. 72 Saffron, and the nature thereof. 78
Setwall, or Capons-tayle, and the virtues thereof. 83 Skirwort. 84 Spinach. 88
Sorrel, and how it is good for the pestilence, how to make conserve of
Sorrel, or any other herb. 89, 90 Strawbery, and Strawbury-water, wherefore
it is good 94 Services and their nature. 115 Sugar, and the nature thereof. 127
Sugar, and Honey compared together. ead. Sugar Candy. 128 Sugar and Water good
for flewme. ead. Swines-flesh how it is in nourishing. 132 That it is like to
man's flesh in many points. ead. Wild swine better than tame. 133 Of Braune,
roasted pigges, and Bacon. 134 The Scotts were sometime Anthropophagi. 139 The
Stomach or Mawe of beasts. 143 The Spleen or milte, 145 Sparrowes, and their
properties. 155 Sole. 163 Salmon. 166 Saltfish. 171 Stock Fish. 172 Of sawces,
and which are the best sawces. 185 Stones and Vdders. 147 Salt and the virtues
of salt. 187 Two kinds of Salt used in meats. ead. A common sauce. 192 Three
differences of Stomachs 193 Surfeit how it may be eased. 198 A remedy for
surfeit. 212 Supper, and whether supper or dinner should be greater* 216 Where
we should walk after Supper. 219 Chremes supper in Terence. 296 Why students
in these days come not to such perfect knowledge as they have done in time
past. 244 An easy practice to cleanse the Stomach. 249 An easy medicine for
the stone ead. Sleep, and how it is the brother of death, and the image of
death, and in the scripture death called by the name of sleep. 268, 269 What
sleep is, how sleep is caused, the commodity of sleep. 269 Four things to
be observed in sleep. 270 The night is better for sleep than the day. 270
Afternoon sleep is unwholesome. ead. How sleep in the day may be used with
less harm. 271 How long we should wake after Supper. 272. What place is most
fit to sleep in. ead. How we should lie when we sleep. 273. How long we
should sleep. 275 Epimenides and Endimion, how they slept, and what is meant by
it. 276 Man sleeps half his time. 276 How to know when sleep is sufficient.
277 Socrates wife. 299 The Stocks argument against Physic. 304 The sweating
sickness. 279 The sweating sickness three times in England. ead The cure of
the sweating sickness. 280 The sickness at Oxford, the like sickness at
Cambridge as was at Oxford. 281
T
TEnis play is the best exercise of all other. 3 Process of time does alter
men's stomachs. 26 Time, and the temperature thereof. 41 Powder of Time good
for students. ead. Turnips and the nature of them. 70 Tansie, and the nature
thereof. 72 Why Tansies are good to be used about Easter. ead. The Tongues of
beasts and the kirnels of the tongue. 141 Tench. 163 Trowt. ead. Time in diet.
203 Times of the day to eat and drink. 207 Long sitting at meals is hurtful.
214 To sit awhile after meat, how it is to be taken. 215 What time the stomach
requires for concoction. 219 One meal a day better taken at norne than at
night. 220. Tullies Physic. 294 The virtues of Treacle. 312 How Treacle
should be used against the plague. ead. How much drink and how much treacle
should be taken at a time. 277 Two sorts of Mithridatum. 278 How to try Treacle
whether it be good or not. ead.
V
THe color of the urine shows when we should exercise. 8 Violets and how to
make conserva of them, also the virtues of the conserva, and that they are good
in broths with other cooling herbs. 89 Veale, and the goodness thereof. 136
Venison, and why it should be drowned in wine. 137 Red Dear, and the age of
the Stagge. 172 Vinegar, and sive properties thereof. 188 How to make one lean
and low colored with vinegar. 189 Rose-vineger. ead. Vinegar of Giliflowers,
and that it preserves from the pestilence. 190 Verjuice. ead. Variety of
meats ^reedeth excess, and surfeit. 194 Venus, how it should be used and in
what age. 278 Whether Venus be requisite for all men. ead. Whereof it rises in
mankind. 279 The benefits of Venus. 280 The discommodities of immoderate Venus.
ead. The difference of men concerning chastity. 282 What complexion is most
given to Venus. 283 Three principal means to abate lust. ead. Ordinary means
to subdue the flesh. 285 Idleness a great occasion of Lechery. 285 Diverse
practices to abate concupiscence. 286 The practices of Arnoldus to abate lust.
ead. Diverse odd practices of old time to subdue the flesh. 286 Varro his
counsel how to deal with a shrewde wife. 292 The right use of Venus stands
in three points. 293
W.
Washing of the face and bathing of the eye. 6 Wheat. 24 What wheat is best.
ead. Wheat bread ought to have five properties. ead. Wheat bread of York.
ead. Wheat buttered. 27 Wormwood, and the nature thereof. 61 Wormewood-wine,
and how it may easily be made. 61, 267 A good water for dimnesse of sight or
any other impediment of the eyes, also an other good water for eyes. 293
Walnuts, and of them with other things, King Mithridates medicine against
poison. 120 Woodcocke, and the nature of thereof. 137 Wings of Birds and foul.
158 Whiting. 163 White meals. 172 Whey, and the nature thereof. 178 A ^^oling
decoction of whey good for many purposes. 179 Whey for a hot liver, or for an
itch. 255 Of water, and that water is is the most ancient drink. 235 What
water is best after Galen 235 Whether it be good for English men to drink
water. eadem Cornishmen drink much water eadem When cold water may be drunk.
236 Cold water and Sugar good to cool and clear the stomach. 236 Water mixed
with Wine quenches thirst the better 237 How a man may prove what water is
best. eadem How water may be drunk without harm. ead. Liquorice water. ead.
Wine and drunkenesse be of like antiquity. 238 The temperature of wine. ead.
The diversity of Wines, and the Countries that bring them forth. 239 The
commodities of wine. 240 Life and wine agree in nature. eadem Five virtues of
wine used moderately. 240 Why wine moderately taken, sharpeneth the wit. 241
Divines love wine, and why. eadem Strong Wines ill for students. 241 Young men
should drink no Wine. 244 Wine is good for old age. eadem How to choose good
wine by five properties. 246 The choice of Wine stands chiefly in three
senses. 246 White Wine least hot. ead. White Wine procures urine 247 White
Wine good for those that would be lean. 247 Red Wine binds. 247 Red Wine
makes a good medicine for the laske. ead. Sweet wine for whom it is good. 248
New wine unwholesome. 248. Whether wine be good fasting. ead. Tosts dippped in
wine wherefore they are good. 249 Wine and women great occasions of the gowt.
253 Doctor Stevens water, and how it is to be made, and the virtues thereof.
261 A correction of the same. 263 Women compared to a Panther. ^69 Women
compared to the Mermaidens. 271.
Y
Yeeles, and how they are engendered. 165
FINIS.

