Two books of Saint Ambrose Bishop of Mylleyne, entytuled: Of the
vocation and calling of all Nations. Newly translated out of Latin into
English, for the edifiyng and comfort of the single minded and Godly unlearned
in Christ's Church, against the late sprung sect of the Pelagians, the
maynteyners of the free will of man, and denyers of the grace of God. By Henry
Becher Minister in the Church of God.

Allowed, according to the order set forth in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Anno Christi. 1561.

We know that all things work for the best unto them that love GOD,
which are also called of purpose. For those whom he foreknevve, them also he
ordained before, that they should be like fasshioned unto the shape of his
son. etc. Moreover, those whom he foreappoynted, those he also called, and
those whom he called, he also justified, and those whom he justified, he also
glorified.

A prologue to the reader.
HERE have thou (most dear and gentle Reader) the two Books of that famous
Clercke and ancient father S. Ambrose, sometime Bishop of Milleyn, entitled:
Of the vocation and calling of all Nations. A work surely of no less divine
wisdom and learning, then of antiquity: and therefore a Jewel greatly to be
esteemed and had in price of al those that be Godly in Christ's Church, who
earnestly desire a right spirit and judgment purely to discern between
truth and error in these peryllous days: Wherein as our Savior Jesus Christ
affirms, Math. 24.
that (if it were possible) the very elect might be disceyued. But chiefly it
is to be had in price Mark. 13.
of all those, who not having the Latin tongue, are not able to read the work
to their edifying in the tongue wherein it was first written and compyled. To
whom the said ancient Father and famous Clercke in this present treatise,
speaks now more familiarly then before. The work it self is such as
needs not my praise: But seeing I can not sufficiently express the
woorthynesse thereof, I think it better to omit it with scilence, confessing
my barreynesse, then for lack of convenient speech to diminishe the glory
thereof. These and such like works have not aforetyme ben so freely offered to
the understanding of the simple, nor so easily come by, as (God be blessed for
it) they are in these our days. Receive them therefore louyngly and
thanckfullye (good Christen Reader) and use them godly and reverently: for they
are the good instruments and tools whereby the eternal God buyldeth the
spiritual Jerusalem his Church, 1. peter. 2.
and by whom the living stones thereof, his elect children, are daily wrought,
shapen, and full fashioned unto everlasting life. 2. Tim. 3.
Learn also to render unto God most heartye thanckes therefore: who showing
more mercy unto thee, then unto many generations paste. As he has caused
thee to be borne in these peryllous days: so has he prepared armure and
weapon for thee, wherewith thou may defend thy self against all those enemies
that shall arise up against thee. The occasion that moved Saint Ambrose to
write this work was this. There arose in Britayne in those days a Monk
named Pelagius Bishop of Bangor, that became the aucthour of a new sect before
that time not heard of. This man with the help of Celestine and Julian his
fautors, drew many into his error: He attributed so much unto the free will of
man, that he affirmed that a man might atteine life everlasting by merits
only without the grace of Christ. Whereof he being blamed, gave place to
thadmonition, in such sort, that he did not afterward altogether exclude
grace: but said, that if grace were given, it was the easyer to attain to
salvation, how beit without it, it might be obtained though with more
difficulty. He condemned praying in the congregation, as well for the
faithful as for the unfaithful, as a thing vain and unprofitable: because
(as he said) that which they should ask, was already in their power, which
with their diligence every one of them might do and perform. But when he
feared least he should be condemned for it by the council of Antioche, he
recanted, although he ceased not afterward to teach the same in his
wrytinges. He added furthermore, that the sin of Adam hurted no man but him
that committed it. Also that all Infantes were borne as innocent and clean
from sin, as Adam was when God first created him. Nevertheless he permitted
them to be baptized, not to the puttyng away of sin, whereof he affirmed
them to be void: but that they might be honored with the Sacrament of their
adoption. And when he was publysshed and proclaimed to be an heretic: he
wrote in the defense of his error. He was condemned by Zosimus, and two
C.xl. Bishops more in the council of Carthage: and before that, he was
condemned by Innocentius, whose error when the Affricans with others
(especially this aucthour S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and S. Iherome) utterly
detested, they took in hand by their several wrytynges to put to scilence the
remnaunte of that sect. Since the which time it has been reputed and taken
of all the godly learned in Christ's Church, for a cursed profane and
Phylosophycall error.

I have showed thee (gentle Reader) the cause or reason of the first making and
compylyng of this work. Now it stands me in steed to show thee the cause
of this my travel in reducing it into the English tongue. There arose in Kent
in these late days, namely since the preaching of the Gospel, a private man
altogether unlearned, named Henry Heart, that revived this error of Pelagius,
and added thereto certain other errors. This man with the help of his
adherentes, new furbed this old cancred heresye, and put it to sale a fresshe
instead of an infallible verity, who also under the pretense of a sober life
and conversation vsyng long hear, long bearde, long garments, and often
reading of psalms, drew many into his error both in Eastkent, in Essex,
Sussex, Surrey, and in the City of London.

This man, after that his error was espied by the late Tharchbishoppe of
Caunterburye Thomas Cranmer, was by him committed to prison, with certain of
his sect (of whom some remain alive, holding that error, some thanked be
God are become new men, and other some are departed this life) and there they
remained until they revoked their error, and colourably subscrybed to the
Artycles agreed upon in the Synod holden at London, in the reign of the late
king Edward the sixte. Notwithstanding in hucker mucker he ever taught the
same unto those only which he knew to be trustye, and unto those that were
brought in by them: who held the said Heart in such reputacion, as if he had been an holy Prophet. But after the death of king Edward, when Queen Mary
began her dominion, and the Christian Clergy was scattered abroad, this Heart
and his companions began to show them selves in their old lykenes of error
again, with much more error which they in the mean time had practiced,
forged, and gathered, with whom (when diverse of our company chanced to meet
in the time of persecution) we had more to do, then we had with all the rest
of our enemies.

And because (dear Reader) thou should not be ignorant of their error, I
have noted some part of it in certain perticulers here following.

1. First they hold and affirm, that the doctrine of predestination and
election, as it was taught of the Christen Clergy of this Realm in the reign
of king Edward the syxte, and agreed upon in the Synod of London. Anno.
domini. 1552. is not a doctrine meet or necessary to be taught in the Church
of God.

2. Secondly, that they that hold the said doctrine, do err dampnably.

3. Thirdly, that God has predestined or elected man none otherwise then
upon the condition of the keeping of the law: the which if man on his part do
not observe, he loses his predestination and election.

4. Fourth, that no man is so reprobated but that he may escape it, and become
an elect and be saved, nor any man so elected but that he may lose his
election, become a reprobate and be dampened, by godly or ungodly living.

5. Fyfth, that Esau was no more reproved then Jacob, nor Jacob any more
elected then Esau, before the one of them had lived godly, and the other
ungodly.

6. Sixth, that all men universally are called with one and the same calling,
the wicked as well as the godly, and Judas as well as the Apostles.

7. Seventh, that if Gods predestination and purpose in election were certain
and absolute, and God resolved and immutablye determined what to do with
mankind his creature, then should the preaching of repentance be in vain,
because the elect could never mysse heaven, nor the reprobates escape hell: and
so a great part of the Scriptures of the holy Bible (namely so much as
concerned repentance and godly living) should serve to no purpose, but to
fill up the book with words and leaves.

8. Eyghth, if God should predestinate some and not other some, elect one and
not another, give greater grace to one then to another: that it should follow
that God were not indifferent but parciall.

9. Nynthlie, that all and as many arose again in Adams loins when Adam
believed the promise, as fell in Adams loins by the transgression, and that
as soon as Adam believed they were all restored to the former integrity that
Adam had before he sinned, and that they lost nothing there by but the free
access or coming to the tree of life.

10. Tenth, that the children come or borne of christen parents, or of one
christen parent at the least, are clean borne, that is to say, void of
sin, both original and actual, and therefore a superfluous work to baptize
them in that case, and that they do first receive sin by the outward
senses, as by hearing, seeing, and imitacion of others.

11. Eleventh, that there is but one only grace, which is equallye and
indifferently conferred and given to all men in their creation: and that al men
have naturally the election and choice of a free will to come to GOD when they
be called, or to refuse, to believe or not to believe, to love and to chose, or
to hate and refuse, either good or evil.

12. Twelth, that all men be regenerate before they be borne, having the
spirit of Godde in their mothers wombes, as had Jacob, Ieremye, and John
Baptist: and the regeneration that follows the natural birth, is either always
or for the most part unto evil: Because it is written in the book of
Psalms. psalm. 58. As Soon as they are borne they go astray and speak lies.
The which cannot (say they) be understand of Infantes, and of their natural
birth, who as soon as they are borne of their parents, can neither go nor
speak.

13. Thirtenth, that it is to be thought that the young children of Turks and
Infideles, neither baptized nor professinge Christ or Christian religion, if
they die in their infancy, are saved.

14. Fourtenth, that the lust or concupiscence remayninge in the flesh of men
regenerate and young children, is not sin: Because that sometimes men have
lust to eat and drink, and also to do the needful offices of the body
which of themselves cannot be said to be sin.

15. Fiftenth, that Jesus Christ the soon of god had also such motions and
temptacions unto evil, as other mortal men have, though he consented not, nor
gave over himself unto them. And that the temptacions that he had in the
deserte, and the conflicte there had with Satan, were altogether such inward
motions and temptacions, and not by any extreme or outward devil as Tom
painter fayneth.

16. Sixtenth, that all Christian men, having the talent, and feelinge
themselves to be moved thereto, may lawefully, and also ought to utter the
same by the way of public teachinge or preaching to others, without any
further loking for admission by man. And though that the preachinge of the
Gospel, 1. Tim. 1. 1. Tim, 3.
and the administracion of the holy Sacraments be called an office, and an
ordinance of god in the scriptures: Yet that every man indifferently may
attempt to do the same, so that he think himself to be moved thereto of God,
Exodus 4.
and have a mouth to speak.

17. Seuententh, that men's works, commentaries, and judgments upon the
Scriptures ought not to be received read nor alleged in matters of religion,
but to be utterly refused, because that men may, have, and do oftentimes
err.

18. Eightenth, that men godly given may and do live in this world without
sin, because it is written: He that sins is of the devil. 1. John. 3.
etc. but all men are not of the devil, for many there are that are borne of
GOD, ergo there are many that sin not. And though they have sin in them,
yet commit they none: like as a man may have weapon about him though he
fight not therewith.

19. Nintenth, though the orthodoxe faith according to the divine scriptures
does confess God to be a spirit without parts, passions or mutabilitie, yet
say they that God is verily angry, does repent, does sometimes alter and
change his purpose, has a very hand, a bosom, a sword, a scabberd, a
whetstone, bow and arrows, and such other like members and instruments.

These present Articles (if thou compare them to the aforesaid Articles of
Pelagius) as they be more in number, so are they more abominable and
diabolical.

But these and such other like pernicious errors do they hold (good Christen
reader) whereof I received the more part at the said Hearts hand, written with
his own fyngers at Caunterbury. The residue were gathered of their own
assertions, that were of that sect, with whom, when in the late time of
persecution, we diverse and sundry times did meet, had conference and
communication the one party with the other, and could not agree: because that on
the one part, we might give no place to error, and on the other part they
would not allow no man's judgment in the matter, but their own, rackinge
the Scriptures to their own purpose: I for my part saw no nerer remedy, then
to use the same artillery and weapons that this learned and ancient father
had prepared to our hands already, and that he used to the ouerthrowynge of
their predecessors, the old Pelagians now 1200. years past or therabout.
Now have I showed thee gentle reader, the occasion of this my present travail
and enterprise, which I beseech thee to take in good part, wherein GOD I take
to witness, I seek nothing but that the sincere truth may hereby be known
from error and falshed, that God thereby may be glorified, and the godly
reader hereof, be edified. And as for those men against whose folly and error
this work is attempted, I heartily desire of GOD the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that it would please him of his infinite goodness, to have mercy upon
them, and once to open the eyes of their understanding, so that they may see
their error and fault, and acknowledge the same: and that they may now at the
last be won unto the pure and sincere truth, whereunto they so long time have
been utter enemies, that we altogether may be gathered into one shepefolde,
under one only sheepeheard Jesus Christ, whose holy spirit be thy leader
and guide (gentle reader) in the reading hereof. Amen.

Marueyle not gentle reader I desire thee, that I have put down their
articles, and have not answered the same. For the work it self folovvinge
does sufficiently aunsvvere them, or the most part of them, as thou shall well
perceive in the readinge of the same.

FINIS.
The first book of Saint Ambrose Bishop of Milleine: Entitled, Of the
vocation of all Nations.
Of the questions that are proponed and had in controversy, between the
maynteyners of free will, and the preachers of the grace of God, the mind of
the aucthore also, and his order in entreating thereon, according whereto, it
must first be disputed of the motions and degrees of man's will: furthermore he
reproves certain men that discern not a right, between the will of man, and
the grace of God.

The. 1. Chapter.
THere has been of late season, a great and a difficult question had in
dysputacion, between the defenders of free will, and the preachers of the grace
of God, for the question is, whether god wills all me^ to be saved? And
because this cannot be denied, they demand why the will of him that is
almyghtye is not fulfilled? And when that seems to come to pass according to
the wyls of men, it seems that grace is excluded: which if it be given for
merits, it follows that it is not a free gift, but a due debt. Whereupon
they demand again: why he which wylleth al men to be saved, gives not that
gift to all men, without the which no man can be saved? And so is there none
end found of contrary disputacions, while they discern not what thing is
manifest, and what is hydben and not known.

Therefore I will do do my diligence, to search out (so far as it shall
please the lord to help me) with what measure and temperancie men ought to
judge of this contrariety of opinions, exercising and diicussing the little
measure of my knowleage, in those things which (I trow) have sticked soberly
in my remembrance: so that if the style shall proceed acording to those rules
which can have none offense nor falshod in them, it shall redounde not only to
our profit, but also to the profit of other, until that we are come to some
doole or mark, beyond ye which it shall not be lawful for us to wade.

I must then first of all dispute of the mocions and degrees of the will of
man. Between the whith will and the grace of God, some men make not a perfect
distinction, thinkyng that through the preaching of grace, free will is denied:
not considering that by the same rule it may be objected unto them, that they
deny grace, when they will not have it to be the guyder of ma^s will, but the
follower of it. For if the will be taken away, where is then the original
beginning of true virtues? if grace be taken away, where is the very cause of
good merits?

That there is in all mankind by nature a certain will, such a one as it is.
Also of the dividing of this will into a natural, reasonable, and spiritual.
Also, although God by his divine providence, and by certain special rules and
laws, had once ordered unto him self a certain people, chosen unto
Godliness, yet nevertheless he never withdrewe from any nation of men the
gifts of his goodness.

The second Chapter.
But now through the help of Christ, I will enter into the matter that I have
taken in hand to entreat of. There is in every living man, naturally a will
(such a one as it is) in as much as it is given him to understand and to have
experience. By the which will he either desires the thing that pleases him, or
refuses the thing that displeases him. Of this will (as perteynyng to the
natural motion, being weak through the fault of the first transgression)
there are two kinds: according to the which two, the will of man is either
sensual or else reasonable. But when the grace of god has his access, then,
through the gift of the spirit, there is added thereto the third kind, that
it might become spiritual. And by this more excellent motion, it might
discern by the law of heavenly wisdom, all affectes, whereof soever they
spring.

Therefore the sensual will (which we may also call the carnal will) is not
lifted up above that motion that spryngeth of the senses of the body: Like as
there is in the minds of young children, who though they have no judgment of
reason, yet do they show plainly that they will some thing, and nyll some thing,
when by seeing, hearing, smellyng, tastyng or touching, they both love the
things wherein they delight, and hate the things wherewith they ar displesed.
For what is it to love. but to will? or what is it to hate, but to nyll? These
therefore have their will, the which, though it be both unable, and also
ignorant to foresee and to consult, yet delights it to be medlyng with those
things that please the senses of the flesh, until the time that the strength
of a reasonable discretion be stirred up in them, thorough more riper workynge
of the body, and until it be moved or applied to the use of the members, who do
serve them selves, not by any strange mouynge, but by their own law.
Therefore from this sensual will or appetite (wherein those do still remain,
who^ we see also in more age to be diserdes and fools) they arise up to a
reasonable will: the which before it be governed by the spirit of god, although
it can lift up it self somewhat above the sensual or carnal motion, In this
will remained the Philosophers in times past and vvorldly wise men in our
days also.
yet is it occupied but in earthly and tra^sitorie things, and forgoeth not
the love of it self In this will also, men's wits (although they do not
filthilye serve the lusts of their bodies, but frame their desires according
to the laws of Justice and honesty) yet obtain they nothing above the reward
of a te^porall praise. And though they decently garnyshe this present life,
yet have they not the reward of eternal bliss: for they refer not their
good deeds and good studies to the praise and honor of him of whom they
received, that they were able in yt reasonable discretion to come to more
profounde understanding, and to appear more excellenter then other men. For
although some me^ have bent the intent of their vndersta^dinges, not only to
the learning of most profitable arts, and doctrines of liberal sciences, but
also to the knowledge of ye most high God, and have beholden the invisible
things of god, by the knowledge of those things which he has made: yet
forasmuch as they gave not thanks to God, nor confessed him to be the aucthour
of that knowledge and faculty, but said that they them selves were wise, that
is, they gloried not in GOD, but in them selves, as though they had attained to
the knowledge of the truth by their own conning and reason: they have come to
naught in their cogitations. And that which they had found out by the grace
of God which gave them light, they lost through pride which made them blind,
falling again from the heavenly light, unto their own darkness, that is to
wete, from the immutable and eternal God, unto mutable and corruptible nature.
Wherefore when such fall back again into the love of them selves, and in such
wise do please them selves, that all thing that they judge commendable in them
selves, they refer it not to the gifts of god, but do challenge it unto
themselves, and ascribe it to the studies of their own wylles: they are
banished far from the spiritual will, and have nothing in them selves whereby
they may be promoted to everlasting life, beginning in them selves to corrupt
also those temporal gifts of god, and to translate themselves from their good
use into the custom of innumerable vices.

For though it be written, that when the hygheste divided the Deuteronomy. 32.
Nations like as he dispearsed the children of Adam, he appointed the nations
their limittes, according to the number of the Angels of God, and his people of
Jacob became the portion of the Lord, and Israel the lotte of his
inheritance. And though it be written that the Lord said unto Israel, Leuit.
19.
ye shall be holy unto me, for I the Lord your god am holy, which have chose^ you
for my self out of all Nations. And though it be written in the book of Hester
by Mardocheus, saying: O Lord we give thee thanks, for thou have done new
signs and wonders, such as have not ben done among ye Heathen dividing all the
world into two parts, have chosen thy self one part of thy people, leaving
the part to ye gentiles. And though Paul and Barnabas say, Act. 14.
we are mortal men like unto you, admonishyng you to convert to the living
God, who made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them:
which in times past, suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Although
therefore that the Scripture of verity does pronounce these and many like
sayings: yet we believe and most humbly confess according to the same
Scriptures, that the care of Gods providence never failed the universal nombre
of men: who though he directed unto Godliness by special institucions and
laws, a certain people excepted to him self, yet has he not withdrawn the
gifts of his goodness from any nacio^ of men: That they might be convinced,
that they have received the voices of the Prophets, and the precepts of the
law, in the obsequies and testimonies of the Elements. Wherefore also they
became with out excuse, because they made the gifts of God, their Gods: and
they did reverence and worship those things that were created for their use.
Into the which ungodliness also, even the same nation that the Lord had
segregated to him self out of all nations, had wholly turned the^ selves, had
not the purpose of his mercy pretended to stay the backslydynges of his
elected. For the books of the old Testament are full of relacions, of the
falling away of the people of Israel: that it may plainly appear that the
grace of GOD was ever the cause why all that people departed not wholly from
the lord. On this wise the nature of man being defiled in the transgression of
the first man, is ever ready and bent to the worse will, yea even in the mids
of the benfites, of the precepts and aydinges of god. Unto the which will to
be committed, is nothing else then to be given over or let run astraye.

This will therefore, is waueryng, uncertain, unstable, vnexperte, weak to
bring any thing to pass, ready to darre take any thing in hand, blind in
desires, hye minded in honor, doubtefull in cares, unquiet in suspicions,
more desirous of praise then of virtue, more dilligent to get a fame then a good
conscience, and by all experience of it self, more miserable in having the
things that it desires or lusts for, then in being without them. It has
nothing in it own power, but only a redynesse to run in danger: For the
mutable will that is not ruled and governed by the immutable will, does so
much the sooner approach to iniquity, as it is more earnestly bent to any
action.

Wherefore so long as those things do please a man, which do displease God,
his will is carnal. For though he use good manners, yet lives he evil, if he
live not to the glory of god. For this is a thing that is proper, and the
chief thing of them that are godly, that they glory and rejoice in the
Lord, and do not love the^ selves but in God. For they love them selves well,
yt love the works of God in them selves. For God also loves the thing in us
that he has made, and hates that which he has not made. Therefore if we love
the work of God in our selves, then love we rightly a good will in us: the
which, if it were not the work of Godde, doubtless it ought not to be loved.
And what man is it (except he be of an evil will) that loves not a good will
in him self, which is the first planting of the heavenly husbandman? For the
verity him self says. Math. 15.
Every plant that my heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked up by
the roots. What thing soever is not to be plucked up by the root, it is
manifest that the same is planted of the father. And a good will is the first
budde of all virtues: who leaninge upon her original beginning, restith in
the eternal and immutable will, to the end it may be made very spiritual.
For he that cleaves to god, is one spirit with him, 1. Cor. 6.
while through the Communion of the geuer of light, and him that is lightened,
the iustifier and him that is justified, the ruler and the subject, all the
action is referred unto one, and that that is referred unto one, is of both.
For that cannot beer alyenated or put away from God, which he has given, nor
that from man which he has received.

A goodly and witty handlynge of this question, that is: when a man begins
to be of a god will, whether the same will be amended which he had in him
before: or else another will given to him, which he had not before, and the
which might repugne the first will. Also, how that whereas in the holy Scripture,
salvation is generally promised to al men, al men are named for ye part.

The third Chapter.
HEre it seems good to entreat, whether when a man begins to be of a
good will, that same will which was in him before, be corrected and amended,
or else another will which he had not, be given unto him, which also is
contrary to the former will. The which thing shall not grieve me more depely
to search out, to the end it may the more evidently appear.

All men in the first man, are made without fault, and al we have lost the
integrity, and health of our nature, through the transgression of ye first
man* from thence comes mortality, from thence comes manyfolde corruption,
both of body and soul, from thence comes ignorance and difficulty,
unprofitable cares, unlawful desires, sacrilegious errors, vain fear,
noisome love, false joys, repentful counsels or devises, and no less
miserye, then multitude of sins. These therefore and other like evils falling
into the nature of man, faith being lost, hope forsaken, understanding darkened,
the will led captive: no man has found ought at al in himself, whereby he might
be repaired. For although there has been some, which have gone about to
strive against sin by natural reason, yet has he garnished bareinly the life
of this time only: but has not profited to true virtue and eternal bliss.
For without the service of the true God, Note,
even that thing also that seems to be virtue, is very sin, neither can
any man please God, without God. And he that pleases not god, whom does he
please but himself, and the devil? By whom what time man was spoiled, he was
not robbed of his will, but of the integrity and soundness of his will: for he
could not have been put from the state of his innocence, onles he had first
sinned in will* That will therefore which was good by nature, became evil in
quality, and that motion of the mind that can never be without some love,
that is to say, without some will, lost not the appetite, but changed the
desire and affection, receyuinge that by desire, which it ought to refuse by
judgment.

Therefore, when man retourneth to godlynes, (of whom it is for that cause
spoken. Psalm 77.
The spirit goes, and retourneth not again: for except God did convert him,
he should not return) there is not a new work made, and a new creature, nor
another substance created in him, but the same that was decayed is repaired:
neither is there anithinge taken from him, but the fault which nature had not.
For nature in Adam was without fault, who through disobedience of will, drew
unto him many euilles, and powered forth the same upon his posterities, to be
multiplied and increased more and more. The which evils, nothing can overcome
and bring to nothing, but the only grace of the Savior, who repaireth his
work, with his work: As the Apostle saint John says. 1. John. 3.
For this cause appeared the son of God, that he might destroy the works of
the devil. And like as he breaks the bonds of the captive, so does he
cloth the nakedness of him that is spoiled, so heals he also the wounds of
him that is wounded, that what soever he does in him, may also be done by him.
To whom it is not expedient to have conflict or keep battle against his
enemy, without a defender. For he must fight with him of whom he was sometime
overcome, wherefore let him not trust to his own powers, who when they were
even perfect, stood not sted fastly: but let him seek victory in him, which
only is not overcome and has gotten the vyctorie in all things. And if he
seek, let him not doubt, but that he has received the desire to seek, of
him whom he seeks. Neither let him think, because it is done by the spirit
of God, that therefore he has not free will, which he did not then loose, The
free will of man is not taken away by Adams transgression, but is depraved,
so that with out grace it wills nothing but evil. Iere. 31.
when in will he gave himself to the devil, of whom, the judgment of the will
was depraved or corrupted, not taken away. Wherefore that which was not slain
by the wounder, is not taken away by the healer: The wound is healed, but
nature is not put away. But that that peryshed in nature, is not restored but
by the aucthour of nature. The Lord says, I will give unto the house of
Israel, and unto the house of Judah, a new Testamente: not like unto the
Testament that I gave unto their fathers, in the day when I took the^ by the
hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt: for they continued not in my
testament, and I regarded them not, says the lord, but this is the testament
that I will give to ye house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I
will make them to understand my laws, and I will write them in their hearts,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: and no man shall teach
his neighbor, nor every man his brother, saying, know the lord, for all men
shall know me, from the least to the most, for I will have mercy on their
iniquities, and will not remember their sins. And I will give them another
meaning, and another heart, that they may fear me all the days of their
life, to do them good, and their children after them. And I will give the man
everlasting testament, which I will not take from them. And I will put my
fear into their hearts, lest they should go from me, and I will vysite them,
that I may make them good.

The lord also by the prophet Esayas foresheweth the same Esaias. 43.
things of his grace, by the which he makes of all men a new creature,
saying: behold I will make new things, which now shall rise up, and ye
shall know them, and I will make a way in the desert, and ryuers in the dry
land. The beasts of the field shall bless me, the maremaides and ye schrich
owls birds, because I have given water in the desert, and ryuers in the dry
ground, to give drink to mine elect generation, mi people which I have
purchased to my self, that they may declare my power. Esaias. 46.
And again, I swear by my self, that there shall righteousness go out of my
mouth, and my words shall not be turned back, for every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall praise God. Therefore, if it be impossible for these
things not to come to pass, for because ye foreknowledge of God is not
uncertain, Note.
nor his counsel mutable, neither his will without effect, nor yet his promise
false, all they of whom these words are spoken, be saved without exception of
any man: For he makes them to understand his laws, and writes them in their
hearts with his own finger, that they may receive the knowledge of God, not
by the work of humayne doctrine, but by the enformation of the highest
teacher. For he that planteth and he that waters are nothing, but god that
gives the increase. 1. Cor. 3.
All they from the least to the most know God, for they have heard, and
learned of the father, that they might come to Christ, all they being drawn
out of error, are instructed in the way of life. It is given to al them to
understand the things that are right, and to will right things, their
hearts being changed.

The fear of GOD is graffed in all them, that they might be learned in Gods
commandments. There is a way made in their desert, and their dry land is
watered with fluds, so yt they which before did not open their mouths to praise
God, and became wild, as the dombe and unreasonable beasts: being cleansed in
the fou^taines of gods word, they bless and praise God, declarynge the power
and maruayles of his mercy, which has elected them, and adopted them into his
sons, and made them the enheritoures of the new testament. And if (as the
Apostle says) no man despises or alters the testament of a man, when it is
once confirmed, how can it then come to pass, that the promise of God may in
any part be resolved? The promise of God made unto Abraham without condition,
and gave without the law, remains steadfast, and is daily fulfilled. For
notwithstanding that some to whom these things be preached, believe not, yet
their unbelief has not made frustrate the truth of God. Romans 3.
For God is true, but every man is a liar. And they which have heard the
Gospel and would not believe, are more without excuse, the^ if they had not
heard any preaching of the truth: but sure it is, Note.
that in the presence of God they were not the children of Abraham, nor nombred
among the company of them, of whom it is said: all nations of the earth
shall be blessed in thy seed. For he promised that they should believe, that
said: And every one shall not teach his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying: know the lord, for all shall know me, from the least of them to the
greatest. He promised that they should be reconciled, which said: I will
have merci on their iniquities* and will not remember their sins. He promised
that they should obey, which said. I will give them another way, and
another heart, that they may fear me all their days. He promised that they
should persevere and continue, which said: I will put my fear into their
hearts, least they should depart from me, and I will visit the^ to make them
good. Also he promised yt they shall al follow him without exception, which
said: I swear by my self, except ryghteousnes shall go out of my mouth, and my
words shall not be refused, for every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue
shall praise God. Here, if we say that that thing is not done, which God swear
should be done, we ascribe falshed unto God (the which thing God fordid) and
a leasing to the truth. But if so be that the words of God do not fail, nor
be without effect, (as both godlynes and faith does teach us) and also that
surely done that he appointed to be done, how shall the stedfastnes of the
sure promise appear unto us, when yet many thousands of men serve Deuylles,
and bow their knees to images? Except we know yt those words and speakinges
of god be spoken and set forth according to the immutable knowledge of god,
wherein with him, ye generality of men is now divided, and whether he speak of
the good men or of the evil men, he does on such wise make mention on ye one
part, as though he omytted no man. For when the Apostle says: old things are
past, behold all things are made new: does it not seem that he said all
men were renewed? Or when he says: Coloss. i.
for it was his pleasure that in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to
reconcile al things to himself: does he not so speak as though he would no
man to be without reconsiliation? Or when he says. Hebre. 1.
In these last days he has spoken to us in his son, whom he has made
heir of al things? does the form of the sentence sound any other thing,
then that all men are transcribed of the father into the heritage of Christ,
according to the prophecy of David, saying. Desire of me, psalm. 2.
and I will give thee the heathen unto thine heritage: and the ends of the
earth for thy possession. For the Lord says, if I shall be exalted from the
earth, John, 12.
I will draw al things unto me: Does not the conversion of all men seem here
to be promised? Or when it is prophesied of the Church and said: Esaias. 40.
Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low,
and crooked things shall be made straight, and rough places made plain. Seems
any man here to be omitted, which is not signified to become subject unto
Christ? What when it is said: And all flesh shall come in my sight, Esaias. 66.
or before me, that they may worship in Iherusalem, says the Lord? Act. 2.
Joel. 2. Psalm. 144.
Or this: And it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will pour out
of my spirit upon al flesh? Or this: The Lord lyfteth up all those that
fall, and heals all them that are hurt? Is it not so spoken, as though no
man were secluded from that gift? The people of GOD therefore has his
fullness. And though the most part of men do either repel, or neglecte the
grace of salvation, yet in the elect and foreknowen men, Note that here are. 2
als, namely a general all, and a special* all*
and among them which are divided from the generality of all, is there a
certain universality numbered: So that out of all the world, all the world
may appear to be delivered, and out of all men, all men to be received. Like
as also when he speaks of the ungodly, the divine style so frames the speech,
that those things which are spoken of a certain part, seem to apperteyne to
all men: as is this which John Baptist says. He that comes down from
heaven, is above all men, he testifies that that he has seen and heard,
John. 3.
and no man receives his testimony. Or this saying of the Apostle: Phil. 3.
All men seek their own, and not the things yt are Jesus Christ's, Psalm. 13
Or yt that David's psalm sings. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that did understand or seek after
God, but they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
unprofitable, there is not one of them that does good, no not one. Of these
and such documentes, which may abou^dantly be brought forth and aleaged if a
man will seek for them, it is most plainly declared, that sometime, for a part
of the earth all the earth, for a part of the world all the world, and for a
part of men al men are named. The division whereof, notwithstanding, the
Scripture does many times open incontinent, that the understanding of the
reader may be transferred from the namyng of the universality to that part
which is thereby understood. As is this saying of the Apostle: We preach
Jesus Christ crucified, a stumbling stone to the Jews, 1, Cor, 1.
and unto the Gentiles foolyshnesse: But unto those Jews and Greeks yt are
called, we preach Christ the power of god and the wisdom of God. Is Christ
power to them to whom he is a stumblynge block? Or is he wisdom to them to
whom he is foolyshnesse? No, but because some of them shall be justified by
faith, and some obdurate and hardened through their own ungodliness, he has
divided one kind of beleuers and unbelievers, under the name of them that are
called, that those who^ he signified to be without faith he might show to be
none of the number of them that are called, though they had heard the Gospel.
By this rule the word of God does promise by Esai, saying. Esaias. 42.
I will lead forth the blind men into a way that they know not, and they
shall walk the paths that they wot not, I will make darkness to be light
unto them, and crooked ways straight. These words will I do, and I will not
forsake them. But that which follows (And they are turned backwarde) must be
referred to a certain part of them, not unto them to who^ it is said: I will
not forsake them. Esaias. 43.
The Lord says again to Jacob. Be not afraid, for I am with thee: From the
East will I bring thy seed, and gather thee from the Weste. I will say to the
North, bring hither: and to the South, forbydde thou not. Bring my sons from
a far country, and my daughters from the worlds end. All those in who^ my
name is called, I have prepared them unto my glory, and I have fascioned and
made them. But that ye follows: I have brought forth a blind people, and
their eyes are blind, and they have deaf ears, can not by any reason agree
to them, whom he says he has prepared unto his glory. In all these words
which are spoken of one kind of men, the former words do agree to some, and
the latter words to other some. And as the saying of ye Apostle is: that thing
that is done in part of the people, is declared under the name of all people,
and in the remnaunt is the fullness counted. For when he disputed of the
obsecation and blinding of the Jews, and showed that some of them were saved
by grace: I say therefore (says he) has God repelled his people? God forbid.
For I also am an Israelite, of ye seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin,
GOD has not cast a way his people whom he Romans 11.
knew before. Therefore the people that was foreknowen, the people yt is not
repelled, are they which are justified in Christ. And yt which seems to be
spoken of al Israel, is showed in them only whom the election of grace has
made a remnaunt to him self: Like as the consequens of the Apostles words do
declare, for he does add and say. Do ye not know what the scripture says of
Helyas, how he prays unto God against Israel? O Lord they have slain thy
Prophets, they have dygged down thine Altares, and I am left alone, and they
seek my life. But what says the answer of God to him? I have reserved unto
my self seven thousand men, which have not bowed the knee to Baall. So
therefore (says he) in this time also, is there a remnaunt saved by the
election of grace. And if it be of grace, the^ is it not now of works, for
then were grace no grace. Therefore, all Israel is not reprobate, neither is
all elected: But wyllyng blindness has turned away a part, and free
illuminacio^ has reserved a part unto him self. And yet are the words
spoken of them on such sort, that no difference seems to be made of all
mankind, neither of them that peryshe, nor of them that are saved. For when it
is read, as touching the Gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but as
touching their election, they are beloved for the fathers sake: the words so
sound, as though he called them beloved, whom he called enemies. But the
Apostle him self wypeth away this darkness, saying: For blyndnesse is
happened unto part of Israel, that we might understand one generation to be
divided into two kinds: and all men, all fullness, all Israel, not always to
be referred to the universality, but many times to a part. Among these manner
of speeches, we ought also to note this saying in the Scriptures, wherein that
which perteyneth to men of diverse times is promised on such wise, as though it
were spoken of one generation of the same time. Like as is that which the
Apostle Peter, writing to them of his time and of the time to come, says: 1.
pet. 2.
But ye are an elect generation, a kingly priesthod, an holy nation, a
purchased people, that ye might show the virtues of him that has called you
out of darkness, into his marvelous light, which sometime were not a people,
but now are ye people of god, which had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy. When these things were preached: whether did those men yet
remain, who^ God in time past suffered to walk in their own ways? And those
same me^ that were delivered up to their own wills: were they now called into
that marvelous light? were not they now dead? They were not now in this world,
neither did their return from error to verity help the^ at al which were
dead before. And yet the custom of speech has declared that after long time,
grace was in the posterity of the wicked: that they may appear now to be
elected, which before were for sake^. These sayings do not belong to ye same
men, but to men of the same nation. And the vocation or calling that has
shyned nyghe unto the end of the world, has not recourse to the time paste.
So now, by a certain manner, it are both they, and not they, of whom and to
whom these things are spoken: while, when they are not divided in any
specialitie from a generality, yet are they divided in some things from a
Community.

A solucion of the contentious obiectior some, which say this aucthor by his
former words gaynsayeth the Apostle, who diffineth that GOD wylleth all men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Also that the depth of Gods
mysteries and judgments are not to be searched of us.

The fourth Chapter.
But when they that love contencious quarrellyng shall read or hear these
things, they will say yt we by these disputacions do speak against the
Apostle, which says that God wylleth all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth. The which part of the Apostles words, we so fully and
wholly do receive, that we withdraw nothing from it of that that goes before
or comes after, that perteyneth thereto. For (that we may set aside other
testimonies of the Scriptures of God) this place is sufficient to refell that
that they falsely obiecte, and to defend that, that they wickedly deny. The
Apostle Paul writing on this wise to Timothy, says: I exhort you therefore
that there be prayers, supplications, and thankesgeuynge, made for all men,
for kings, and for all them that be in authority, that we may lead a
peaceable and a quiet life, in all godliness and pureness, for that is good
and accepted in the sight of God our Savior, which wylleth all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For there is one God, and
one mediator between God and men, even the man Jesus Christ, which has
given him self a ransom for all men. Of this rule therefore of the Apostles
doctrine, wherewith the universal Church is instructed, least we should wander
into a strange understanding after our own brain, let us search what the
universal Church understands in it: for there can be nothing doubtful in
the precept, if that the obedience in the desire do agree. Therefore the
Apostle commanded, yea rather the Lord by the Apostle, which spoke in the
Apostle, that prayers, supplications, and thankesgeuyng should be made for all
men, for kings, and for all the^ that are constitute in authority. The
which law of supplication and prayer, the devotion of all priests, and of
all faithful men does so agreably hold, that there is no part of the world
wherein such prayers are not celebrate and made of the Christian people. The
Church therefore in every place, prays unto God, not only for the Saints
and them that are already regenerate in Christ: but also for all Infidels and
ennemies of the Cross of Christ, for all Idolaters, for all them that
persecute Christ in his members, for the Jews, unto whose blyndenesse the
light of the Gospel shyneth not, for Heretics and Scismatickes, which are
without the unity of faith and charity.

And what does the Church ask for these, but that they forsakyng their
errors may be converted unto God, may receive faith, may receive charity:
and being delivered from the darkness of ignorance, they might come to the
knowledge of the truth? The which things because they are not able to give it
to them selves, being so oppressed and wayed down with the wayght of evil
custom, and tayed in the bonds of the devil, neither are able to overcome
the things that deceive them: Wherein they have stycked so fast, that look how
much the truth ought to be beloved, so much do they love falsehod. It is the
will of the merciful and just Lord to be prayed unto for all men, that when
we see innumerable to be delivered from such bottomless mischeifes, we should
not doubt but that GOD has granted that, that he was desired to grant: And
that we geuynge thanks for them that are saved, should hope also, that they
which are not yet illumined, shall be delivered by the same help of Gods
grace from the power of darkness, that they may be translated into the
kingdom of god, or ever they depart out of this life. But if any man fail of
this grace of the Savior (as we see it does happen) and the prayer of the
Church be not received for them, we must refer it to the secret
judgments of Gods righteousness, and we must acknowledge, that the
depenesse of this mystery cannot appear to us in this life. For our knowledge
is imperfect, and our propheciyng imperfect. And we see now as it were by a
glass in a dark ryddell, neither are we wyser, or have more knowledge then
the blessed Apostle, who when he dysputed of the grace of GOD, and was entered
into the secret of great mysteries, he fell down under those things that was
impossible to be declared. For when he had said, brethren I would not have you
ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceypt, that
blindness is happened in part of Israel, till the fullness of the gentilles
might enter in, and so al Israel might be saved, as it is written. He shall
come out of Syon, which shall turn away ungodliness out of Jacob, and this is
the testamente that I will give them, that I will take away their sins. For
as concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but concerning
election, they are beloved for the fathers sake: for the gifts and calling of
god, are without repentance. For like as ye sometime also did not believe in
God, In your mercy, that is in the mercy that ye have obtained.
and now have obtained mercy, because of their unbelief: even so they also
have not now believed in your mercy, that they might obtain mercy: For GOD
has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all.

Therefore, when in a certain trance or recesse of his mind, he had powered
forth these mysteries of Gods works, far passing the measure of man's
understanding, he turned all the reason of the exposition thereof into a
wonder, and meruayling greatly at the things which he had spoken, he cried
out and said: Oh the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of GOD, how
incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways paste finding out? for who
has known the meaning of the Lord? or who has been of his counsel? Or who
gave first unto him, and he shall reward him? For of him, and by him, and in
him, are al things. To him be glory for evermore. Amen.

Why all nations in time paste were suffered to walk their own ways, one
Israel only excepted, and unto the knowledge of the truth elected, and why
God gives grace to one man, and denies it to another.

The fifth Chapter.
THe assertion of him that teaches the things before spoken, will minister
occasion of many questions. As it is demanded, what the cause should be,
that Gods grace was so variated through out so many peoples and times: that
is to say, why all nations in time paste were suffered to walk in their own
ways, one Israel only (which was instructed by the word) excepted, and
elected to know the truth, whose infidelity at the last ministered occasion,
and gave place to the salvation of the gentiles, as and if this one people did
abide in the faith of his forefathers, the mercy of god could not be given to
other nations? Also why they, whose diminishing is the salvation of the
gentiles, are not first delivered from their blyndnes, before the fulness of the
ge^tilles should come in, as though they could not be illumined with all men,
which shall be all saved after that the adoption of the gentiles shall be once
finished? Or how all Israel shall be saved, when their obsecation and
blindness is taken a way, of whom an innumerable multitude are fallen away in
their infidelity, and have not come to the time wherein they are promised to
be saved? Or how the fullness of those nations, (which were not called
before) are said to enter in now, when of every age and condition of men, so
many thousands of all nations under heaven, do dye without being justified in
Christ? But the godly and wise teacher had lever suspende the causes of these
secrets and judgments unto the profou^ditie and depth of the riches of Gods
wisdom and knowledge, then with rash inquisition to dyscusse the mystery of
the most just verity and most merciful goodness, which is taken away
from the knowledge of man, omitting none of those things which it behooves
me^ to know, and medlynge not at all with those things which are not laweful
to be known. For there are many things in the dispensatio^ and ordering of
Gods works, whose effects only are showed, but the causes lie hid, that
when it does appear what is done, yet it appears not why it is done, that
where as the work is seen of all men, yet the reason why it was done, is
shut up in secret, to the end that in all one and the self same thing, both
presumption in things unsearchable might be holden under, and also that
faished of manifest things might be confuted. For though I know not why one
man was created a Greek, another a Barbarian: this man borne in richesse, and
he in poverty: one man the valiant beauty of a personable stature does set
forth, another, the crooked deformity of feeble members does disfigure: this
man begotten of Christen parents was norished in the cradell of verity,
another, being the brood of heretics drynketh the poison of error with the
milk of his mother. And to be brief, although I can not discuss a thousand
other differences in the habit of bodies, in the qualities of minds, the
condition of times, the manners of countries: yet follows it not thereof that I
am ignorant that God is the maker and the disposer of all these things, who
verily has on such wise created the bodies and spirits of all men, that
besides the voluntarye or wylfull diversity that follows the study of every
man, he variated them in most unlike number in the beginning of their creation.

The many opinions of vain bablers would trouble us, and draw us diverse
ways, which out of things unable to be known, have presumed to go into
inconveniences, and have ascribed these original inequalities and differences,
unto fate or destinies (when in deed there are none at all) and unto planettes
or stars: unless we did hold in most sure knowledge, that God the creator
has formed of the natural Elements every vessel as he will, and has ordered
one nature of souls, and one nature of bodies by measures after his own
pleasure, which works of GOD might also be known to man's understanding, if
they ought to be known, and it might be showed why every thing was so made,
but that it is sufficient to know, that they were so made.

The Lord says unto Moses: who has given man a mouth? Exodus* 4.
who has made the dombe and the deaf, the seeing and the blind? have not I
the Lord God?

And by the Prophet Esaias he says: Esaias. 66.
Have not I made the fruitful and the barreyne, says the Lord? It is red in
the book Ecclesiasticus: Eccle. 11.
good and evil, life and death, poverty and richesse, are of God. Job. 12.
Also Job says? The dwelling houses of robbers and brybers are full of
plentiful store, and yet dare they boldly provoke GOD, whereas he has given
all things into their hands.

And the same Job, disputing of the increase and decrease of human and
worldly things, and referrynge all chaunges to the judgments of God, says.
With him is there wisdom and strength, he has counsel and understanding.
If he pluck down, there is no man can build up: if he close up a man, there
is no man can open him: if he withholde the waters, all shall be dried up: if he
send them forth, they shall ouerflowe the earth, with him is power and
wisdom, he knows both the deceiuer and him that is deceived, he brings
counselors to a foolyshe end, and Judges into dasednesse: he loses the
girdle of Kings, and gyrdeth their loins with a rope: he makes Priests
without honor, and overthrows the rulers: he changes the lips of the true
speakers, and takes away the learning of the Elders, powrynge forth dispite
upon Princes, and relieuynge them that were oppressed: who opens the things
that are buried in darkness, and brings to light the shadow of death, which
multiplieth the nations, and destroys them, and makes them that are
destroyed sound again, which changes the hearts of the Princes of the
earth, and beguyleth them, that they may go they wot not whyther. They grope
as in darkness, and not in the light, and he will make them to go out of the
way like dronken men. And again, the same Job showing that the will of God
can not be frustrate, Job. 33.
says: For he is alone (says he) and no man can turn his thought, and look
whatsoever his soul wylleth, the same shall be done. Part of mankind is
delivered, and part of them does peryshe: and if we should ascribe that unto
the merits of men's wylles, as though it should seem that grace had refused
naughty men and chosen good men, then shall the causes of innumerable people
resist and be against us, unto whom by the space of so many years, the
preaching of the heavenly doctrine has not shone. Neither may we say that
their posterities were better, Esaias. 9.
of whom it is written. The people of the nations which sat in darkness have
seen great light, and unto them that sat in darkness and shadow of death light
is sprung up. And they to whom the Apostle Peter says: 1. Pet. 2.
Ye are an elect generation, a kyngly priesthod, an holy nation, a purchased
people, that ye might show forth the power of him that has called you from
darkness, into his so marvelous a light: who in time past were not a people,
but now are the people of god: on whom sometime he had no mercy, but now has
mercy. Wherefore, that is not given for the merits of the younger, which the
elders did not deserve. For the ungodliness was all alike that accused the
children as well as ye fathers: and all one and the like blindness of
ignorance drowned and overwhelmed both the one and the other in like error.
But what knowledge can comprehend, or what wisdom ca^ find out, why God had
mercy on the one sort, and had not mercy on the other? The reason of this
difference lies hyd and is secret, but not the difference it self. We
understand not his judgment herein, but we se his workyng. And why then do we
falsely accuse his secret judgment, that owe thanckes to his manifest mercy?
Let us praise and reverence that that is done, for there is no danger to be
ignorant of that that lies hyd in secret.

Look also upon the whole multitude of young children, Original sin
deserves damnation
in whom (except it be that sin only, wherein al mankind is borne into
dampnation) neither can any merits paste, nor yet to come, be judged: for all
they of whom we now speak of, before they have any use of understanding,
before they have any free liberty of will, This he speaks because such
infantes unbaptized, have no promise in the scripture to be saved.
some of them being regenerate, do go into everlasting blissednes, and other
some not borne again, do pass unto perpetual misery. Now if thou grauntest
original sin, then is all the number of them guilty, and if thou lokest on
the innocence of their manners, the hole flock of them is without fault. The
justice of man cannot find any difference, but the unspeakable grace of God,
has found out what to elect. The device lies hid in secret, but the gift
lies not hyd. Godliness brings forth the work, but power hydeth the
cause. But, as little is that to be doubted that is not seen, as that that is
seen: for neither the confession of the manifest work, nor yet of the
unknown equity, can be denied to the creator. But if thou will direct the
sight of thy mind unto those men, who living a long time in sin and
mischief, are renewed and borne again by the Sacrament of Christian baptism,
even in the end of their life: and without any help of good works, are
translated into the fellowship of the heavenly kingdom. By what reason will
thou know the judgment of God therein, but only that thou must know
undoubtedly that the gifts of God are free? And that, like as there be no
sins so detestable that they are able to withstand or keep away the gift of
grace: even so can there be no works so excellent, to whom that that is freely
given, is due by the judgment of reward or retribucion: for then should the
bloudde of Christ be nothing worth, neither should the prerogative of men's
works be any thing inferior to the grace of God. If justification which
comes by grace, were due unto any merits that went before: then it were not
a gift of a free geuer, but the wages of a worker. And how might it be proved,
that there be no works meet to put away original sin, unless that both
ungodly men, and also mischeuous persons, were by the lauer of Christ received
into his kingdom? And how should they which glory in their own righteousness
know how little they can do worthy of the adoption of the sons of God, if
they came not to the Sacrament of regeneration, seeing they are fast tied and
holden in the same state and condition that the wickedst sinners be? They should
become like in sanctification, if they were regenerate, but should peryshe
together if they were not baptized. Therefore, if grace have found any of the
most wicked men, yea even in the very departing of the life, whom it does
adopte and chose (when, notwithstanding many that have less offended are
seen to be without this gift) who can say either that this is done without
the dispensation and appointment of God, or else that they are so discerned and
severed a sunder without profounde and secret equity? The which also is not
therefore unjust, because it is unknown: but therefore is it just, because
there is no doubt but that it is the judgment of God. For that that depends
upon his pleasure, it is uncertain with what sentence it ought to be judged,
before it be judged. But when the thing shall come to his end, no man ought to
complain of the end: for it is most certain, that god ought not to do any
other wise then he has done. The rule of the Evangelical parable has also
confirmed the variety and diversity of the manyfolde vocation and calling
which belongs unto one grace: in the which is declared, how the good man
of the house hired at sundry times laborers into his vineyarde, under the
covenant of a penye, whereby is signified the equality of eternal life.
Where no doubt, they that were sent into the vineyarde at the eleventh hour,
The eleue^th hour is.v. of the clock at aft. noon after the Jews account.
receiuyng as much as they that had wrought all the day, do represent the
nombre of those of whom I now speak: whom the gentleness of GOD has
esteemed and accounted in the end of the day and conclusion of their life, to
commend and praise the excellency of his grace: not paying them wages for
their labor, but powryng forth the richesse of his goodness upon them whom
he chose without works, that they also which had swette with much labor, and
yet received no more then the last, might understand that they had received the
gift of his grace, not the wages of their works. Wherefore, if we also do
murmr against the good man of the house, because they that were last called
are made equal to the laborers of the whole day, or that they have deserved
no more with their much labor, then the other that labored almost nothing
at all: the same shall be said to us that was answered to one of them. Friend,
I do thee no wrong, Math. 20.
take that that is thine, and go thy way, for I will give as much to this man
that came last, as I will to thee: Is it not lawefull for me to do with mine
own what I list? or else is thine eye evil because I am good? Surely this
liberality seemed to this false accuser to be unequal: and what was he ye
wiser? or what accomptes was there made unto him? The ryghteousnes of the
dispensation of that business was not opened unto him, neither was he admitted
to be of counsel of this hyd secret. But that he should refrain from
serching the judgments of god, there was laid forth before him both the
goodness of him yt is merciful, and also the power or authority of him yt
wills it to be so: eue^ like as if it should have been said unto him of the
Apostle. O man, what art thou that disputest with god? Romans 9.
Does the pot say to him that made him, why have thou made me on this wise?
Therefore in all me^ of every nation, of every state or condition and age, the
will of God is the cause of the receiving of grace in them, with the which
will, the reason of the election lies hyd: all merits beginning at that
grace, which they have received without merits, which merits if they could
be good without grace, it should not be said: Except a man be borne again of
water and of the holy ghost, John. 3.
he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. And, except ye eat the flesh
of the son of man and drink his bloudde, ye have no life in you: But it
should be said, Except a man be just and good, he can not be blessed for ever.
Neither were it needful to be born again of water and of the spirit, if it
were sufficient to be instructed by the commandment: and faith should take no
place, which believes that all sins are forgeuen through baptism, if it
were taught that grace were not given unto the evil and wicked men, but unto
good and righteous men. Therefore the beginning of true life and ryghteousnes,
consists in the Sacrament of regeneration, that where a man is renewed, there
also the verity of these virtues should spring, and they begin to profit
by faith unto perpetual glory, who could scarce come to the temporal
reward of vain praise. For whether he be a Jew that swells through the
knowledge of the law, or a Greek puffed up through the study of natural
wisdom, before he be justified by the faith of Christ, he is shut up under
sin. And if he continue in his infidelity, ye wrath of God abides upon
him, even that same which he had drawn unto himself in the transgression of
Adam, whereof the Apostle speaks, saying. Ephe. 2.
And ye when ye were dead in your trespasses and sins, wherein ye walked in
times past, according to ye time or course of this world, after ye prince of
the power of this air the spirit which works now in the children of
unbelief, among who^ we also had our conversation in time paste, in the lusts
of our flesh, and fulfilled the will of the flesh and of the mind, and were
by nature the children of wrath, like as other were. And again: ye were at
that time without Christ, aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Testamentes, having no hope of the promise, and were
without God in this world. And again: ye were sometime darkness, but now
are light in the Lord. Colloss* 1.
And again: giving thanks to ye father, which has made us worthy to be
partakers of the inheritance of saints in light, which has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and has translated us in to ye kingdom of his well-beloved
son. Titus. 1.
And again: for we also were sometime folish, unfaithful going astraye, serving
diverse lusts and plesures, living in malice and envy, hateful, hating one
another. But when ye benignity and gentleness of our Savior apeered, not for
ye works of righteousness which we have done, but acording to his mercy has he
saved us, through the lauer of regeneracio^ of the holy ghost whom he has
powered forth abundantly upon us, through Jesus Christ our savior, that we
being justified by his grace should be heirs of eternal life by hope.

What the nature of man is without grace.

The.vi. Chapter.
AND that it may briefly apeere what the nature of man is without grace, Jude.
1.
let Jude the Apostle tell, what either the ignorance of the unlearned, or
the doctrine of the wise can do. But they (says he) what things soever they
know not, that do they blaspheme: and what soever things they know naturally
(as brute beasts do) therein corrupt they them selves. Let also the Evangelist
Luke, Luke. 1.
under the words of zachary, tell in what a night mankind does wander before
the illuminacion of grace, and out of what a darkness of ignorance the people
of God is delivered. And thou child (says he) shall be called the prophet of
the highest, for thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his
ways. To give knowledge of salvation to his people, for the remission of their
sins. Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spryng from an
high, has visited us. To give light to them that sit in darkness and in
the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of peace. And this
tender mercy has the lord showed, not to the redemption of one people only,
but unto the salvation of all Nations, as the Euangeliste says: For Jesus must
dye for the people, Ioh, 11.
and not for the people only, but also that he might gather together the
children of god which were dispersed. And that thing does the voice of the
Lord, which through the trumpe of godlynes soundynge throughout all the
world, does both call and gather together al me^. Math. 11.
For when he had said: I thank thee oh father, lord of heaven and earth,
because thou haste hid these things from the wise and prudent, and haste
reveled the^ unto babes: Even so O father, for so was it thy good pleasure: he
added. All things are given to me of my father, and no man has known the
son but ye father, neither has any man known the father, but the son, and
he to who^ the son will reuele him. And the^ he added: Come unto me all ye ye
labor, and are laden, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you, and learn
of me, for I am meke and humble of heart, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls, for my yoke is sweet and my burden is light. John Baptist also in the
Gospel of John, protests in ye spirit of prophecy, saying: Ioh. 3.
He yt came from heaven is above al me^, and he does testify that ye he has
seen and hard, and no man receives his witness, howbeit he yt receives his
witness has set his seal that God is true. Therefore in so much as pertains to
ye blindness of mankind, gotten with ye long night of ignorance and pride, the
creator of ye world, came into this world and the world knew him not, the light
shyned in the darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not. He that is
above all testified that that he had seen and hard, and no man received his
testimony. But because the son of God came not in vain into the world, but
gave him self for all men: he dyed, not only for the people, but also that he
might gather into one the children of God which were dispersed. And he said
unto all men: Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I shall
refreshe you. And he makes him self and his father known to whom he will
reuele it, reserving unto him self the liberty of the election unable to be
known. All the children of light, the children of promise, the sons of
Abraham, the sons of God, the elect generation, the kyngly priesthood, the
true Israelites, foreknowen and fore ordained to the kingdom of god (who has
called them, not only out of the Jews, but also out of the gentiles) do
receive the testimony of him that came down from heaven, and set their
seals that God is true, that is to say: they declare in that they are saved,
that GOD is true, that he keeps touch and perfourmeth that, that he promised
unto Abraham the father of all nations. Who when God promised him that he
should be the heir of the world, doubted not by mistrust: But being
comforted in faith, gave glory unto God, knowing most certainly, that he was
able to perform the thing that he had promised. And who is so enstrau^ged
from the faith of Abraham? who is so far grown out of kind from the father
of all nations, that he will say either that the promise of god is not
fulfilled, or else that it is fulfilled of any other then of him that made that
promise? Truly, that man shall be a liar, but god shall be true. And every one
that receives his testimony, seals this thing, shows this thing. That he
is made to see, by that light which gives light, he is made obedient, he is
made to understand, as the Evangelist John witnesses, saying. We know that
all the world is set on wickedness, and we know that the son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding that we might know the true God, and should
be in his true son.

Why he that is the Savior of al men has not given to all men this
understanding that they might know the true god. Also why some young Children
being regenerate, are saved, and other some, not being regenerate, do perish
and are lost.

The seventh Chapter.
But if they ask, why the Savior of all men gave not this understanding to
all men, that they might know the true God, and that they might be, that is
to say: might abide and continue in his son, although we believe that the
help of grace was not wholly taken away from any man? Of the which thing we
will dispute more largely hereafter. Although peradventure this thing be
unknown also, like as the other lies hid why in times past, all the
gentiles being set a side, and let pass, he took unto himself one people,
whom he would instruct in the way of truth? Of the which judgment of GOD,
if we may not complain, much less then may we murmr of this that is done
in the election of al nations, We may not be curious in hid things nor yet
unthankful in manifest things
for the things that God would have to be secret and unknown, may not be
searched for: but those things which he has made manifest, are not to be
denied, lest we be found vnlawefully curious in the one, and dampnably
unthankful in the other. Truly we are not ignoraunte, that there be some of
so indiscreet and unadvised presumption, and of so proud an arrogancy, that
the thing which the noble teacher of the gentiles, being taught, not of men,
nor by men, but by god, confessed to be laid up far and exceeding high above
the measure of his know ledge, they dare rashely discuss, in a doctrine
falsely so called, and will there have nothing hyd or secret, nothing to be
unknown, where the Apostle has not opened what ought to be understand and
known, but what ought not to be searched for. For as I have said before, it is
given to no studyes, to no wits to try out, by what judgment, or what
counsel, god which is immutably good, immutably just, always forknowinge,
always almighty, has therefore shut up all things in unbelief, that he
might have mercy on all. And yet in the time wherein he instructed Israel
only, he deferred to illumine innumerable nations of ungodly people: and now
suffers the same Israel to be blinded, till all nations and the fullness of
the gentyles be come in that peryshe, by so many thousands of those that are
borne and dye again, and yet shall the said Israel be saved in them whom the
end of the world shall find here. The which mystery being opened and set
abroad in all the whole body of the scriptures, he has showed us what he has
done, what he does or may do, and what is yet to be done. But why it was his
pleasure that it should so be done, that is taken away from man's understanding.
But these men that are asshamed to be ignorant of any thing, and by
occasion of the darkness of ye matter, lay snares of disceyte, do refer to the
merits of man's will all the difference whereby god choseth some, and choseth
not other some (for Retribuci on, is the reward of well doing, or a revvard
where something is deserved before
many are called, and few are chosen) so teaching that no man is saved freely,
but of retribution, because it is naturalli graffed in all men, that if they
will, they may be partakers of ye verity, and that they have grace enough
that do ask it. The which diffinicion, although it speak not of ye verity
of grace, yet seems it to show some reason of those men that have free will.
But as touching infantes, in whom ye cause is commen, and al one with other
mortal me^ in the original wound, and are with out any merit or deserte of a
good will. There can no exposicion be made whereby it may be taught, why some
of them are saved being borne again, and why other some do perish, not
being borne again, and that under his providence and omnipotency, in whose
hand is the soul and life of every living thing, and the spirit of all the
flesh of man, and unto whom it is said. Job. 14.
The days of man are short, thou haste nombred his time. But I suppose these
defenders of free will, will not use the symplenesse of men so shamelesly, that
they will either say that these things do happen by chance, or else will say,
that they which are not borne again do not peryshe: for then should they be
manyfestly conuinsed, either to agree with the Paganes in destenye, or else
with the Pelagians to deny that sin is transfused and powered forth upon the
posterity of Adam. The Palagians deserved to be condemned, because they said
that infantes were without sin.
And the Pelagians could not say, that infantes were unbaptized by destenye:
but because the said Pelagians durst profess that such infantes were free from
sin, they deserved to be condemned. But forasmuch as the question of the
separation of al me^ is already dysputed and tried, and forasmuch as infantes
can not be separated from the number of al men, and also forasmuch as the
verity spoke of every age, when he said: the son of man is come to seek and
to save that which was lost. Luke. 19. If children regenerat be sought and
saved by Christ, then vere they once lost being unregenerate.
In vain go such men about to open the depenesse of the unsearchable grace by
free will, which appoint the cause of election, in the merits of them that
are elected. And when they have brought forth many things both foolyshe and
false, of the will and judgment of the elder persons: yet in the difference of
infantes they can say nothing, nor once brag that they have yielded or rendered
any reason of that question that is had in disputacion concerning, all men,
and yet is not performed on all men. But the multiformitte or diversity, and
also the great nesse of gods grace proves that such men do affirm against
the verity, that that they speak of the elder persons wills, and also that
the testimonies of the holy scriptures are repugnant to their persuasion. All
the which things, if we should speak of in this present, there should be
no end of the disputacion. The which things not withstandinge, if they come
to memory, they may not be omitted that it may be declared as much as is
sufficient, that all the good merits of men, from the beginning of faith,
unto the end of perseueraunce, are the gift and working of god.

Of what fountain faith springs, and whence the spirit of faith is had,
and how this faith is given by measure according to the will of the geuer.

The.viii. Chapter.
Therefore, says which is the mother of good will and just workynge, of what
fountain she springs, the Apostle declares, which gives thanks to god
for the faith of the Romans, saying. Romans 1.
First I thank my God through Jesus christ for you al, because your faith is
spoken of throughout all the world. And writing to the Ephesians, he says.
Ephe 1.
For this cause after that I heard of your faith which is in Christ Jesus, and
your love toward all the saints, I cease not to give thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers, that the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the God of glory might give unto you the spirit of wisdom, and open unto
you the knowledge of himself, lightening the eyes of your hearts, that ye
might know what the hope is whereunto he has called you, and what the
richesse of his glorious inheritance is upon the saints. Likewise also he
gives thanks to God for the faith of the Collossians. Colloss. 1.
We give thanks to God (says he (and unto the father of our lord Jesus
Christ, always praying for you, since we heard of your faith in Christ
Jesus, and the love which ye have toward all the saints, for the hopes sake
that is laid up in store for you in heaven. And she wyng what he prays for
the^, that is: that they might receive other good things of the same aucthour,
he says. For this cause we also since the first day we have heard of you,
cease not to make prayers and supplications for you, that ye may be filled
with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,
that ye may walk worthily of the lord in all things that please him, being
fruitful in all good works, and encreasinge in the knowledge of GOD,
strengthened in virtue through his glorious power, in all patience and long
sufferynge with ioyfulnesse. Also to the Thessalonians, 1. Tessal. 1.
which served in the spirit of faith and love, he says. I thank god always
for you all, making mention of you in my prayers without ceassing, remembryng
the work of your faith, your labor in love, and your perseueraunce in the
hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God our father. 2. Tessa. 1.
And afterward: for this cause we thank god without ceasinge, because that
when ye received of us the word, where with GOD was preached, ye received it
not as the word of man, but even as it is in deed the word of GOD, who
works in you that believe. Could it more fully or more evidently have been
showed that the faith of them that believe, is the gift of God, then that
thanks should therefore be given to GOD? for they, to whom the word of god was
preached by men, doubted not thereof as of ye word of men, but believed it as god
speaking by men, who wrought in them that they might believe. In his second
Epistle also to the same Thessalonians, Note.
the Apostle speaks of the faith of them that profit and come forward in
Christ, on this manner.

We ought to thank GOD always for you my brethren, 1, Tessa. 2
as it is mete, because that your faith increases, and your charity is
abundant, every one to another of you. So that we our selves rejoice of you
in the Congregations of GOD, over your patience and faith in all your
persecutions and tribulations which ye suffer, which is a token of the just
judgment of God, that ye be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the
which ye also suffer. The Apostle Peter also showing that faith comes of
God, writes on this wise. 1. peter. 1.
Knowing that ye are redeemed, not with corruptible gold and silver, for your
vain conversation which ye have received by the traditions of your fathers,
but by the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled and without spot,
which was ordained before the world was made, but was declared in the last
times for your sakes, which by his means have believed in God, which raised
him up from Note.
death, and glorified him, that your faith and hope might be in the Lord.
Also the same Peter in his second Epistle, speaks on this wise of the
receiving of faith. 2. peter. 1.
Simon peter the servant and Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, to them
which have obtained like faith with us, by the righteousness that comes of
our lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But John ye Apostle teaches most plainly
from whence we have the spirit of faith, 1. John. 4.
saying. Every spirit that coufesseth that Jesus is come in the flesh, is of
God, and every spirit that denies Jesus, is not of God, and the same is
Antichrist. He says also, that he in whom the spirit of verity is, receives
the Gospel: we are of God, (says he) he that knows God, hears us, hereby
we know the spirit of verity, and the spirit of error. Also Peter in the
Acts of the apostles declares that faith comes through the lord Jesus.
This man (says he) which Acts. 3.
ye see and know has the name of him made whole, and faith which is by him,
has given this perfect health in the sight of you all. Faith in Christ comes
of Christ, and by Christ
In like manner also it is showed in the same History, of the faith of Lidia,
whose heart the Lord opened among other women which heard the gospel. Acts.
16.
And on the Sabbath day, we went out of the City and sat down by a river side,
where they were wont to pray, and we spoke unto the women which were come
thither, and a certain woman whose name was Lidia, a seller of purple, of the
City of Thiatira, a worshipper of god, heard us: whose heart the lord so
opened, that she atte^ded unto ye things that Paul spoke. And it is confirmed
by ye words of the verity it self, that faith comes not by man's wisdom but
by the inspiratio^ of god, for the lord says to his Disciples. But whom say
ye that I am? Simo^ Peter answered, saying: Thou art Christ ye son of the
living god. Math. 16.
Jesus answered and said unto him: Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas,
for flesh and blood has not reveled this unto the, but my father which is in
heaven. Paul the Apostle also tells yt this faith is given by measure, at ye
pleasure of him yt gives it, on this wise: I sai unto you al, through the
grace yt is given to me, yt no man esteem of himself more the^ becomes him to
esteem, but that he discretely iugde of himself as god has dealt to every man
the measure of faith. Also the same Paul declaryng yt the Romans 12.
unity and agreemente of the right faith, and the consenting to the honor of
god, does proceed and come of god, says. The god of patience and consolation,
Romans 15.
grant you to be like minded one toward another of you, after thensample of
Jesus Christ, that ye agreynge together, may with one mouth praise GOD the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And afterward: the god of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in beleuinge, that ye may be rich in hope, through the
power of the holy ghost. By the which testimony, not only faith, but also joy
and peace, and abundance of hope, are taught, not to be had but by the power
and virtue of the holy ghost. And the Apostle, writing to the Ephesians of the
richesse of grace, (the which grace gives good things for evil), and of
faith which is not had of our self but of the gift of god, speaks these
words. But god which is rich in mercy, Ephe. 2.
for his great loves sake wherewith he loved us, when we were dead by sin,
has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace we are saved, and has
raised us up, and has made us sit together in heavenly things, through
Christ Jesus: for by grace are ye made safe through faith, and that not of
your selves, for it is the gift of God, and comes not of works, least any
man should boaste himself. For we are his handy work, created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, unto the which, God has ordained us before, that we should
walk in them. Therefore the new creature has this property, through grace,
that they that are of Gods fasshioning, which are made in Christ by a heavenly
nativity, be not idle sluggardes, nor given to sloth, but increase from virtue
to virtue, and go from strength to strength, walking in ye way of good works.
For this is to be made in fashion. This is to be made a new creature of an
old. This is to be reformed from the image of the earthy man, into ye image of
the heavenly man. All the which things he begins, he augmenteth or
increases, and he perfourmeth and finisheth either openly by the cooperatours
or joint workers of grace, or else privily, by ye secret ministering of the
spirit, whose husbandry, whose building, and whose workmanship we are.

How that all the gifts of virtue are given and ordered of the lord god, and
that al things are in his hand, and that God is the aucthour of all goodness.

The.ix. Chapter.
BY these testimonies, as far as I can perceive, it is sufficiently declared
(although other Documentes might be gathered) that faith, whereby the ungodly
man is justified, is not had but by the gift of god, and that the same is given
for no merits going before, but is given to thend that it might be the
beginning of merits, and where as it is given unasked, it is given that other
good things might be obtained by her askinges. Grace is given before it be
asked.
Concerning the which thing, I will gather certain testimonies out of many
which show forth the abundance of grace, by the diversity of the gifts
thereof. That it is of god therefore, that a man choseth the way of god, and
rises up when he is fallen, the psalm of David sings, saying: psalm. 36.
The Lord orders a man's goynges, that he may will his way, when he falls
he shall take no hurt, for the Lord puts under his hand. Also the same
David teaches that men come to god by the leadinge of god, psalm. 42.
saying. Send forth thy light and thy truth, they have led me and brought me
unto thy holy hill, and unto thy Tabernacle, or place of thy dwelling.

Also that the strength of man is in the lord, and that the will of God does
prevent the deliverance of man. psalm. 58.
My strength will I ascribe unto thee, (says he) for god even my god is my
deliverer, his will shall prevent me. In the proverbs also, we read of
wisdom and understanding: for the Lord gives wisdom, prouer. 2.
and from his face comes knowledge and understanding. Also in the same book,
speakinge of the distribucion of the wisdom of GOD, without the which,
nothing is well done. prouer. 8.
It is thus said: counsel is mine, defense is mine, I am wisdom it self, and
power is mine own. By me kings raygne, and tyrauntes by me obtain the earth.
Also in another place, that no man can go the right way, but by the ordering of
god. prove. 20.
The steps of man are ordered of the Lord. For how does a mortal man
understand his own ways? Also in another place. prove. 21.
Every man thinks himself to be just, but the lord orders the hearts.
And afterward: the will is prepared of the lord. prove. 19.
Again in the same book, he speaks of thought and devise, on this wise.
Many thoughts are in the heart of man, but the devise of the lord preuayleth.
It is said also in Ecclesi. that both to have things necessary, and to use
them well, is the gift of God. There is nothing good to man, Ecclesi. 5.
but that that he eats and drinks, and shows his soul good of his
labor, and truly I have seen these things. For it is in ye hand of God: for
who has eaten or shall eat without him? Also it is red in the same bohe, that
the hearts and works of the righteous men, are in the hand of God, and that
they so much profit and go forward in their studies and desires, as he shall
give. Eccle. 9.
What pain soever a man take to get him, he shall not find him, and
whatsoever a wise man shall say to him, to enstruct him that he might have
knowledge, he shall not find it out. For I have laid up al these things in my
heart, and my heart has seen all this, that both the just men and the wise men
and also their works, are in the hands of god. And it is spoken in ye book of
wisdom, of the same work of grace, on this wise. For he is both the captain
of wisdom, and the amender of the wise. In his hand are both we and our
words, Sapi. 7.
and the knowledge of all wisdom and works, and discipline Of Continency also,
that it is had of Gods gift, the same scripture speaks on this wise: Sapi. 8.
After that I knew that I could none otherwise be chaste except God gave it
me: and this was also a point of wisdom, to know whose gift it is. Unto the
which sentence, the doctrine of the Apostle Saint Paul agrees, writing on
this wise in the first Epistle to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 7.
I would all men were as I am my self, but every one has his proper gift of
God, one after this sort, another after that. Also the Lord in the Gospel of
Mathewe declares the very same of chastity. For when his Disciples said: If
the cause of man and wife be such, it is not expedient to mary. Jesus says
unto them: Math. 19.
All men are not able to attain unto that ye speak of, but they to who^ it is
given of my father. Ecclesi. 1.
It is read in Ecclesiasticus on the same wise, of the fear of God and of
wisdom: The fear of the Lord is the crown of wysdom, and both are the gift
of God. Also in the same. The fear of the Lord has set it self above all
things: blessed is the man to who^ it is granted to have the fear of the
Lord. Esaias. 33.
Esaias the prophet speaks likewise of the spiritual richesse, whereof God is
the aucthour. Our salvation comes with treasures, as for wisdom and
godliness, and nourture, they come from the Lord, these are the treasures of
ryghteousnes. Also he speaks these words of the depth of the riches of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, whose goodness is prevented with the merit of
no man, which has measured the water with his hand, Esaias. 4.
the heaven with his spanne, and the whole earth with three fingers, which has
wayed the mountains in the skaoles, and the rocks in the balaunce: who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? who can
instruct him, or of whom has he asked counsayl, and he has taught him? Or who
has showed him judgment? or who has showed him the way of wisdom? or who
has first given to him, that he may recompense him? whereof also in the book
of Job the words of the lord are red in the Job. 4.
same sense, saying: who has given to me first, that I should recompense him?
All things that are under heaven are mine.

Ieremias also says on this wise, that a man has right wisdom from god.
Ierem. 10.
O lord, I know that it is not in man's power to order his own way, neither is
it in man to rule his own journey. Also the Lord protests by the same
Prophet, that the conversion of the heart to God, is of God, Ierem. 24.
and he says. I will restore them unto this land, and I will new build
them, and will not destroy them, I will plant them, and not pulle them up. I
will give them an heart that they may know me, for I am the Lord and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, for they shall be converted unto me
with their hole heart. Also the same Prophet she wynge that it comes of god
that we know god, says. And they shall know that I am the Lord their God,
and I will give them an heart to know me, and ears to hear me. The Apostle
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 12.
teaches that every good word and every holy work, is the secret working if
the holy spirit, without who^ nothing is well done, saying: Therefore I do you
to understand that no man speaking in the sprite of god defieth Jesus. And no
man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but in the holy ghost. For there be
diversities of gifts or graces, and yet but one spirit, and there be
differences of administracions, and yet but one Lord, and there be diverse
manner of operacions, and yet but one God, which works al in all. The gifts
of the spirit are given to every man to edify withal. For to one is given
the vtteraunce of wisdom by the spirit. To another is given the vtterau^ce of
knowledge by the same spirit, Faith is the gift of God, and the vvorkynge of
the spirit.
to another is given faith by the same spirit, to another the gift of healynge
by the same spirit, to another prophecy, to another judgment to discern
spirits, to another diverse tongues, to another the interpretacion of tongues:
and al these works one and the same spirit, deuidyng unto every man, Not as
we list.
even as he will.

The same Apostle unto the Ephesians says, that every man has so much grace
as the Lord has given him. One body and one spirit (says he) as ye are
called in one hope of your calling. One Lord, Ephesians. 4.
one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is above al men, and
over all things, and in us all. For to every one of us is given grace,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. For the which cause he says:
He ascended up on high, and has led captivity captive, and given gifts to
men. Also the same Apostle in the second Corinthes says: 2. Cor. 3.
that we are not able to think that that is spiritual, but by the grace of
God. Such trust have we toward God, through Christ, not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God, which has made us meet ministers of the new
Testament, not in the letter, but in the spirit: for the letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. Again in the same Epistle, teaching that the desire
and the sufficiency or ableness unto good works are ministered of God, 2.
Cor. 9.
he says: God is able to make all grace to abound in you, that ye all having
sufficient of all things, may be rich in every good work, as it is
written: He has dispearsed abroad and given to the poor, his ryghteousnes
abides for ever. For he that ministers seed to the sower, shall give you
food to eat, and shall increase the fruits of your ryghteousnes, that ye
being made rich to the vttermoste, may have plenty unto all singleness.

And the Apostle writing to the Ephesians, teaches that all good things where
with God is pleased are the gifts of GOD, and that it behooves them to be
asked of God, that he may give the^ to those which have them not. For this
cause (says he) do I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 3.
of whom is named all fatherhod both in heaven and in earth, that he would
give you power according to the richesse of his glory, that ye might be
strengthed by his spirit in the inner manne, that Christ might dwell in your
hearts by faith: that ye being rooted and grounded in love, might be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is that breadth and length, depth and
heyghte, and to know what the love of Christ is, which love passes
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all manner of fullness that comes of
God. And unto him that is able to do and to work all things more
aboundauntlye in us, then we can either ask or think, according to that power
wherewith he now works in us. To him he praise and glory in the congregation,
by Jesus Christ throughout al worlds Amen. And James the Apostle tells in
like manner, that God is the aucthour of every good thing, whose gifts are
neither uncertain nor mutable, but proceadyng of the eternal will, Jacob. 1,
saying: Do not ye err my dear brethren. Every good gift and every perfect
gift discendeth from above from the father of light, with whom there is no
variableness, neither is he changed unto darkness. Of his own good will
begat he us with the word of truth, that we might be the first fruits of
his creatures. Unto whom the Prophet zacharias agrees, zach. 9.
saying: In that day the Lord shall save his people as sheep, for holy
stones shall be rolled upon his land. For if any thing be good it is his, if
any thing be precious, it comes of him. And in the Gospel of Saint Mathe
we it is told likewise, that knowledge and understanding are the gifts of
God, which he gives to whom he will: Then his Disciples came unto him, Math.
13.
and said: Why doeste thou speak unto them in parables? But he answered and
said unto them: because that unto you it is given to know the mysteries of
the kyngedome of heaven, but to the^ it is not given. John the Evangelist does
also show, that no man has any goodness except he receive it from above,
John. 3.
saying: A man can receive nothing except it be given him from heaven. The
verity him self also teaches in the same Gospel, that no man comes to the
son, unless he be drawn of the father. For god makes him that shall come
both to understand and to be obedient. John. 6.
No man (says he) ca^ come to me, except the father which sent me do draw
him, and I will reyse him up in the last day. For it is written in the
Prophets: And they shall be all apt to be taught of GOD. Every one that has
heard and learned of the father, comes unto me. And afterward: For this
cause said I unto you that no man can come unto me, except it be given him
of my father. The authority of the holy Scriptures does confirm, that to go
forward and to continue unto the end in faith and good works, comes of the
gift and help of GOD. For the Apostle Paul writing to the Philippians
says. Philip. 1.
I surely believe this, that he yt has begone a good work in you, will also
accomplysshe and perform the same in you even unto the day of Ihesus
Christ. Pelagius.
A certain man wyllyng to convert the virtue of this text to his own wrong
understanding, would have it to be understand as if it had been said:
which has begone of you, that both the beginning and ending of the work
should be referred unto man, and not unto God, which wylled both to begin and
to end. But the most excellent preacher of grace has confuted this most mad
pride in the same Epistle, Philip. 1.
saying. Fear not ye your adversaries for any thing: for that same that is to
them the cause of dampnation, is to you the cause of salvation, Faith and
patience are the gifts of god for Christ's sake. philip. 2.
and that of God. For unto you it is given for Christ's sake, that ye should
not only believe in him, but also that ye should suffer for him. And again:
work out your salvation with fear and tremblyng (says he) For it is God that
works in you the will and the perfourmau^ce, and that of his good will. Also
in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians he teaches, that the beginning, the
going forward, and the finishyng of virtues, do come of God, saying. God him
self, and our father, and our Lord Jesus, direct our journey toward you,
1. Tessa. 3.
and the Lord multiply you, and make your love abou^dant one toward
another, and toward all men, like as we do abound in love toward you, to
confirm your hearts without fault in holiness of life, before God and our
father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. Also
writing to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.
and commending the fruitful perseuerau^ce of all virtues to be the gift of
God, he says: I thank my God always for you, for the grace of God that is
given you in Jesus Christ: for ye are made rich in all things in him, in all
doctrine and wisdom, like as the testimony of Jesus Christ is confirmed in
you, so that ye are not behind in any gift, waiting for the appeeryng of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the which shall also strengthen you unto the end without
fault, unto the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Also unto the Romans he speaks of the love of Christ, whereby he makes
them who^ he loves, inseparable, that is to say: he makes them to persevere
and continue unto the end. For what other thing is it to persevere, then not
to be overcome with temptacion? Romans 8.
Who (says he) shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation?
or persecution? or anguysshe? or hunger? or nakedness? or peril? or swearde?
As it is written. For thy sake we are killed all the day long, psalm 43.
and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain: But in all these things we
overcome and have the victory through him that has loved us. 1. Cor. 15.
Also to the Corinthians, speaking of the victory that Christ works, he
says. The stynge of death is sin. The strength of sin is the law: but
thanked be GOD which has given us the victory through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Also to the Thessalonians of the perseueraunce or continuance which God
gives, 1. These. 5.
he says: It is only god that keeps us fautlesse.
And the GOD of peace sanctify you through out, that your whole sprite soul
and body may be kept fautlesse unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Faithful is he that has called you, which also will do it. Also unto the same
Thessalonians: that all our goodness, either in workyng or in speaking, and
also the continuance in the same are the gifts of God, he shows us on this
wise, 2 Thessalonians. 2
saying: Our Lord Jesus Christ him self, and God our father, which has
loved us, and given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace,
comfort your hearts, and stablyshe you in all doctrine and good doing.
Furthermore, my brethren pray for us, that the word of god may have free
passage, and be glorified as it is with you, and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and evil men. For all men have not faith: 2 Thessalonians. 3.
but the Lord is faithful which shall stablish you, and keep you from evil.
Let us also hear the Apostle Peter, from whence he teaches the virtue of
perseueraunce to come. The GOD of all grace (says he) which has called us
unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, 1. peter. 5.
shall his own self after ye have suffered a little affliction, make you
perfect, confirm, strength, and stablysh you, to whom be power and dominion
for evermore. 1. John. 4.
John the Apostle also tells on this wise, that the victory of the Saints
is the work of God, which dwells in the Saints. Ye are of God little babes,
and ye have overcome the world: for he that is in you, 1. John. 5.
is greater then he that is in the world. Also the same says: All that is
borne of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith.

It is declared also in the Gospel of Luke, Luke. 22.
that it is Gods gift that men persevere in faith. And Jesus said unto
Peter: Simon Simon, behold Satan has desired to syfte you like meal, but I
have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith should not fail. And after thou art
converted strength thy brethren. And pray that ye fall not into temptacion.

We read also in the Gospel of John, that the verity speaks these words
of the sheep of Christ, which no man can take out of his hand. John. 10.
But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. My sheep hear my voice and
I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never peryshe, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Also in
the same Gospel are these things said by the mouth of the Lord, of them
whom the father gives to the son, who also come every one to the son, and
of who^ none does peryshe. All that the father gives me, John. 6.
comes unto me, and him that comes unto me I cast not away. For I am come
down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me,
and this is the will of the father that sent me: that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should reise them up again in the last
day. There be many other things in the discourse and order of the Canonical
Scriptures, which I omit because I would be brief. For the testimonies that I
have resited are not a few, nor obscure, nor yet of small authority: In whom
notwithstanding it is most fully declared, that all things pertayninge to
the attayninge unto everlasting life, are neither begone, neither can be
augmented, nor yet performed or finished, without the grace of God. 1. Cor. 4.
And against al election that glories of free will, this sentence of the
Apostle does most inuinsibly impugn, That is to say, who has made the
difference between the and the naughtiest man in the world, or who has made
thee better the^ him.
who says. But who discerns the? And, what have thou, that thou haste not
received. And if thou have received, whi boastest thou as though thou had
not received it? Therefore the depth of this question, which we (according to
the admiration of the apostle) do confess to be unsearchable, is not
answered by the will and nylle of free will. For although it be in man to
nille goodness, yet except it be given him he cannot will that that is good,
and the one has nature drawn unto it by transgression, the other has nature
received by grace. But how this comes to pass, that this one and the same
nature, (which before reconsiliacion is in all men evil, and in all men
miserable) is not justified in all men: and is discerned and divided into a
certain part of it self, from those that peryshe, by him that came to seek,
and to save that peryshed and was lost, cannot by the wit of man be tried
out in any wise.

For how much so ever the cursednes of wicked men is to be blamed, for
resistinge the grace of GOD: shall that prove that they to whom it is given,
have deserved it? Or else that the self same power and workyng of grace, that
subdueth to it self whom it will, was not able to convert and turn unto it,
those which remain unconverted? Even such were they that are drawn, as they
be which are left in their own hardness. But unto the one part has
wonderful grace given what it would. And unto the other part has just
verity given that, that was due: to the intent that the judgment of GOD may
be more unsearchable in the election of grace, then in the retribution, and
yeldynge of justice.

Notwithstanding, least that part of our faith should seem to be
dymynyshed, wherein we godly believe that God wills al men to be saved
through the knowledge of the truth, (by that that is evidently showed in ye
effects of grace) we must labor and endeavor through the help of Christ,
that the stabilitie and certaynetie of this difference may appear to us. And
because the business of so necessary a knowledge requires no small travail
and diligence, we will begin the disputation that shall follow in the
beginning of another book.

The end of the first book.
The contents of all the Chapiters of the second book of saint Ambrose
Bishop of Millaine, entitled of the vocation of al nations.
THat there are three things in

That no man can come to the knowledge salvation by his own merits, but by
the help and working of Gods grace.











from eternal salvation.

How grace prepares the will, as a

A rehearsal of the things dysputed

The second book of Saint Ambrose Bishop, of the vocation and calling of all
nations, wherein he establishes with most fyrme and strong arguments,
those things which are diffined
The first Chapter.
ALl contencion removed and settea part, the which the bitter courage of
intemperate disputacions does in gender and bread. It is evident that there are
three things in this question, whereof I begin this second book, of the which
it behooves to entreat more largely. One, which must of necessity be
granted, that god wills al men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth. Another which in no wise may be doubted: that no man can come to
the knowledge of the truth by his own proper merits, but by the help and
work of Gods grace. The third, which is to be confessed is this, namely that
the depth of gods judgments cannot be found out nor attained unto of man's
understanding, and that it ought not to be searched why he saves not all
men, which wills all men to be saved. For if that be not sought for,
which cannot be known, there shall remain no cause of contencion between the
first and second diffinition: but either of the^ may be preached, and either
of them may be believed with a sure and a quiet faith. Surely god with whom
there is no vnequitie, and all whose ways are mercy and truth, the good
maker of all men, is a just ordinatour and dysposer, he dampneth no man
vndeseruinge, he delyuereth no man of duty, punishinge that that is ours when
he punishes offenders, and geuynge of his own, when he makes just men,
that the mouth of them which speak unrighteous things may be stopped, and
that god may be justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged.
Neither may the complaynt of him that is damned be just, nor yet the arrogancy
of him that is justified be true.

If either the one say, he has not deserved to be punished or ye other say
that he has deserved grace. And like as those sayings the which I have
declared out of the holy scryptures for the setting forth of grace, cannot be
confuted nor stained by any reason or craft of disputacion, so that so great a
number of sentences plainly agreynge together in them selves, might be
drawn or wrested into any uncertainty of a false exposicion: Even so also,
that that is found in the same body of the scriptures touching the salvation
of all men cannot be reproved by any contrary argumentation: So that the
harder the same is to be understood and apprehended, with so much the more
laudabler faith it ought to be believed. Great is the force of consent, to whom
thaucthoritie is sufficient to follow the truth, yea although the reason of it
be unknown. Therefore let us diligently consider, what the Lord commands
the preachers of the Gospel. For in Saint Mathewes Gospel he says thus:
Math. 28.
All power is given to me both in heaven and in earth: Go your ways therefore,
and teach all nations, baptizinge them in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy ghost, teaching them to observe all things that I have
commanded you. And behold I am with you always unto the end of the world.
Mark. 16.
And in Saint Mark, it is said to the same Apostles on this wise. Go ye into
all the world, preach ye the Gospel to every creature: and whosoever shall
believe and be baptized, the same shall be saved, but whosoever will not believe
shall be dampened. Is there any difference made here of any nation or of any
men in this commandment. He has excepted no man for merit, he has
separated no man for his stock or lineage, he has made no difference of the
state of men. The Gospel of the Cross of Christ was sent even to all men.
And lest the ministry of the preachers should seem to be done by the
only work of man: behold (says he) I am with you always even unto the
worlds end: That is to say, when ye shall enter in as sheep among wolves,
be not afraid of your own infyrmitie, but put your trust in my power,
Math. 10.
which unto the end of the world will not forsake you in all this work or
business. Not to the end that ye should suffer nothing: but that that much
more is, I will bring it so to pass that ye shall not be overcome with the
ragyng cruelty of any tyrauntes. For in my power shall ye preach, and by me
it shall come to pass, that even among the denyers and those that speak
against you, yea even among those ye rage against you, Abraham's children
shall be raised up of stones. I will put into their minds whatsoever I have
taught, and I will perform that which I have promised. They shall betray you
in their counsayles, and shall scourge you in their sinagoges, and for my names
sake shall ye stand before Kings and Rulers, in a witness to them, and to
the gentiles. But when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or
what ye shall speak: for it is not ye that shall speak, but the spirit of
your father that speaks in you.

For the brother shall betray the brother unto death, and the father the son,
and the Children shall arise against their fathers and mothers, and shall put
them to death, and ye shall be hated of al men for my name sake. But whosoever
shall endure unto the end, he shall be saved. The grace of GOD our Sauyoure
has therefore Titus. 2.
appeared (says the Apostle) unto all men: and yet were the gifts of grace
hated of all men. And while there were some that hated, and other some that
were oppressed with the hatred of them that persecuted: yet was there neither
of the parties deprived of the name of all men, the portion of the rebels
having the loss of their salvation, but the dignity of the faithful
obteynyng the nombre of al fullness. For the Apostle Saint John says: 1.
John. 2.
But if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, even Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propiciation for our sins: and no^ for our
sins only, but also frr the sins of the whole world. And it is a mystery
of a great and unspeakable Sacrament, that unto those preachers to whom it was
said: Mark 16.
Go ye into al ye world and preach the Gospel to al creatures: Math. 10.
unto the same was it said before, ye shall not go into the way of the
Gentyles, and into the Cities of the Samaritanes shall ye not enter, but rather
go ye to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. For though the Gospel
should be directed unto the vocation and calling of all men, and the Lord
would al men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth: yet
notwithstanding, he had not taken away from himself the power and
authority of his dispensation, so that the order of his council should run
otherwise then he had appointed in his secret and just judgment: wherefore
the murmuringes of obstinate men's complaints take no place. For it is sure,
that whatsoever GOD would have done, ought not to be done otherwise the he
would. And in time paste, what time the Lord Jesus sat in the glory of God the
father, and the preachers of the word did labor in the business that they
had taken upon them, Act. 16.
the Apostles willing to preach the word in Asia, were forbidden of the
holy ghost. And when they purposed to go into Bithynia, they were forbidden
of the spirit of Jesus: Doubtless not that the grace of God was denied to
that people, but as it should appear, it was protracted and delayed for a
time. For afterward the Christian faith was of power among the^ also. But
what the cause was of the deferring of their calling it is not known. And yet
are we taught by the example of the thing, that done it was: because that
among generalles, whether they be promises or works, or else precepts, God
knows by a secret reason how to ordeyne and dispose certain things being
excepted from the common causes.

I believe, for that intent that those things which shine more dymlye, having
shadows over them, might apeere the more marvelous to us when we see them:
least our sight should become the more dull and negligent, through the
facility and easynes of the sight thereof, and should after a certain manner
slumber in accustomed things if it were not styrred up by unaccustomed
things. And we have known these incognoscible delays of illuminations to
have happened in many houses and families, among who^ doubtless many peryshe
in unbelief, not only among the wicked which are far from the truth:
but also even in the Cities of the beleuers, while they which are to become
Christians, are against the Christian faith. For many shall love that they have
hated, and shall preach that, that they do not now allow. And among these
things: who shall make it known unto these murmuters or curious searchers,
why the Sun of ryghteousnes shyneth not yet to some Nations, and why also
the verity which is to be revealed hereafter, withholdeth at this time her
bright beams from the hearts that are so full of darkness: why they which are to
be reformed afterward are suffered so long to go astray, and why that that is
given to old men in the end of their life, is not given them by so long a time
before? Why the children believe now in Christ, and the parents do not yet
believe? And again, why an evil child differs utterly from his godly and
religious parents? And yet notwithstanding prayers are daily made to god
(which is both the geuer of the beginning of faith, and also of then crease
thereof) according to his commandment: so that both if he mercifully do hear,
the grace of his mercy may be known, and also if he do not favorably hear,
the truth of his judgment may be understood. And also in times past even
the same grace which after the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ was
spread abroad every where, and of the which it is written: (Thy illuminacions
has shone abroad to all the world) was not lacking in the world. Psalm. 76.
For though it can not be denied but that the people of Israel were elected by
a special regard and mercy of God: and all other Nations were suffered to
walk in their own ways, that is to say, were suffered to live after their
own will: yet notwithstanding, the everlasting goodness of the Creatoure
did not so turn away it self from those men, that he did not admonysshe
them by some significasignifications both to know him and also to fear him.

For heaven and earth, the sea, and every creature which may be seen and
known, was chiefly ordained for this profit and utility of mankind: to the
intent that the reasonable nature, through the beholding of so many kinds of
things, through the experience of so many good things, through the receipte
of so many gifts, might be instructed to the worship and love of his maker:
the spirit of God replenyshyng all things, in whom we live, move, Act. 17.
and have our being.

And though that health be far from sinners, yet is there nothing void of the
presence and power of his salvation. Therefore as the Prophet says: The earth
is full of the mercy of the Lord, psalm. 32.
that never failed any time or any generation. And he did ever bestow that
same providence, by the which he does give and preserve al things to the
governance and succouryng of nature, having ordinarily prepared and appointed
by the immutabilitie of his eternal council, unto whom, and what he him self
would distribute in their seasons: and also the unsearchable and inuestigable
measures of his manyfolde grace, whereby he would diversely give and distribute
his gifts and divine mysteries. For like as the liberality and large nesse of
this grace, which last of all had her influence upon all Nations, does not
euacuate that which fell upon one Israel under the law, nor the richesse
present do not abolysshe the faith of the former penurye and scarsenesse: Even
so likewise we must not imagine of that care and regard of God which
properly governed the children of the Patriarchs, that the merciful
gouernaunces of God were withdrawn from the residue of men: who surely in
comparison of the elect, seem to be but abiectes, but they never were
repelled from both manifest and secret benefits. For we read in the Acts of
the Apostles, Act. 14.
that Paul and Barnabas the Apostles said to the Lycaonians: Ye men, why do
ye these things? We also are mortal men like unto you, preaching unto you
that ye should be converted from these vain things unto the living god, who
made both heaven and earth, the sea, and al things in the^ contained: who in
times past suffered al nations to wander their own ways. And yet left he not
him self without witness, in that he sent us his benefits, in geuyng us rain
from heaven and fruitful seasons, fylling our hearts with food and gladness.
And what witness is this which ever served ye Lord, and never kept silence of
his goodness and power? but that same unspeakable beauty of the whole world, and
the rych and orderly liberality of his unspeakable benefits, by ye which
certain tables of ye eternal law were written in the hearts of men: that the
common and public doctrine of gods institucion might be read in the books of
the elements. The heavens therefore and all the heavenly bodies, the sea, the
land, and all that ever is in them, did preach the glory of GOD, with the
consonant hermony of their kind and ordinacion, and by that perpetual
preaching they uttered the majesty of their maker. And yet notwithstanding,
the greatest nombre of men which were suffered to walk the ways of their own
will, did neither understand nor follow that law. And the sauoure of life
which smelled unto life, became unto them the savor of death unto death, so
that also even in those visible testimonies, it might be learned that the
letter kylleth, but the spirit gives life.

The.ii. Chapter.
THat thing therefore which was done in Israel, through the ordinance of the
law and the doctrine of the Prophets: that same the testimonies of all
creatures and the marvelous works of God did continuallye among all nations.
But forasmuch as among that people and Nation (to whom both those kinds of
erudicion was given) no man was justified but by grace, through the spirit
of faith: who doubts but that they which were able to please God, of what
Nation so ever they were, or in what time soever they were, were discovered by
the spirit of gods grace? The which grace, though before time it was both more
scarce and more privy and secret, yet did it never deny it self at any time
in one power, in diverse quantity, in immutable counsel, in manyfolde
operation. For even in these days, wherein the ryuers of unspeakable gifts do
water ye whole world, one manner is not given to all men, nor yet one measure.
For though all one and the same verity be preached to all men, by the
ministers of the word and of the grace of God, and al one and the same
exhortacion given: yet is it the husbandry of God, and the building of God
(whose virtue woorketh inuisiblye) that, that which is buylt may go forward,
and that that which is tylled may grow and increase, as the Apostle Paul
witnesses, saying: What is Apollo? 1. Cor. 3.
and what is Paul? his ministers are they whom ye have believed, even as the
Lord has given to every man. I have planted, Apollo has watered, but GOD
gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he
that watreth, but God that gives the increase. He that planteth and he that
watreth are one, and neither of them better then other: yet shall every man
receive his reward according to his labor. We are gods laborers, ye are gods
husbandry, ye are gods building. Therefore every man is so far forth an
helper, a workman, and a minister of this husbandry and buyldyng, as the Lord
shall give unto every man. And those which are tylled through the labor of
the ministers, do increase unto that measure whereunto the aucthour of the
increase shall advance them. For in the field of the Lord there is not al
like and one manner of plantynge. And though the buyldyng of al an whole temple
do agree into one beauty, yet have not all the stones thereof one place, nor one
use. Like wise also in a body, every membre has not one office, as the
Apostle says. 1. Corin. 12
But now has God disposed and ordered the members and every one of them at
this own pleasure. And whereof these said members become apt, wence they
become profitable, and whence they become so beautiful, the same doctor
declares, saying. Therefore I do you to understand, that no man speakinge in
the spirit of God, defieth Jesus: and no man can call Jesus the Lord, but by
the holy ghost. And there be diversities of graces, and yet but one spirit,
and there are differences of administrations, and yet but one Lord: and there
be diverse manner of operations, and yet but one God which works al in all.

The gift of the spirit is given That is to sai to every man to whom they are
given.
to eueri man to edify with all: For to one is given through the spirit, the
vtteraunce of wisdom: To another is given the vtteraunce of knowledge by the
same spirit, to another is given faith by the same spirit: to another power
to do miracles. To another prophecy. To another judgment or trial of
spirits. To another diverse tongues, To another the interpretacion of
languages. And al these things works one and the same spirit, dividing them
to every man, even as he will. Seeing that the teacher of the Gentyles has
showed these things with so great a light, and such a playnesse: by what
reason or for what cause should we doubt of it? Does not the budde and
beginning of al virtue spring to us from GOD? Also, who except he be to mad
will complain of the difference of Gods gifts? Or think that it is to be
ascrybed unto unlike merits: that it is not equallye given of the heavenly
liberality. For if this distribution should come from him, according to the
merits of any works that went before, the Apostle would never have knitte up
the cataloge and rehearsal of those gifts with such a conclusion, as to say:
Al these things works one and the same spirit, deuidinge unto every man as
he will, where no doubt if he would have the causes to be understand of
merits, he would have said: dividing unto every one as they deserve. Like as
he promised a reward of devotion to the planters and waterers: saying. Every
man shall receive his own reward according to his work: therefore it is given
to eueri man without merit whereby he may come to merit. And it is given before
any labor, He means, to eueri man to whom it is given, as is said a
little before. Math. 25.
whereby every man may receive reward according to his labor. The which
thing to be even so: is also known by the testimonye of the evangelical
truth, whereas by a certain comparison it is said, that a certain man
goinge into a far country, called his servants, and delivered unto them
his substance, and unto one he gave five Talentes, and to another two, and to
another one, to every man according to his ability, that is to say: according
to their proper and natural possibility: and not according to their proper
merit. For it is one thing to be able to work, and another thing to work,
and it is one thing to be able to have charity, and another thing to have
charity: and it is one thing to be capacious of Charity, of justice, of
wisdom: But it is another thing to be chaste, just and wise.

Wherefore, every thing that is repayrable, is not repaired: nor every thing
that is curable, made hole. For it comes of nature to be repayrable and
curable, but to be repaired and cured, is of grace.

And to conclude, those to who^ an unlike number of Talentes was given unto,
according to the measure of the capacity, that the distributour of the
substance foresaw in them: they did not receive the reward of merit, but the
matter or substance of the work: in the which the vigilant diligence of the
two servants is not only honorable rewarded with glorious praises: but also
is commanded to enter into the everlasting joy of their Lord. But the dull
ydelnes and sloth full wickedness of the third, is no such wise punyshed,
that both is he dyshonored with an opprobrious check, and also is dispatched
of the portion or talent that he had received, for worthy was he to lose his
unprofitable faith, that had not exercised charity.

Wherefore in the words following, (wherein most evidently is declared the manner
of the judgment to come) when the son of man shall sytte in the seat of his
majesty, all nations being first gathered together, some are led to the
right hand, and other some shall be set on the left hand. When he has
praised those on his right hand for the works of charity, nothing is else
objected to them on the left hand, but the neglectinge of mercy and loving
kindness. These therefore had also received faith: but they had not followed
love. Neither shall they be dampened because they have not kept the gift, but
because they have not increased it. For although that all good gifts are of
god, yet some of them are given of God unasked: to the intent yt by those
which are received, those may be sought which are not yet given. The sede yt
is sown in the ground, is not sown to yt intent it should remain only ye
same: but yt in bringing forth fruit it should become manifold and great number:
the prosperity whereof comes from him that gives the increase. But now a
ground being lively and fruitful through the rain of grace, has that that is
looked for of it, according to that, that it received to be increased.

The.iii. Chapter.
THese things (as I suppose, and as far as the Lord has given me knowledge)
being rightly handled, let us return unto that from whence our disputacion
made digression: that is to say, to the consideration of the differences whereby
the works and gifts of gods grace are variated and made diverse. The high
nesse of the richesse of Gods knowledge and wisdom (whose judgments are
unsearchable and his ways paste finding out) has always in such wise
moderated his merci and judgment, that in the most secret will of his
eternal counsel, he would not that the measures of his gifts should be
equal in all things upon al generations or upon all men. For after one manner
has he helped those men whom he taught to know him by the testimonies of the
heaven and the earth: and after another manner those for whom he had provided to
be helped, not only by the service of the Elements, but also by the doctrine
of the law, by the oracles of the Prophets, by miracles and signs, and by
the help and succor of aungelles. And he much more otherwise declared his
mercy to all men, when the son of god became the son of man, yt he might be
found of the^ that sought not after him, and might apeare to them that asked
not for him. And that he might have ye preeminence, not only in one people of
ye stock of Israel: but that the multiplied sede of Abraham might spring in
every nation which is under heaven. Into the which succession of heritage, not
the Children of the flesh, but the Children of promise should enter. And that
there should be now as great a scarsenesse of grace among ye pleople of the
Jews, as was in times paste among other nations. Nevertheless it is
promised, that when the fullness of the gentiles is come in, then their
dryness shall be watered also. Who now ca^ tell what the causes should be of
these diversities and vnliknesses being al under one and the same grace? Or
what the reason of it is, seeing the scriptures do not tell it? And forasmuch
as the knowledge of thapostle Paul in these things passes from disputacion
unto wonder: who dare presume so far, as to think yt these ca^ be opened by
disputing, and are not rather to be merueyled at with silence. Let this secret
therefore be pacientli and gentelly unknown, that is set so far from man's
understanding. Yet, because things yt are close shut up cannot be known: the
intrau^ce to things that are opened may not be ouerpassed and let slip. For
many aucthorities of the holy scriptures have manyfestly declared, and the
continual experimentes of all ages have taught, that the just mercy of God,
and his merciful justice, has not ceased at any time to norishe the bodies of
men, nor to teach them, nor yet to help their understandings and minds. For
it has ever rayned on the ^ath. 5.
good and bad, he has made his son ever to arise upon both the just and
unjust: he has ever given the breath of life, he has ever given the
continual courses of the day and the night, he has ever given fruitfulnes to
the ground, increase to the seeds, and fecunditie or multiplyinge to the
generation of men. And if he have at any time diminished any of these things,
he has chastened with gentle correction the backtourninges and sloth of those
that abused them, to the intent that they should seek his mercy in their
adversity, whose justice they feared not in their prosperity.

Furthermore, if we have recourse to the very beginning of the world, we shall
find that the spirit of God was the governor Genes. 6.
of all the saints that were before the fludde, for the which cause they were
named the sons of God. Romans 8.
For as thapostle says: whosoever are ruled or led by the spirit of God, they
are the sons of God. And when they had neglected the observations of their
fathers, by mynglynge them selves in the unlawful marriages of the reprobates,
and for that wicked society and mingling were judged worthy of destruction:
the lord said. My spirit shall not abide in these men, for they are flesh.
Whereby it appears that the same people, whose generation are set in a
diverse order with the number of their years, was before that spiritual, even
in the same will which the holy ghost does govern: bestowinge the temperauncye
of his regyment and governance in such sort, that he took not away the power
to declyne to sin: the which power if this people had not had, they could
neither have forsaken God nor yet be forsaken of God: It should be that same
of whom it is spoken. Happy is he that was able to offend, and has not
offended. During the time therefore that Eccle. 13.
this people abode in God, they remained in that will that god inspyred and
governed. For the will (as it is written) is prepared of the Lord. But of this
preparation there is not always one success nor yet one measure: for the
works and gifts of grace are disceuered in diverse wise and by innumerable
differences, and in every kind of the said gifts, there are unlike degrees
and uneven quantities. For like as in the coming up of earbes and trees that
the earth brings forth, there is not al one beauti or likeness, nor one kind
of the^ al, but every one of them comes forth in ye form of his own seed,
and in the quantity of his own kind: neither do they receive full beauty
incontinent, as soon as they come forth, but come forward by certain orderly
increasing, until they come to the perfyte quantity of their state that
happened unto the^ by the same increasinge or growinge. Even so, the seeds of
the gifts of the holy ghost, and the plants of virtues, do not grow in
every field of man's heart hollye, the same and attonce that they shall be
afterward. And it is an hard thing to find ripeness in the beginning, and
perfection in the first entrance.

Yet many times the mighty and merciful God does pour forth these meruaylous
effects of his workinge, and whatsoever he will give, that same conueyeth he
into certain minds altogether and at once, the tariynge for increase not
waited for. Leui is sanctified in the loins of Abraham, and with him is also
the house of Aaron and priestly order blessed. In Isaac conceived by promise
and borne contrary to the hope of the old barreyne parents, is the calling
of all the Gentyles and the form of Christ laid up and hyd. Jacob being
beloved, without any help of merit is elected before he is born. Ierem. 1.
To Iheremye it was said: Before I fashioned thee in the womb I knew thee,
and or ever thou were borne I sanctified thee. Luc. 1.
John reioyseth being filled with the holy ghost in his mother Elizabethes
womb: And that there may be none greater among the children of women, he
feels the begynnynges of grace before the begynnynges of nature. But although
there want not other examples of the like doctrine, the which I ouerpasse
because I would be brief: yet is that sort of men thicker and more in nombre,
unto whom what soever the heavenly liberality particulerly gives, does grow
by little and little, to the intent that the causes of the gifts which are to be
given, may be brought forth of ye gifts which are already given. Some there
be, Mark. 9.
which after they have received faith, are not without diffidencie and
mistrust, which doubtless he knew to be in himself, which said: Lord I
believe, help mine unbelief. And the which they perceived not to be quite out
of their minds that said: Luke. 17.
Lord increase our faith. Some men do not understand the thing that they do
believe, and many of those are long holden in the measure of their simplicity.
Many do sone receive the light of understanding, and yet the same understanding
has not in all men one power and force, or like aptness. And many men there
be, which when they seem to be decked and adorned with faith and understanding,
yet faint they for lack of charity, and can not abide in those things that
they see by faith and understanding: for a man cannot always continue in that
thing that he loves not with all his heart. Also the gift of charity it self
is not always such, that the receiver thereof can take at once whatsoever
belongs to the fullness thereof. For there is a love which may be overcome
with another love, and many times the love of GOD fades and widdereth away
through the love of the world: except it increase to such an heat through
kindling of the holy ghost, which can be quenched with no cold, nor wax
fainte through any heat.

Therefore, when in this unspeakable gift of God there is a sum of all
gifts, or a purpose whereto they are given, and also a certain life of all
virtues: all other gifts are given to this end and purpose, that the intent
of the faithful soul may have whereby it may prease and attain to perfect
charity. The which, because it is not only of god but also God himself, it
makes men stable and durable, and also unable to be overcome, whom it has
filled with the river of his pleasures. But they that know not the sweetness
of these waters, and drink yet of the ryuers of this world: or else if they
have tasted any thing of the well of life but with their lyppes only, and yet
do desire to be dronken with the golden cup of Babylon: those are utterly
deceived in their own free choice, and are fallen away by their own free
will. And if they continue in that sluggardy, they spoil themselves of that
they have already received. For any kind of good thing may easily perish
without charity, the which could not profit without charity.

The.iiii. Chapter.
AND these things which I have briefly and compendiously touched, Gods
ordinance extends not to the fall of men.
do suffice to this purpose, that we may most certeynly know how that no
faithful man, not departing from GOD, is forsaken of him, neither that the fall
of any manne is appointed by the ordinance of god. But many which yet have
the use of reason, are therefore at liberty to turn back, because that not
to have turned back might have a reward, and that the thing which could not
be don without ye working of the spirit of God might be reckened for their
merits, of whom it could not be done by will, which will in evil actions
can be alone, but in good doing it can not be alone. For though it be
agreeable to man's nature to be of a good will: yet the vice or fault that fell
into nature through an evil will, is not overcome by the power of nature, but
by the power of grace. Therefore that first people was governed by the spirit
of God, and did obtain from the fellowship and manners of that cursed and
foredampned people, through the information of the holy ghost: keeping a
separation of themselves, from mynglynge with the carnal men: whose euyls the
long suffryng of Godde did so long forbear, as the good men pleased him in
that they did not follow them. But afterward, when the good men were
corrupted also through following of the evil, and did through the fault of
will, wholly conspire together into al one wickedness. Whom (the house of Noah
excepted) one ungodliness had polluted, one sentence and judgment did root
out and destroy. But the goodness of God failed not that part of men which
remained not in charity, but swelled from the beginnynge of them with the
poison of the deuylles malice: Cayne.
For the Lord vouchsafed through his fatherlye counsel, to mittigate the
prince of that wicked Nation, (who envied the good works of his holy brother,
and imagined his death in his mischeuous heart) saying to Cayne: Why art thou
sad? Gene. 4.
why does thy countenance change? If thou offrest ryghtly, and yet deuideste
not ryghtly: have thou not sinned? Be content, for the amendment thereof shall
belong to thee, and thou shall rule the matter. Put away (says he) thy
sadness, that aryseth of an envious disdain, and quench the flames of thy
cruel hatred. He means that Cayne divided the vvorste of his fruits to GOD,
whereas he should have given the best.
Abell has not hurt thee, nor done thee harm in pleasynge me. I have
despised thine offeringes by mine own judgment, not by his desire. Thou haste
done a good work negligentlye. Chine oblation had been right, if the
division had been right. Thou ought to have known what thou shouldeste
offer, seeing thou kneweste to who^ thou should offer. Thou haste not
ryghtlye divided between me and thee, because thou haste reserved the best to
thy self. This error therefore is thine, and this trespace is thine own: be
quiet, and be not moved against thine innocent brother, but rather let thy
faut be revoked to thy self. Let not sin reign and bear rule over thee,
but rather take thou to thy self dominion over it: For by repenting, both
thou shall not proceade into greater mischief, and also shall be cleansed from
the thing wherein it grieved thee that thou had displeased me. Therefore
when God spoke such things to Cain is it to be doubted that he would have
brought to pass (yea and it suffised as touching the manner of his healyng)
that Caine should have repented of his ungodly furye? But his stout malice
became the more inexcusable, of that thing whereof it ought to have been the
better reformed. And doubtless, God knew before to what end the conceit of
the frantic fellow would come: neither was his mischeuous will compelled to
sin by necessity, because the knowledge of God could not be disceiued. From
whose conspiracy and workynge also the life of Abell might have been preserved
without harm: but that it pleased GOD with the great praise of his patience,
that the temporary woodnesse of the wicked man, should become the perpetual
honor of the just man. And who cannot easelye perceive that the goodness of
God never denied it self to ye posterite of this murderer of his brother,
although they lived in the manners of their forefather, if he would but
consider how much so long a patience of God, so great a plenty of temporal
goods, and so great a nombre of issue increased, might have profyted them? The
which benefits, although they did nothing help to the remedy and amendment
of the^ that were obdurate and hardened: yet do they prove that their falling
away proceaded not of Gods ordinance, but of their own will. But in the
preseruacio^ of Noah, and of his sons and daughters in law, in who^ the hope
of thincrease of al nations was laid up: how great works of Gods grace were
declared, the holy Scripture does tell plainly. Forasmuch as by that ark, which
was of so wonderful wydenesse yt it received al kinds of beasts (so much as
belo^ged to the store of increase) the Church was figured, which was to be
gathered together out of all nations of men, unto it self: when by a tree and
by water, the redemption on the Cross and the wasshyng of regeneration is
opened: when in them that were saved from that destruction of the world, the
fullness of all the Gentilles is blessed: when the blessing of the increase of
mankind is renewed, and liberty increased to eat what men list (strangled
and blood only forbodden) And the security and sauftie of our salvation was
consecrated, in the testimony of the bow of many colors, that is in the
signs of manyfolde grace.

The which Sacraments and misteryes verily, did not only enstruct those few
men of one household that were then: but also in them, all their pasterities
and offspring, to the intent that the thing that was given to the reformation of
the parents, might profit toward the instruction of the Children. And now,
when in process of time, the posterities and generatio^s of men were
increased, and the great number of mortal me^ were waxe^ proud of their
multipliynges, and according to the height of their pride, went about to build
them a tower of an unmeasurable building, that it should reach up unto heaven:
How marvelous was the censure of gods justice in repressing of that their
arrogant presumption? which did confound that one only speech of those people
that was so consonante and agreeable with significations that were known to
every man among themselves, in to the diversity of.lx. and.xii. tougnes: that
the agreement of the workmen perishing in disagreable voices, the purpose of
their mad enterprise might be broken: and that he might cause them to inhabit
upon all the whole face of the earth, through the necessary scatterynge abroad
of an evil gathering together. And the miracles of the Christian grace were
foreordayned in that work of Gods prouydence, which should afterward call
together all them that were so dyspersed into the couplement of that buyldyng
wherein every knee boweth to GOD, and every tongue confesses that Jesus Christ
is in the glory of the father.

This same largeness of grace did the promise of Godde that was made to
Abraham declare, to be opened now in the fullness of the times appointed, by
more evident tokens, what time as his double succession (that is to wete, the
children of the flesh, and the children of promise) was compared to the
multitude of gravel stones, and of stars. philip. 2.
And the old man being far from the hope of having any issue, through the
aged barreynnesse of his wife: believed in a commendable faith through the issue
of one son, that he should be ye father of the whole world, John. 8.
foreseeyng or rather beholding him in his sede, that said: Abraham saw my
day, and reioysed. By the which faith, when Abraham was justified, he had not
yet received the commandment of circumcision: but his faith was counted to
him for righteousness, when he was yet in his natural prepution or
uncircumcision.

And that same faith received the seal of circumcision, Jesus Christ.
in that same member whereby the seed of procreation might come unto that
flesh, wherein without all carnal seed, That is the virgin Mary.
God, the son of GOD, the word, might become flesh, and be borne of
Abraham's daughter, even the Virgin Mary, taking all men into the fellowship
of this his nativity and birth, which being borne again in Christ by the
holy ghost, should believe the thing that Abraham believed.

The.v. Chapter.
ANd this faith was holde^ within one Gene. 12.
stock of people, before that seed came, of whom it was said to Abraham: In
thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed, the hope of our
redemption, being alive among the true Israelites. For although there were
some of the strange nations, whom it vouchsafed the verity to lyghten in the
time of the law: yet were they so feawe, that it could scarce be known
whether there were any or no. Neither for all this were the nations to be
holden excused, which being enstraunged from the conversation of Israel,
having no hope, and being without GOD in this world, peryshed in the
darkness of ignorance. For this abundance of grace, that now wattereth all
the world, did not flow aforetime with like plenteousnesse, for there was
evermore a certain measure of the heavenly doctrine given unto all men: which
notwithstanding it was of a more scarce and secret grace, yet was it
sufficient as the Lord judged it unto some men for a remedy, and unto all
men for a testimony, that it might appear, not doubtfullye but euydently,
that except, where sin was aboundaunte, there grace had been more
aboundaunt, the like wickedness had also blinded all mankind now in these
days. Whether peradventure are there better wits in these our days (as
some men babble) then were of old time? and have the latter times brought forth
minds yt were more apt to receive Gods gifts? The which thing if it were
so, yet ought it to be ascribed to the goodness of the author, which made
such minds as were not before, that the people might be called unto eternal
life. But there is nothing innouated or new changed in the carnal generation,
neither is ye ofspringe of the successors grown more genteller then their
ancestors. But rather in the men of that time, wherein the redemer of the
world came: Look how much more duller that progeny and ofspringe was
become, so much the stronger was iniquity found in them. The ungodly fury of
the Jews proved this right well. And how apt that generation was to the
Gospel of Christ, not only the hearts of the common people, but also the
hearts of the Scribes, Princes, and Priests, have declared. To who^ it was
but a trifle to wax wood in cruelty and tirannye against the lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world, by sedicion, contumelies and
reproaches, spittinges, buffettes, and blows, stoninges, scourginges, and at
the last by crucifiyng him on the Cross contrary to the testimony of the law,
contrary to the oracles of the Prophets, and contrary to ye practicing of
godly virtues: But also they persecuted the witnesses of his resurrection with
the like fury and madness. The which the Apostles, when they were scourged of
ye high Priests, showing the same out of David's psalm: said. Lord, thou art
he that haste made heaven and earth, the sea and all that are in them, which in
the holy ghost by the mouth of thy servant David our father, have said: Why do
the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? The kings of the earth
do stand up, and the rulers have assembled together against the Lord and his
anointed, for of a surety both Herod and Ponce Pilate, with the gentiles and
people of Israel, have assembled together in this City, against thy holy
child Jesus, to do whatsoever thy hand and counsel have determined to be
done. Therefore to the setting forth of Gods grace, which was disposed and
bent of gods eternal and unchangeable counsel unto the salvation of al
nations, the former times were not eschewed, as not able to apprehende them:
But these times were elected, the which have brought forth such a people,
whose fearce and cruel wickedness, should go forward in doing those things
that the hand of God and his counsel have determined to be done: not of the
desire to profit any man, but to the intent to deal cruelli: that the grace and
power of God might be ye more wonderful, which of so hard hearts, so dark
minds, and so envious stomachs has made a people to himself both faithful,
obedient, and holy, which came not to the knowledge of the wisdom of god, by
the wisdom of this world: but by the gift of him, of whom thapostle S. John
witnesses, 1. John. 5.
saying. We know that the son of God is come, and has given us a mind to
know the true GOD, and might be in his true son. Unto the which testimony
the Apostle Paul agrees, Colloss. 1.
saying. We thank GOD, which has made us worthy to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, which has delivered us from sin, and
from the power of darkness and has translated us into the kingdom of his
derely beloved son. And again he says. Timo 5.
For we were sometime (says he) folishe, unfaithful, wandering astray, serving
diverse desires and lusts, living in malice and envy, hatinge one another. But
when the benignity and gentleness of our Savior appeared, not of the works
of ryghteousnes which we wrought, but according to his merci has he saved us,
through the lauer of regene ration of the holy ghost, which he has poured
forth on us aboundauntlye, through Jesus Christ our Savior, that we being
justified by his grace, might be heirs of everlasting life through hope.
Could it be more fully, more euidentlye, or more truly declared what merits
Christ found in men, and what manners he subdued unto himself? what hearts he
converted unto him, when he came not to heal those that were hole, but the
sick, and to call, not the just, but the sinners to repentance? Note.
For the people of the gentiles which sat in darkness saw great light, and unto
them that sat in the region and shadow of death light is begone to shine. The
heathen raged, the people of the Jews were angry, kings waxed fearce, the
high powers countersayde, and all the supersticions and errors of the whole
world impugned. But of the very resisters, of ye ragers, and of them that
persecuted, Christ augmented his people, and through enprisonmentes,
punishments, and death, the faith of the Saints was strengthened, the truth
got the victory, and the come of the Lords field did abundantly increase all
the world over: for there was such constancye of faith given from above,
such confidence of hope, and such strength of patience, that the same fire of
love which the holy ghost had kyndled in the hearts of faithful men,
could not be quenched of the oppressors by any manner of means, when even
they which were tormented, were the more feruenter, and they which persecuted
them, did mani times feel as great heat, as those did whom they persecuted.
Wherewith thapostle s. Paul being inflamed, said boldly and fervently: Romans 5.
Seeing therefore that we are justified by faith, we are at a peace with GOD,
through our lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have free access or coming through
faith unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of the
sons of God. Not only that, but we rejoice in tribulation: knowinge that
tribulation works patience, and patience woorketh proof or experience,
proof woorketh hope, hope is not ashamed, neither departs empty. For the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, through the holy ghost which is
given us. Romans 8.
And again he says: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation or anguyshe? either persecution? or hunger? or nakedness, or peril
or sword? As it is written. Behold we are killed continuallye, that is to
wete: we are counted as sheep appointed to the slaughter. But yet in all these
things we have the victory, through him that loved us. For I am sure, that
neither death, nor life, neither Aungel, nor principate, nor power, neither
present things, nor things to come, Two worlds, one vvher of Christ
says, so has God loved the world. etc. The other whereof he says, I pray
not for the vvoorlde. etc.
neither heyght nor loweth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of god, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

This love being spread abroad by the holy ghost, has brought to pass, that
the world of the faithful should overcome the world of the wicked. This love
has confunded the cruelty of Nero, the fury of Domicianus, and of many Rulers
after them, by the glorious end of innumerable martyrs. Christ geuyng unto
them yt follow him, through the persecution of Kings, the crowns of
everlasting reward.

The.vi. Chapter.
THerefore there is no cause to doubt, but that Jesus Christ our Lord dyed
for wicked men and sinners, whose number are found in the book. And died not
Christ for all men then? yes no doubt, for all men dyed Christ. For before the
reconciliation and atonement that was made by Christ, there was not one man
that was not either a sinner or else ungodly, as the Apostle says. Romans 5.
For if when as yet we were weak according to the time, Christ dyed for us
which were ungodly, for scarce will a man dye for a ryghteous man: yet
peradventure for a good man durst a man dye. But God sets forth his love
toward us, seeing that when we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: much
more now seeing we are reconciled, shall we be safe through his life. And ye same
Apostle in the second to the Corin. says. For the love of god compels us
to think thus, 1. Cor. 5.
if one be dead for all, that the^ al are dead: and he died for all, yt they
which live, should not henceforth live unto them selves, but to him that dyed
for them and arose again. But let us hear what he pronounces of him self,
saying: This is a true saying, 1. Timo. 1.
and of al me^ worthy to be received, that Ihesus Christ came into this world
to save sinners, of whom I am the chief: but therefore did I obtain mercy,
that Jesus Christ should first show on me all long patience, unto the example
of them which should believe in him unto eternal life. Therefore, whether they
were circumcised or uncircumcised, they were concluded all under sin, and one
guylte or trespass has tied or bound al men: and there was none, whether their
guylte were more or less, which without the redemption of Christ could be
saved: which redemption came freely into all the world, and appeered to all
men indifferently: Forasmuch as on the fiftieth day from that Easter wherein
the true lamb offered him self a sacrifice to GOD, when the Apostles and they
which were of one mind with them, being full of the holy ghost, spoke in the
tongues of all nations. A great multitude of men of diverse Nations, being
moved with the miracle, came together, that in the^ that were present, all the
whole world might hear the Gospel of Christ.

For there came together (as it is written) the Parthians and Medyans, Acts. 2.
the Elamytes, and they that dwell in Mesopotamia, men of Iurye, of Cappadocia,
Pontus, and Asia, Phrigia, and Pamphilia, of Egipte and the parties of Libia
which is about Ciren, and strangers of Rome, Jews also and Procelites,
Creteans and Arabians, hearing the great works of god to be preached of in
their own tongues: Whose testimony also might ren forth both in length and
breadth unto those nations which were farther beyond them. To theffect and
woorkyng whereof, we believe that the Roman kyngedome was enlarged through
gods providence, that the Nations which should be called to the unity of
the body of Christ, might first be associated together under one ungodly
power. Howebeit, the grace of Christ has not been contented to have those
same limittes that the Roman kingdom had: For it has subdued at this time
with the scepter of the Cross of Christ, many nations of people, whom the
other overcame not with feats of arms. Who also is made more amplye by the
governance of the Apostolical priestehood, in the tower of Religion, then by
the seat of power. For peradventure like as we know certain Nations to be
now adopted into the fellowship of the children of GOD, which thing they once
desired not: Even so now there are certain Nations in the uttermost parts of
the world, on whom the grace of our Savior has not yet shone. And we doubt
not also concerning them, but that in the secret judgment of GOD, the time
of their vocation and calling is appointed, wherein they may may hear and
receive the Gospel, the which they have not yet seen: To whom yet that
measure of the general help, which from above is always given to all men, is
not denied. Though man's nature be wounded with so grievous a wound, that
voluntary contemplacion and beholding is not able fully to enstructe any man
in the knowledge of God, except the true light do first drive away the
darkness of the heart, the which knowledge the just and good God of his
unsearchable judgment has not so plenteouslye spread abroad in times paste,
like as he has done in these last days: Whereof the Apostle Paul, Colloss. 1.
writing to the Collossians, calls it the misterye which was hid from
worlds and generations: but now is declared unto his saints, to whom God
would make known the richesse of this glorious secret, among the gentyles,
which is Christ in us.

The.vii. Chapter.
WAs this mystery also unknown unto the Prophets? And did not they by who^
the holy ghost did speak, know those things whereof they spoke? I think
plainly it may not so be understand, but that that mystery was hid from the
Gentyles, which the Lord revealed when he would and to whom he would. For of the
calling of the Gentyles, the which were not the people of God, and on whom
aforetyme he had not mercy, it is thus said in the Deuteronomie: Deute. 32.
And the Lord saw it, and he waxed zealous, and he was wroth over his sons
and daughters, and he said. I will turn away my face from the^, and I will
show them what their end shall be. For it is a froward generation, children in
who^ there is no faith. They have angered me with that which is no God, and
provoked me with their vanities. And I also will provoke them with those which
are no people, with a foolyshe nation will I anger them. And David foretells
these things, that all nations shall worship God, psalm. 85.
saying: All the Nations whom thou haste made shall come and worship before
thee oh Lord, and shall glorify thy name. And again he says: Psalm. 71.
All the kings of the earth shall worship him, and all nations shall serve
him. And again: In him shall all the linredes of the earth be blessed, and all
nations shall magnify him. Esayas also shows the like things, Esaias. 2.
saying: And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the hill of the
Lord shall be manifest, and the house of God upon the top of the mountains,
and it shall be exalted above al little hills, and all nations shall come unto
it. And again he says: And the Lord of Sabbath shall bring to pass (says
he) that all Nations shall drink wine upon this hill with gladdenesse and
rejoicing. In this hill shall they be anointed with ointment, he shall give al
these things to the gentyls, for this is his devise upon all the gentyles.
And again he says: And the Lord shall show his holy arm in the sight of
all the gentyles, and all the Nations of the earth shall see the salvation which
is of the Lord. And again: Behold, strangers shall by me come unto thee, and
shall fly unto thee. And afterward: The nations which have not known thee
shall call upon the, and the people which were ignorant of thee, shall fly
unto thee. Oseas also prophecieth the like things, saying: And it shall come to
pass, Osce. 1.
that in the place wherein it was said unto them: Ye are not my people, there
shall they be called the chil dren of the living God. Osee. 2.
And the children of Judah and the children of Israel shall be gathered
together into one. And again: I will have mercy on her that was not beloved,
and I will say to them that are not my people: Thou art my people, and they
shall say: Thou art my God. And in the Apopostles times, when they which were
of the circumcision and believed in Christ, did think that they which were
Gentyles and were called Preputians or fore skynned, could not be parttakers
of the iustyfying of grace: The blessed Apostle Peter teaches how inseparable
both those people are with God, if both of the^ come together into the unity
of faith. As Soon as I began to speak (says he) the holy ghost fell upon them,
as he did upon us in the beginning. And I remembered the word of the Lord,
how he said: John verelye baptized you with water, but ye shall be baptized
with the holy ghost. Therefore if God have given them like grace as he has done
unto us which Act. 11.
have believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I should have
withstand God? When they heard these things they held their peace, and
glorified God, saying: Then has God given unto the Gentyles also repentance
unto life.

James the Apostle also of this calling of the Gentyles, says: Ye men and
brethren, harken unto me, Acts. 15.
Simon has she wed you how God at the beginning did visit the Gentyles, and
received of the^ a people unto his name. And unto this agrees the words of
the Prophets: as it is written. After these things will I return, and will
build again the Tabernacle of Dauio which was fallen Amos. 9.
down, and that that was fallen in decay thereof, will I build again, and
will set it up, that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and also
all the Gentyles upon who^ my name is named (says the Lord) that does these
things known unto the lord, is his own work from the beginning of the
world. Simeon also, even he which had received an answer of the holy
ghost, that he should not taste of death, until he had seen the Lords
Christ: spoke these words of the salvation of all Nations, which salvation
was reveled in Christ: Now Lord let thy servant depart in peace, according
to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared
before the face of all people. A light to lyghten the gentyles, and to be the
glory of thy people Israel. In these and other like testimonies of the holy
Scriptures it is undoubtedly declared, that this most rich, most mighty, and
most benign grace whereby all nations in the last end of the world are
called into the kingdom of Christ, was hyd in the secret counsel of GOD in
the former ages: And why it was not made known in time past by the same
manifestacion that it is now made known to all nations, can no knowledge
comhende, nor no understanding perceive. Yet notwithstanding that which most
godly is believed of the goodness of GOD, how that he wylleth all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, ought to be judged to be
perpetual and everlasting, according to the measures whereby God knows how
to heap his special upon general gifts: That both they which have be^
without grace might be reproved of their wickedness: and also that they which
have shyned in his light might glory and rejoice, not in their own merit, but
in the Lord. And in this streite, but yet the right path of understanding, the
consideracion of young Infantes does set forth unto us no small difficulty:
which Infantes have not the judgment of reason, whereby they feelynge the
benefit of their maker, might come to the knowledge of the truth. Neither
does it seem that they can be justly reproved, for that they have neglected the
grace that should have helped them: seeing that they were naturallye brought
forth in that ignorance, which no doubt receives no knowledge nor
perceives any doctrine.

The.viii. Chapter.
Wherefore, forasmuch as God wylleth all men to be saved: what is the matter
that so great a multitude of Infantes are alienated from everlasting
salvation, and so many thousands of men in these days are left without
eternal life, as though he had made them for that purpose only, which created
no man of evil will? so that because they came into this world with the flesh
of sin, they should fall into the bands of vnlooseable trespass without the
gyltinesse of their own act. What can be more deeper then this? what can be
more marvelous then this? And lawful is it not to believe that they which
have not obtained the Sacrament of regeneration, do perteyne unto any
felowwyppe of the blessed. And it is more to be wondered, and more to to be
maruayled at, that where the act offends not, where the will resists not,
where there is all one misery like weakness, the cause common, and al one,
that the judge is not all one in so great a likeness: and such as repulsio^
refuses, even such does the election adopte and take. Howbeit our hearts shall
not be troubled about this depth of gods separation, if we believe with a firm
and steadfast faith that all gods judgment is just, and do not desire to know
that thing that he would have secret. So that when a man can not find out
why he so judges, it may suffice him to know who it is that judges. Albeit
this question is not so far past knowledge, that there should be no
instruction at all that can be learned concerning it, if the quiet look of a
sober heart be applied to behold the thing that may be seen. For when we do
consider, among the Pagans, among the Jews among the Heretics, and among
them that are Catholic Christians, how great a number of Infantes does
peryshe? who (so far forth as perteyneth to their proper wylles) we are sure
have done neither good nor badde. We learn that the same sentence abides
upon them, which mankind received for the transgression of our first parent:
the rigor of which sentence, while it is not resolved toward such, it is
declared how great that sin was.

And it should be judged that every man were borne innocent, except it should
be hurtefull to such, not to be borne again. And as touching the
vntimelinesse of death, there is no reason why to complain of it, seeing that
death and mortality being once entered into our nature through sin, has
brought in bondage to it, eue^ every day of our life. If chvldre^ were born
without sin, the^ could they not dye, but were after a certain manner
immortal.
For it should come to pass, that after a certain manner a man might be called
immortal, if there were a time within the which he could not dye. But
corruption is never on such wise partaker of incorruption, that it should not
always be bound unto the defection that is due to the fall or transgression.
The beginning of this life is the beginning to dye, and our age begins not
to be increased, before it begin to be diminished: Whereunto if any temporary
space be added, it is not added to thend it should endure, but it passes away
to the end it should peryshe and be gone. Therefore that which is mortal from the
beginning, what day so ever it dye, it dies not contrary to the law of
mortality: Neither have they at any time power to live, any nyer then they
have power to die. And though the mortality of al me^ is come of one cause,
yet corruptible nature is drawn, not into one only, but into manyfold
imbecilities: and not only the years, months or days of ma^s time, but also
al hours and momentes, are subject either to diseases, debilities or hurts:
nether is there any kind of death or any way to die but it chau^ceth into some
portion of the generality of mortal me^. For there remains an heavy yoke
upon all the children of Adam, from the day that they come forth of their
mothers womb, until the day of their buryall again into the earth, which is
the mother of al things. But the weight of this most sharp yoke has not in
such wise fallen upon the children of Adam, that the Justice of God might not
work any part of his moderation therein. The which has so subdued things
transitory and failing unto the laws of defectio^, that he would not take away
from the^ the power of his moderacions: Or else all euyls should fall upon all
men, because that by common condition, all men should be subject to them
all. But that the general necessity being variated and made diverse, the Lord
might reserve unto him self the causes both of their pardon, and also of their
punishment: and that it might be in one to whom all men are bound, both
mercifully to remitte, and iustelye to requite. Seeing then that the just and
almyghtie providence of God does without ceassyng judge and discern all
things, and that no man can come into this world nor depart out of this
world, but by the same entrance and departing, which the ruler of things
according to his most high knowledge and wisdom does appoynte, (as it is
written in the book of Job:) Who knows not that the hand of the Lord has
done al these things, in whose power is the soul of every living thing, and
the spirit of all the flesh of man?

And again he says: Job. 14.
The days of man are but short, and the nombre of his months are with thee.
Who dare search out the causes of his works and devises? For it is
unsearchable and wonderful secret why the state and condition of man is
variated with so great differences. Continual syckenesse greeueth one manne
from his chyldehood to his age, and yet does not the time of his appointed age
fail among those continual sorrows. Another man has great strength when he
is old, and a lively power quickens him in a valeaunt courage. One ends
his days in his chyldhod, another when he is come to man's state. One can not
live past his youth: To another it is possible to live so long till his speech
fail him like a child. The which bonds and limittes of life being sundry
ways unequal, this transitory mortality should find the less bitter, if
it might suffer but the detriment of this present world only, and if they
which departed hence without the lauer of regeneration might not fall into
everlasting miseries. But forasmuch as the cause of the gifts which grace has
given is unsearchable, as well as the cause of misery which nature has
deserved, all one, and the same difficulty and hardness of the understanding
thereof, sends us back again unto our author: And when we ask how he
wylleth al me^ to be saved, which gives not unto all men the time wherein
they may be able to receive grace apprehended by voluntarye faith: I think it
not ungodly to be belened, nor vnconuenientlye to be understand, Not to the
adoption of the especial grace.
that these men of few days or short time, do appertain to that part of
grace which is always given unto all Nations. The which grace doubtless, if
their parents had used well, they also had been helped by them. For the
spryngyng up of all Infantes, and all those begynnynges of infancy being
without reason, lies under the arbitrament of another will, neither ca^ they
by any means be helped but by other men. And so it follows, that they
perteyne to those of whose either right or wrong affection they are governed.
For like as they believe of another man's confession and faith, so of another
man's infidelity or dissimulation they believe not. And forasmuch as they
neither had desire of this present life, nor yet of the life to come: like as
their parents are the cause that they were first borne, so are they the cause
why they are not regenerate and borne again. And like as touching the elders,
besides the general grace that knocks at the consciences of all men more
sclenderlye and secretly, a special grace is set forth, with a more excellent
work, a more large gift, and myghtier woorkyng: Even so also the same
election is plainly declared concerning innumerable Infantes. The which
election doubtelesse failed not them that were unregenerate in their parents,
He speaks of those that come to baptism before their parents be baptized.
but was present with them which are regenerate before their parents: So that
the diligence of strangers has oftentimes served many Infantes, whom the
ungodliness of their own parents have forsaken, and they have come to
regeneration by strangers, which was not provided for them by their own next
friends. In the which work of grace, who (except he be to arrogant and most
foolyshe) dare complain of gods justice, that the like providence does not
help all Infantes: and that it does not either by power remove and put away,
or else by mercy prevent all perils and ieopardies that might let or stop
the regeneracio^ of them which shall dye? Which thing doubtless should so come
to pass upon al, if it ought so utterly to be done. But it is not unknown
how much slouchfulnesse should be engendered in the hearts of the faithful,
if in the baptizing of infantes nothing were to be feared touching any man's
negligence, or nothing touching the mortality of the children: for it were
not possible to chance by any mean, that such should be without baptism. And
in this felicity of Infantes, so unable to be lost, ye opinion of that error
should be strongly maintained, which dares affirm contrary to the catholic
faith, yt the grace of god is given according to the merits of men. They
acknovvelege none adoption, that confess no guylt to constrain them.
For it should seem to be due by all equity to fautlesse innocentie, that
adoption should ouerpasse none of them, whom no gift did constrayne. Neither
had it ben ungodly spoken of a certain man touching the baptism of
Infantes: Pelagius.
that grace has that it may adoptate, but water has not what to wash of or
put away. But all the disciples of the truth, do know this to be detestably
spoken. And hereby it is manifest, that they which are saved, are saved not by
merit, but by grace. For it is no doubt, but that they which dye without
baptism are peryshed: who doubtless, except they had been partakers of most
grievous sin, should not peryshe. But not it is declared on this wise by the
secret distribution or difference making of God, yet being just, both what
grace can give, and also what sinful nature can deserve: to the end that
neither pride should be lyfted up against the gift, nor diligence should
cease against peril. Therefore, whether we consider the last times, the first
or the middel, it is both reasonable and godly to be believed, that God wylleth
al men to be saved, and evermore would: and this is declared none other wise
then by those benefits, and that same providence of God, which he commonly and
indifferently gives unto all generations. For such manner of gifts have been
and are so general, that by the testimonies of them, men might be helped to
seek the true Godde: with the which gifts protestyng their authority
throughout al worlds, the abundance of a special grace was powered forth.
Which grace, although it be given forth now more plentifully then it has been
aforetime: yet has god reserved the causes of his own distributions thereof
within his own knowledge, and has hid them within the secret place of his
most myghtie will: which should not be unknown, if they were given in one
uniform manner unto all men. And forasmuch as there is no more ambiguitie or
doubt of the general benignity of God, then there is of his special mercy:
there should be nothing that should cause us to wonder as though the one were
grace and the other no grace. But it has pleased God to give the one to many
men, and to pull away the other from no man, that it might appear on both
parts, that that thing which was given to the portion of men, was not denied
to all: but yet in some, grace to have prevailed, and in other some, nature to
have start backward. For we so believe this more abundant grace, Gods grace
works not violence, but amendeth the will of man, vvherby man becomes
vvyllyng.
and have experience of her power, that we in no wise think it to be violent:
that whatsoever is done in the business of man's salvation, should be done by
the only will of God, when the very infantes are helped by the service and
diligence of another myns will.

The.ix. Chapter.
DOubtelesse it is the grace of god that has ye preeminence principally in all
iustificatio^s, in councellyng by exhortacio^s, in warnyng by examples, in
fearyng by perils, in stirryng up by miracles, in geuyng of understanding, in
enspiring of counsel, and in illumining the heart it self, and instructing with
the affections of faith. The will of man is also added and coupled unto it, the
which is moved and stirred up by ye aforesaid helps unto this end, namely
that it may work with the work of God in them selves, and begin to practice
to merit, that which it conceived to desire by the heavenly seed: having of
his own mutabilitie if he fall, and of the aid of grace if he profit and go
forward, which help is given to all men by innumerable means, either privy
or manifest: and that it is refused of many, is of their own wyckednes, but
that it is received of many, comes both of the grace of God, and also of man's
will.

Therefore whether we consider the beginninges, either the profytinges and
encreasynges of the faithful, or else the kind of men which persevere unto
the end, no kind of any virtue meteth us or comes to hand, which may be
had either without the help of Gods grace, or else without the consent of
our will. For grace it self works this by all kind of medicine and
helping: that in him whom she calls, she might prepare his will to be the
first receyuer of her, and the handmayden of her gifts. For there is no virtue
in them that are not willing, neither can faith, or hope, or charity be
affyrmed to be in them, which are without a good consent to the same things.
And this consent, not only the exhortacions of preachers, and the stirringes of
doctrine, but also fear does engender and breed, wherefore it is written: The
fear of the Lord, is the beginning of wisdom. The which in how great fear
so ever a man be brought, does none other thing but that it makes him
willinge, whom it made fearinge, and not only willinge, but also wise. Whereof
also this is written: Eccle. 25.
Blessed is he to whom it is given to have the fear of God.

For what thing makes a man so blessed, as this fear, which is the father
and teacher of wisdom? In whose devotion doubtless, the will also is devout,
the which by the same aucthour of grace, profitteth in the same fear wherein
it begone. Therefore when as this fear is put in a man by a certain power
of great terroure, reason is not thereby extynct, nor understanding taken
away, but rather that darkness which did oppress the mind is driven
away: that the will which before was deprauate and captive, might be made right
and free.

Wherefore, like as the mind apprehends no virtue, unless it receive a beam
of the true light: Even so grace does confer and give nothing to him whom
she calls, except she open in him the eyes of his will. The which in many
men (as I have before disputed) being in the beginning of it, most ardent and
fervent, is enryched with spedye and great increasinges. But in other some,
profittinge more slowly, and by little and little, is scarce advanced unto those
increasynges which have convenient firmitie or strength to persevere. For the
Lord says: John. 6.
No man comes to me, except the father which sent me do draw him. Bnt that
is spoken because we should know, that that faith, without the which no man comes unto Christ, is the gift of the father, according to that
which was said to the Apostle. Math. 16.
Blessed art thou Simon Bariona, for flesh and blood has not revealed this
unto thee, but my father which is in heaven, which wrought in the hearts of
them that were to be drawn, that they might believe, and brought it to pass
that they might will. For there could be nothing how or why they should be
drawn, if they were not folowers in faith and in will: for they which believe
not, are not drawn at all, neither do they come: neither do such as dissent,
approach or draw nere, but they go backwarde and depart away.

Therefore they which come, are led by love: for they being loved first, have
loved again: they have been sought, and have sought: and they have wylled that
which GOD willed them to will: which so gives that will of obedience unto
them, that he takes not away from them that persevere, that mutabilitie which
may nyll. For otherwise, no faithful manne should at any time have departed
from the faith. Concupiscence and unclean desire should overcome no man,
heuinesse should hurt no man, anger should overcome no man: No man's charity
should wax cold, no man's patience should be broken, and no man should
neglecte grace being given unto him. But now, because these things may come
to pass, and because there is an easy and a steep discendynge down into the
consent of such temptacions: That saying of the Lord ought always to sound
in the ears of the faithful, wherein it is said to the Apostles, watch and
pray, least ye fall into temptacion. Math. 26.
Where if he had warned the Disciples to watch only, and not also to pray,
he should have seemed to have exhorted the only power of free will. But when
he added: And pray, he sufficientlye taught them that it should be given them
from above, that the storm of temptacion should not overcome them while they
watched.

And the like is it that he says: Luke. 22.
Simon Simon, behold Satan has desired to sift you as it were wheat, but I
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, and thou at length when thou art
converted, stre^gthen thy brethen. And pray lest ye fall into temptacion. If
then the faith of so great an Apostle should have failed, except Christ had
prayed for him: doubtless then was there mutabilitie and chaungeablenes in him,
which in temptacion might waver. And he was not now made so strong in virtue
of perseueraunce, that he should be subject to no peril at all: for after
these things, so great a perturbation smote him, that being in the house of
Caiphas, he was so afraid at the question of a wenche, that (his constancye
quite failed) he was brought to the point, that he thrice denied Christ, with
whom he had promised to dye. Then he which beheld the troubled heart of the
Apostle, not with human, but with deuyne eyes, and stirred him by a mighty
look unto aboundaunte tears of repentance, was able, and could have given
unto his chief disciple, that stedfastnes of mind. That like as nothing
feared the lord him self from his purpose to perform his passion: So should
not any fear at that time, have ouercommed blessed Peter. But this stabilitie
was only proper unto him, which only truly and mightily said: I have power
to put away my life, and I have power to take it again. John. 10.
But in other men, so long as the flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and
the spirit contrary to the flesh, and so long as the spirit is willinge,
but the flesh weak, the immutable fear of mind can not be found, for
perfect and secure felicity is not had in this life, but in the life to
come. And in the uncertainty of this present conflicte and battle, If any
man get any victory, then is pride the danger.
neither is victory it self in safeguard from pride lying in wait, nor without
danger of mutabilitie. And though Gods divine protection and favor do give
unto innumerable his saints power to persevere and continue to the end, yet
takes he from none of them, that that repugneth against themselves, which
also is of them selves: that in all their studies and endeuoures, evermore will
and nyll do strive among themselves. The which fight and battle, the said
blessed Peter suffered even in the end of all his victories: for the lord
himself protested the same, when he said. Verily verily I say unto thee, when
thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self and walkedst whyther thou would:
But when thou art old, John. 21.
thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and another shall girde thee, and lead
thee whyther thou would not. And this he spoke to declare, by what death he
should glorify GOD. Then who can doubt, yea who can but know, that this most
strong rock which took part both of virtue and name of that principal rock,
to have had always the desire, that constancy might be given him to dye for
Christ's sake? Notwithstanding the obluctacion and struggling of fear was so
unable to be avoided, that the man most gredie of marterdome, was told
aforehande, that he should obtain the vyctorie of passion and suffringe of
death, howebeit not without the temptacion of fear. Therefore not without good
cause, not only the Saints which are but beginners, but also they which are
grown up unto the most perfection do uniformly beseech the Lord and say.

Lead us not into temptacion, but deliver us from evil. For unto all them
that abide in faith and in love, Math. 6.
it is given of him that they be not overcome in temptacion, that he which
does glory, should glory in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1.
And yet does he ascribe that same glory unto them whom he gives it unto:
that though they stand through the help of God, yet forasmuch as it lay in
their own power to fall, it should be their own merit that they did stand.
Therefore like as they which have believed, are helped yt they might abide in the
faith: All our power, without grace, is either to, go backevvarde, or else not
to come at al
So they which not yet believed, are helped that they might believe.

And like as the one sort have in their own power to go back, so the other
sort have in their own power that they come not. And it is made manyfeste, that
by diverse and innumerable means God wylleth al men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth: But they which come, are guyded and dyrected
by the help of god: and they which come not, do strive the contrary in their
own stubburnes. And although that many men loving their own darkness, do
not receive the brightness of the truth, and many which were once lyghtened, do
fall again into darkness: yet does the word of God abide for ever, and
nothing falls away from the truth of his promise. The foreknowen and
promised fulness of the gentiles does daily enter in: and in the seed of
Abraham, all nations, all tribes, and all tongues are blessed: for that which
the father has given to the son, the son loses not: neither is any manne
able to take out of his hand, that which he has received. The foundation of
GOD stands steadfast and sure, and the building of the Temple that shall
endure for ever, wauereth not. The truth and mercy of GOD being stretched
forth upon all men, of whom that (which is both denied to no man, and also
is due to no man) is perfectly performed and brought to pass in them whom
he has promised. For he works all in all: but out of doubt it is all just
things and good things. For all the ways of the Lord are very mercy and
faythfulnesse.

Who like as he knew before al worlds, Psalm. 24.
how great a multitude of me^ of the whole world, either using his common
gifts, or being helped with his special aids (but yet declining from the way
of truth and life) should enter into the broad way of error and death: Even
so had he always in his foreknowledge how great a number of godly men, through
the help of grace and the service of obedience, should parteyne unto
everlasting bliss: that none falling away from the fullness of the nombre of
promise (who neither should fail of advancement, nor be destitute of help)
he might glorify them before all men, whom he has chosen out of all men. For
the manyfolde and unspeakable goodness of GOD has in such sort always helped
and yet does help the general multitude of men, (as we have sufficientlye
proved) that none of them which perish have any excuse that the light of the
truth has been denied him, neither has any man liberty to glory in his own
ryghteousnes, forasmuch as their own wickedness wayeth down the one part unto
pain: and the grace of god conducteth and brings the other part unto glory.

The.x. Chapter.
Therefore, that which we have declared in the beginning of this second book,
the same do we now commend again unto your remembraunces, that when we
disputed of the depth and height of grace, we stayed upon three most wholesome
and true diffinicions.



times, in nations, in families, in Infantes, in them which are not yet borne,
and in them which are unbegotten, certain things are known to be diversely
or notablye done, which we doubt not but that they are of those things
which the just and mercyful Lord wyld not that they should be known in this
transitory world. The which thing we must think to be so disposed and
ordered for our profit: that forasmuch as we are saved, to whom god has
prepared yt which ye eye has not seen, the ear has not heard neither has
entered into ye heart of man, like as we believe consta^tly that we shall see the
things which we yet see not, so should we patiently, look to understand
the things which we do not yet understand. Therefore if crafty malice would
cease, if wanton presumption would be still, these things being (as I trow)
rightli handled: there remains no more cause of strife, neither need we to be
occupied in endelesse questions. For I have trauayled so far forth as the
Lord has helped me, that it might be proved, how that not only in the
latter times, but also in all times past, the grace of God has been present
with all men, by like prouydence and general goodness: but by manyfolde and
sundry workinge, and also by diverse measures, for either privily or else
manyfestly, he is (as the Apostle says) the Savior of all men, but especially
of the faithful. The which sentence being of most fine briefnes, and most
valeaunt strength, if it be considered with a quiet and calm aspect, does
cease all this controversy that we speak of. For in that he says, which is
the Savior of al men, he has assured us that the goodness of God is general
upon all men: But in that he adds especyallye of the faithful, he shows
that there is a part of mankind which by the merit of faith enspyred by god,
is promoted by special benefits, unto the most high, excellent, and eternal
salvation. The which thing doubtless is done by no vnequitie of the most
just and most merciful GOD, whose judgment in these dyspensacions and
orderinges, is not to be judged with arrogancy, but is to be praised with
tremblyng: forasmuch as even among those faithful people (as is abouesayde) not
one and the same things, nor like things are given to them all, and before
any part of men's merits, there is a most unlike measure of Gods gifts.

For if we dare not complain of the judgment of our carnal parents, when
they do love some of their Children more tenderly then the other, even before
any trial of their manners, and before any service of godliness: And the
affection and disposicion of masters is free and at liberty toward their
servant: neither is any man justly reprehended which has chosen to himself
out of his famyly and household servants, being all in one condition and
state, some certain servants whom he would more lovingly prefer and set
forth, and whom he would more liberalli instruct: Shall we then cauyll and
complain of the most loving equity of the highest father and true Lord,
because that in his great house also, things are made variable by innumerable
differences? And when no man has any good thing that is not of his gift:
yet al men shine not in like virtues, or are enriched with like gifts of the
holy ghost. And we may not apply this diversity of degrees unto the causes of
merits, forasmuch as the principal cause of all good merit, is grace: Of
whose riches is received whatsoever thing is found allowable in all men.
Therefore like as it is ungodly to conceive in the heart, any grief of those
things, which the holy ghost many sundry ways works in the Church: So
also we must not murmr at al at that providence that is over the unfaithful.

For the judge is both just and good, neither is he of an unrighteous will, nor
yet of an uncertain discrecion, that we should think, whosoever perishes,
ought not to perish under the great mercy and justice of the almighty God.
There is no part of the world without the Gospel of Christ, and albeit the
general calling cease not, yet is that special calling also become common to
all men. For of every nation, of every condition and state of men are daily
adopted thousands of old men, thousands of young men, thousands of
Children: And also those instruments and tyrauntes by whom the world is
tormoiled, do serve to the effects of ye Christian grace. For fear of present
peril has drawn many a one to the water of regeneration, who in the calm of
peace did defer to receive the Sacrament of Baptism: and dreadful fear
has suddenly constrained that, which quiet exhortation could not in long
time beat into weak and luke warm mynds. Some Children of the Church, being
taken of their enemies, have won their masters unto the Gospel of Christ,
and they were above them in magisterie and dignity of faith, whom they served
by course and condition of war. And some barbarous men while they aided the
Romans, have learned in our countries, that which they could not know in
their own countries, and have returned home to their own abidinges with the
doctrine of the Christen religion. So then, nothing is able to resist the
divine grace, that the thing that he has wylled, should not be fulfilled,
when very discordes draw men to unity, and plagues are turned into remedies,
that the Church might thereof receive increasinge, He means of persecution
whereof it was affrayde of ieopardie.

Therefore let us look unto all the issues and ends of human things, and we
shall find that no times, no business, no beginninges nor ends of generations
wanted the eternal and unsearchable judgments of god. All repugnauncie of
variableness, al causes of unlikely successes, which we are not able to
search and discern, were in that eternal knowledge, both known and divided
at once: and nothing was there vnordeyned or undisposed, yea even of the
qualities of the actions which yet have no being. For in God there is no
chaunsyng motion or new will, no temporal counsel or mutable deuyce, neither
is his thought changed with the inequality of mutable things, but he
comprehended at once and together in an everlasting and stable syghte or
beholdynge, all times and temporal things. And he gives all unto al things,
who has alreadi made the things that shall be hereafter. And this is it that
the Apostle Paul wrytteth to the Ephesi. Blessed be god and the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.
which has blessed us with all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly
things by Christ, according as he had chosen us in him before the beginning
of the world, that we should be holy and immaculate in his sight in love,
which has predestinate us unto the adoption of sons by Jesus Christ our
Lord, according to the purpose of his own will, unto the praise of the glory
of his grace. etc. The which he knitteth together under the predication of the
same sense, teachinge that the gift and workynge of grace, has evermore
remained and abidden in the everlasting counsel of God, and that all the
Children of adoption were elected, not only in that time wherein they were
called now being, but also before the world was made. In the which election,
what man so ever was not foreknowe^ in Christ, shall by no means be associated
or joined unto him. For all the men which shall come into the kingdom of god, by
the calling of any time, were sealed into the same adoption that went before
all worlds.

And like as no unbeliever is numbered in this sort: even so no godly man is
divided from this sort. For the forknowledge of God which cannot be deceived,
loses nothing of the fulness of the members of Christ's body: and the
foreknowen number and preelected in Christ before all worlds, can not be
minished by any hyndraunce or danger. 2. Tim. 6
Like as the Apostle writing to Timotheus, says: Labor thou in the Gospel
according to the power that God has given thee, which has delivered us, and
called us with an holy calling: not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace, the which grace was given us in Christ Jesus before
al worlds

Against this most bright light of invincible verite, some men are wont
indiscreetly to speak, saying that it is superfluous and but lost labor to
go about to get the merits of good works: that it is in vain also to continue
in prayer, whereby we hope that God is entreated, if election do depend upon
the unchangeable purpose of the grace of Christ, nor if nothing can go
forward or proceade otherwise then is already disposed by the will of him that
is almyghtye. But those men which think that they do wittyly make this
objection, do not understand nor consider that the knowledge of God which
co^prehendeth both things that are paste, things that are present, and things
that are to come, is not bound to any time. And that those things which are yet
to be done are as well present in his sight, as the things which are at this
present time a doing, or which have be^ done in time paste. The which thing
forasmuch as it is most true, that power needs no leisure to see and
discern, which beholds at once and together in an everlasting and most
true sight, both things created, and things to be created, things begone,
and things to be begone, things which are done, and things which hereafter
shall be done: and whatsoever in the generality of things is paste by times
before determined, and is declared by manifold varieties and diversities: all
that same does it comprehend even now, in the same order, which the end of
this world shall receive, in that most high and perfect judgment. And this
everlasting and evermore quiet knowledge does not constrayne us to sin by
any necessity: neither does any wickedness come of the thing whereof
comes rightousnes. For forasmuch as God being good, has made al things
good, and there is none evil at all in nature. Wylfull transgression spronge of
free wylles, (the which wills to be made free, was also good), and mutable
nature, whose safegarde depends upon the immutable essence, divided it self
from the highest goodness, when it peruerslye delyted in his own, which ruin
now, the grace of GOD does heal: and for this cause came Jesus Christ into
this world, 1. I(...)
even that he might destroy the works of the devil, which doubtless are in
such wise destroyed, that in the destruction of them, those men which are
succored do also labor, for that is also given them of him that saves them.
Therefore the blessed Apostle says. And not that only, but also we rejoice
in tribulatio^s, knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
brings proof or trial, trial engenders hope, and hope is not made ashamed:
Romans 5.
for the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy ghost which is
given unto us. And the same Apostle also unto the Ephesi. says. Ephesians. 2.
Ye are saved by grace (says he) through faith, and that is not of your
selves, for it is the gift of God and comes not of works, least any man
should glory or boaste. For we are his workema^ship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which god has prepared, that we should walk in them.

GOD therefore gives unto them whom he has chosen without merits, whereof
they may be garnished with merits. And it is vaynely spoken, that the elect
need not to work, as it is also, to say that they do work to the intent they
may be elected.

For the gifts of virtues cannot be idle, for as the verity says: Math. 25.
to every man which has, shall be given, but to him that has not, shall that he
has alreadi be taken away from him.

Therefore chastity is not given, to the end we should not fight against
concupiscence, neither is wisdom and understanding given to any man, to the
intent that his meditation should not be in the law of the lord both day and
night. What does the gift of love, if the carefulnes of benevolence or well
willing, be not vigilant? what fruit has patience, if strength of mind have
nothing to suffer? Or how shall a man be known to live godly in Christ,
when he suffers no persecution? Or that peace which is of God and with god:
Is it well in quiet if it agree with ye world? Or can the love of god be
obtained without enemitie of the devil? The grace of God makes no man at al
unable to be tempted: Neither is the battle of the Christians fortified on
the right side and on the left with the help of heavenly armor, to the intent
we should fight with no enemy, when it is more laudable and better, to be
able not to be overcome in battayl, then sluggishly not to be able to be proved
or assaulted.

And to be brief, and to let other things pass. I will prove plainly by one
testimony, that the diligence of prayer is not resolved by the purpose of Gods
election. For in the book of Thobie, Raphaell the Angel says to Thobies
son. Remember the commandment of thy father, Tobie. 6.
for he told thee that thou ought to take a wife of thy fathers kyndred.
And now hear me my brother, pass not upon the devil, but desire her, and
know thou that she shall be given unto thee even this same night to be thy wife.
And when thou shall come into the chamber, take of ye liver of the fisshe, and
lay it on the coals, and the savor of it will come forth, and the devil shall
smell it and will flee away, and never will come nygh her after. And when thou
shall begin to be desirous of her company, arise both of you first and beseech
ye the lord of heaven, that he will grant you mercy and health: And be ye not
afraid, for she was appointed unto the before the world was made, and thou
shall heal her.

Therefore though that the thing which god has appointed can by no means but
come to pass, yet is the desire and diligence of prayer not taken away, nor
the devotion of free will released through the purpose of election, forasmuch
as the effect of gods will that must be fulfilled, is in such wise preordeined,
that by the business of works, by the instaunce and intercession of prayers,
and by the exercise of virtues, there might be increase of merits. And they
that have done good works, shall be crowned, not only according to the purpose
of GOD, but also according to their merits and deserts. For, for this cause
is the foreappointment of this election hyd in the uttermost and farthest
secret, from man's knowledge, and a man can pronounce of none before his end
that he shall come into the glory of them which are elected, even to thintente
that a profitable fear might preserve and keep perseueringe humility, and
that he which stands might take heed that he fall not. 1. Cor. 10.
And if peradventure a man being overcome by some temptation, do fall, let him
not be swalowed up with heaviness, neither let him despair of his mercy which
raises up the^ that fall, and lifts up those that are down. Psalm. 144.
For as long as we live in this body, no man's amendment ought to be forslowed,
Note.
nor no man's recovering ought to be dispaired of. And therefore let the holy
church pray, and give thanks for them that have believed, let it desire for
them a profitinge perseuerau^ce, and for them which are out of the faith, let
it pray that they may believe: let it not therefore leave of from prayer,
because she is not heard for some men, for God which wills all men to come
to the knowledge of the truth, can not without all justice refuse any man.

FINIS.
lmprinted at London in Powles Church yard, by Richard Watkins.


