A REFVTATION OF M. JOSEPH HALL HIS APOLOGETICALL DISCOVRSE, FOR THE Marriage
of Ecclesiastical Persons, directed unto M. John VVhiting.

IN WHICH Is demonstrated the Marriages of Bishops, Priests etc. to want all
warrant of Scriptures or Antiquity: and the freedom for such Marriages, so
often in the said discourse urged, mentioned, and challenged to be a mere
fiction.

Written at the request of an English Protestant, By C. E. a Catholic Priest.

Libertatem promittentes, cum ipsi sint serui corruptionis. Promising freedom,
whiles themselves are the slaves of corruption. 2. Petr. 2. Permissu
Superiorum, M. DC. XIX.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
WHEREAS according to the order set down in the ensuing Letter, I had
determined to add another Paragraffe to the former three, co^teyning A
detection of M. Halls errors, and ouersights in writing, I found in the
pursuit thereof so abundant matter, as I could not comprize it all within the
narrow bounds of a Paragraffe; and increasing so much under my hands, I
resolved at length to set it out a part, at amounting to more then what I have
already written in answer of this Letter to M Whiting, which being one entier
Controversy, might perhaps better be set out alone the^ conio^ned with other
points nothing at all incident to that matter, as are the other doctrinall
Errors, Untruths, Mistakings, Impostures, and other fraudulent, ignorant and
malicious behavior which I am forced to detect, and wherewith all the ^apsodyes
of his Epistles that contey^ any disputable question are fraught to the full.

Another cause heerof was, for that a Gentleman lately come out of England,
gave me notice of other books of the same Author, which I had not yet seen,
and of one entitled, The peace of Rome, on which in particular depends very
much of that which I have written in the Detection, especially in refuting that
most shameless assertion, Decad. 3. Epist 5.
that Bellarmin acknowledges under his own hand two hundred thirty and seven
Contrarietyes of doctrine amongst Catholics: which is nothing else but 237. lies
in one assertion, if he mean as he must do, of points that belong to says and
Religion, and not of matter undecided and merely disputable in Schools. And
yet further (which to one not acquainted with the forhead of Heretics may
seem incredible) he avouches, the dissensions of Protestants to be only in
cerimonyes of the Catholics in substance: theirs in one or two points, ours in
all. Again, ours is in the whole cloth, theirs only in the skirts etc. with
more to the same effect. All which, or at least the chiefest part, I mean the
disagreement of Catholics in fundamental points, are as I suppose discussed in
that work, and I cannot so well refute his words in general, until I see his
special prooses that are made against our unity, and the proper subject of
every particular dissension.

Only here to his general charge, I return also in general this answer:
That neither he, nor all of his Sect set together can make this good: and in
case he be so bold in his Peace, as he has been in his other VVritings, we
shall find store of most impudent untruths (for lying and detraction if it be
for the advancement of the Gospel seem with this Man to be meritorious works)
and those delivered with such audacity, as if they were most certain and
uncontrollable truths: of which kind there be many disco^ered in the
refutation of this Letter, but the number that remain is without comparison
greater: which when I consider, together with his eminent ignorance, I cannot
but greatly admire the scarcity of learned men in our Country, that could find
no better Doctors to send to Do^t Conference, to conclude the peace between
the skirtwrangling-Brethren then M. Hall, no more to be compared with learned
men, then a Pedlar with Merchants, a Pettifogger with Lawyers, a mere
Pedanticall Grammarian with grave and learned Deuines.

Were the matter in Controversy to be concluded with outfacing of lies; M.
Hall might sit for Arbiter and Judge of the whole Assembly, and (unless they be
too shameless) ouerbeare them all. Of a main multitude which already I have set
down in the Detection, I will touch one here, and that only to discharge and
clear my self from that whereof I accuse him, I mean of detraction, and
defaming his person Let this then pass for an example which so confidently he
writes in his Quo vadis, or Censure of Page 41.
Travel: where though he say that, A discreet man will be ashamed to subscribe
his name to that whereof he may be afterward convinced, yet Page 6^.
so indiscretly does he deal, as he blusheth not to write in these words:
What packets fly abroad of their Indian wonders? Even Cardinal Bellarmine can
come in as an auoucher of these cosenages, who dares auerre, that his fellow
Xauier had not only healed the deaf, dumb, and blind, but raised the dead;
whiles his brother Acosta after many years spent in those parts, can pull him
by the sleeue, and tell him in his ear so loud, that all the world may hear
him, Prodigia nulla producimus, neque vero est opus etc. So M. Hall.

And I appeal to all the Ministers of Dort, whether they ever heard a more
impudent untruth. For first Acosta was never in the East Indyes at all nor
Xauier in the West: and how then would Acosta spend many years in those parts
where Xauier had lived? This is one lie, and that so long a one, as it reaches
as far as it is from the East to the West, or from the Artick to the Antartick
Pole. Again so far is Acosta from pulling Bellarmine by the sleeue, or
disauowing the miracles of Xauier, as in this very work he does both
acknowledge and confess them for true. For thus he writes: Conuertamus oculos
in Lib. 2. 10.
saeculi nostri hominem, B. Magistrum Franciscum virum Apostolicae vitae etc.
Let us cast our eyes upon a man of our age, on B. Master Francis (Xauier) a
man of an Apostolical life, of whom so many and so great miracles are
recorded by many, and those approved witnesses, as there are scant recounted
more or greater (unless it be of the Apostles) of any. What have M. Gaspar
(Berzaeus) and other not a few of his Companions done in the East Indies? How
much have they advanced the glory of Gods power in converting that people by
their miraculous works? So far Acosta.

Out of whose words delivered in so plain, and honorable terms of this
Blessed Man Francis Xauier, the Reader may see whether he were a fit witness to
be produced against the miracles of the said Father: whether he pull Bellarmine
by the sleeue, and cry so loud in his ear, that all the world may hear him,
or rather whether M. Hall do not most lewdly lie, and maliciously abuse his
Reader in applyirg that to Xauerius which Acosta spoke only of himself, and
others then living with him in Peru, Brasil, Mexico, and the adjoining coasts,
and assigns the causes of their not working miracle^, as I shall more fully
declare when I shall come to handle this in the Ditection.

And even now there is come to my hands a book written by one Collins in
defense of Doctor Andrews. If Spenser the Poet were living, he might very well
make another Collins Slowt upon his slowterly discourse, so loose and
loathsome, as will weary the most patient Reader, and withal so ignorant,
railatiue, and lying, as I wonder that it was permitted by privilege to come
to the Press, and was not suppressed with his other which he wrote against the
Reverend Father Andraeas Eudemon-Ioannes. He is fortunate in the choice of his
Adversaries, for be singles out such as are singular; but in the combat he is
weak, simple, and a mere pratler: this he shall better hear from him whom
it concerns, then I shall need now to declare. Only this I must note in him,
that -- -- -- -- Et Platanus Platanis, Alnoque assibilat Alnus. One egg is not
more like another, then are these Ministers in lying, For this seely fellow in
his Epistle to his Majesty (of all others which ever I saw written to a Prince
the most beggarly) thus writes of Cardinal Bellarmine.

He in his deuoutest Meditations of all others, his book last set forth de
aeterna Felicitate (says M. Collins) will not excuse Kings from being
murdered de iure (not only de facto) only he passes it over as a casus
omissus, happily because avouched in his other Volums more peremtorily. So he*
Insinuating that Bellarmine allows the murdering of Kings, not only de
facto, but also de iure: for what other sense can his words bear, that he will
not excuse Kings from being murdered de iure? And again when afterward he
says, The Cardinal not content with a death de facto, implies that they may
be slain de iure too, but that it does approve it? which is so far from the
Cardinals meaning, as he insinuates the quite contrary. For having compared
the Saints in heaven with Kings on earth, he comes after to show wherein the
Saints do excel them: and puts this for one point, that earthly Kings are
subject to many calamityes, from which the Saints are exempted: and delivers
the difference in these words.

Denique potest etiam Rex subditos vinculis, carcere, exilio, flagris, morte
mulctare: sed potest etiam Rex (de facto loquor, non de iure) vinciri, carceri
mancipari, exilio, vulneribus, Lib. 1. c. 5.
morte mulctari. Id verum esse probauit Julius Caesar, Caius, Nero, Galba,
Vitellius, Domitianus etc. To conclude, a King may also punish his Subjects
with fetters, prison, banishment, whippings, and death: but the King also may
be fettered (I speak de facto, not de iure) may be committed to prison, may be
punished with banishment, wounds, and death. This did Julius Caesar find to be
true, this Caius, Nero, Galba, Vitellius, Domitian etc. So Bellarmine. And let
any here judge whether the Cardinal speaking de facto and not de iure, do not
grant the one, and deny the other? Grant I say that such facts have fallen
out (and may upon the wicked disposition of the people fall out again) but not
that they were lawfully done. Which is further confirmed by the other examples
which he does produce, of which some were good Princes, as Gordian, Gratian,
Valentinian the second, and others. Some also Saints, as S. Edward of England,
S. Sigismund of Burgundy, S. Wenceslaus of Bohemia, and S. Canutus of Denmark.
And is it possible to conceive that the Cardinal should affirm all these to
have been lawfully murdered? And in case he had so imagined, why then did he
interpose that negative exception, de facto loquor, non de iure, I speak of
the facts which have fallen out (for certain it is the forenamed Princes to
have been slain) but not of the lawfullnes of their killing? Was it not,
trow you to excuse the Kings, and accuse the murderers? For if he would have
employed the contrary, or approved it as lawful, he would never have spoken in
this phrase of speech, but either have concealed these words, or expressed his
mind in other.

And it cannot but move laughter to see, how this man geeth about to prove the
immortality of Kings, and reprehendeth Bellarmine for saying only, that Kings
de facto may be slain, telling his Majesty most son^ly, that the Scripture
leads us to speak of Kings and Princes in another strain, as if they, that
ought not to be violated by any mortal hand, could not dye at all. So this
gross flattering Parasite. But where I pray you are those straynes? Sure I am
he must strain hard before he find any such on our Bibles. He alleges the
saying of David, speaking of the death of Saul, How was he slain, as if he had
not been anointed with oil? But does this show that de facto Kings cannot be
slain? or rather does it not show the contrary? For here you have Saul a
King, and yet de facto slain, which is as much as the Cardinal does affirm.
But to this M. Collins very learnedly ( scilicet!) replies, that Kings dye not
as Kings but as men (quatenus homines non qua^enus Principes) and so grants
that Kings as men may be killed, but not as Kings. By which reason I will deny
that any Minister, Cobbler, Tinker, or Tapster may be killed, or dye at all. Or
though some of these degrees come to be promoted to the gallows, yet are they
hanged as wicked men, not as Ministers, not as Cobblers, not as Tinkers, not as
Tapsters: for else all Ministers, Cobblers, Tinkers, and Tapsters should be
hanged, which were as you know a very pitiful case. And the like happens
although they dye in their beds, for they do not dye because they are
Ministers, Cobblers, Tinkers, and Tapsters, which are accidental qualityes, but
for that they are mortal men, and subject to corruption.

But I leave him to his learned Adversary, who yet as I persuade myself, if he
read any one Chapter in him, will be more moved to contemn his writings then
to answer them. And indeed he should to much iniure himself in case he should
seriously go about to refute such an idle froth of indigested fully, or
encounter with so base and babbling an Adversary, whose pride, ignorance, and
rusticity are such, as the one makes him to reject, the other not to discern
the truth, and the last to forget all modesty, or good method in writing. S.
Bernard speaking of Heretics truly said: Nec rationibus conuincuntur, quia
Bernard. sermon. 66. in Cantic.
non intelligunt; nec auctoritatibus corrigu^tur, quia non recipient; nec
flectuntur suasionibus, quia subuersi sunt. Such Ministers as M. Hall, M.
Collins and the like, are not convinced by reasons, because they understand
them not; nor amended by authorityes* because they regard them not; nor moved
by persuasions, because they are subverted. So he. And were it not for others
of more indifferent judgment, we should surcease from all labor of further
writing: but their salvation we earnestly thirst, howsoever we distrust of
these Ministers reclaim. And so much hereof. Now let us come to the Letter it
self.

Very loving Sir,
THE letter you sent me by the English passenger came very The occasion of
writing this letter.
late to my hands, which I impute to the negligence, or misfortune of him who
should have delivered it, and it must excuse my delay in returning the Answer,
which I suppose you expected sooner, and I acknowledge my self much indebted
to your love, who with such special courtesyes have so kindly prevented me:
for I have received (though after some six months expectance) the Books you
sent me, together with other remembrances at other times, and seeing that in
lieu of better requital you were content to have my censure of M. Joseph Hall
his writings, presently upon the news of your ariuall I took his works into
my hands (for before I had never read any thing of his) and opening the Book I
found by your self two leaves turned down before his epistle to M. VVhiting,
D^cad. 8. epist. 3.
whereby I gathered your meaning to be that I should peruse that letter with
some attention, as debating a point much in controversy between us. I have
done as you desired, and examined all the passages brought for proof out of
any author: which exact survey has drawn my letter to a greater length, so as
it may seem not a letter, but a Treatise. My end only is to give you
satisfaction, which if I perform, I shall not need to repent me of the labor,
or you complain I hope of the prolixity. If I be wanting therein, you must
impute the fault where it is, to my insufficiency. If you be satisfied, to the
force of Truth, and want of learning in M. Hall who gives so great and open
advantages as any Adversary may easily refute him, I crave no more but
indifferent hearing: let no favor or disfavor balance you: as you have
yielded one ear to him, so a little lend me the other: when you have heard us
both to speak, you shallbe the better able to judge of both: and if the Truth
delight you, there will, I trust, be no difficulty where to find it. I pray God
there may be as little to embrace it, as I well hope there will not.

2. And although that much less be said in this matter I treat, then the thing
it self would The Autors scope in the ensuing refutation.
require, because my chiefest scope is only to refel what M. Hall does bring,
and not thoroughly to discuss the main controversy it self, unless it be where
his arguments give me occasion of further enlargment: yet as the Sun in
dispersing the clouds does show it self to the sight of all, so likewise does
Truth in the detection of error, and removing the falsehood of heretical
sophistry (which like a veil cast before the eyes of the ignorant, no less
darkeneth their wits then peruerteth their wills) so sufficiently appear, as
all may see the grounds of Protestants to be so weak as they cannot subsist,
and by the same view perceive also the truth to stand with us: for according to
the received rule of schools verum vero non contradicit, truth cannot be
contradictory to truth (because one extreme must needs be false in all true
contradictions) and our assertion standing on these terms with the doctrine of
Protestants in disprouing the falsehoods which they bring, we also confirm the
truth which we mayntaine, one necessarily following of the other: as if one
should say, that M. Hall either is not a married Minister, or he is: if I prove
that he is, I do therewith all disprove the negative that he is not: and if I
prove that he is not, then I convince the other part to be false which
affirms that he is. Even so in the marriage of Priests and Clergy men,
whereas he grants the free liberty allowed now in England for all to marry
without control, to have been still in use for a thousand years together
after Christ, and thereupon concludes his letter saying: What God and his
Church has ever allowed, we do enjoy. If I prove that neither God, nor his
Church ever allowed this carnal liberty in clergy men, with the same labor I
show the single life for which I plead to have been still required* approved,
used (speaking as M. Hall does of the general use and approuance, for the
abuse of particular places without general acceptance is neither the voice of
God or doctrine of his Church) and the use of wives never without special abuse
to have been permitted.

3. If in the prosecution thereof finding in The manner of writing observed
against M. Hall.
M. Hall so many paradoxes, untruths, impertinencyes, paralogismes, so much
ignorance, immodesty, folly, scurrility, and other ill behavior I may seem
sometimes to have sharpened my pen to much, or dipped it a little too deep in
gall, although I forbear all virulent terms, which in him are very frequent
(as presently you shall see) and much more from all scolding words of
disgraceful reproach, as whores, strumpets, panders, and the like (the usual
thetoricall flowers of this man's eloquence) yet I confess that his malice and
ignorance (both which in him do strive together for the pre-eminence) have
made me more earnest then I would have been, and in a manner forced me to
offer violence to mine own nature, known to such as best know me, not to be
so much subject to such bitterness, as well perceauing sharpnes in words or
writing to be the whetstone of dissentions, by which men's minds are soon
moved, but hardly removed from an immortal distaste of each other: and this
hatred hereby begone between their persons becomes at last the hinderance of
truth it self, and prejudice of whatsoever cause or controversy shallbe
treated between them: and truly were the immodest terms hee^ used personal
against my self, I should with contempt let them pass unanswered, but being
against the Vicar of Christ, the whole Church, most virtuous persons of
particular note, they require a sharper reiection; yet still in this acrimony I
shall observe the admonition of the Comicke, ne quid nimis, to shoot rather too
short' Teren. in Andria.
then too far at these rouers.

4. Touching the order of writing, this The order observed in this letter.
short table of the things treated, will show what method I observe. The letter
to M. VVhiting is part by part answered, without the least pretermission of any
one sentence or clause that makes for M. Halls purpose: no authority of
Scriptures, Canons, Counsels, Fathers, Historyes, or other writers is
neglected: the whole is discussed, answered, refuted, and the whole discussion,
answer, and refutation, for better perspicuity, is divided into three parts or
paragraffs under these titles.

The doctrine of the Apostles expressed in Scripture, and alleged by M. Hall
for the marriage of Priests, with his other proofs for their practice, are
examined and refelled: the vow of Chastity is proved to be lawful, and not
impossible.. 1.

Of the testimonies and examples of the ancient Fathers, Counsels, especially
the Trullan, and historyes produced by M. Hall for the marriage of Priests and
Clergy men.. 2.

The later Part of M. Halls letter is examined: the fiction of S. Vdalricus his
epistle to Pope Nicolas the first, is refuted: Gregory the seventh defended:
and withal is declared the practice of our own Country, even from the
Conversion under S. Gregory.. 3.

5. Further to satisfy your request, I have added another paragraffe which
contains a more general censure or survey of M. Halls whole book, not that
I tax or touch as much thereof as deserves correction (for some other more
potent Index expurgatorius is necessary to blot out all the faults, and to
purge either by water or fire this impure stable) but for that out of these
which I have taken, you may make a conjecture of the other which I have left,
and more fully be able to conceive the worth of this writer, whom to me you
have so much extolled: for all his painted words serve to no other end, then
to make the simpler sort to swallow down more greedily his poisoned pills,
whiles they see them covered with such golden phrases of superficial
cloquence, and urged with so great show of zeal, as if the man meant nothing
but truth, whiles he plainly gulleth them with most open lies. Of these thrids
is this net wouen, which catches so many of the weaker people, much like as S.
Hierom says to the web Hier. ep. ad Cyprian. Presbyt.
of spiders, that catches weak flies, and by birds and beasts is broken a
sunder: telam araneae texunt (says he) quae parua and leuia potest capere
animalia: The Heretics weaue a spiders web which is able to catch little and
light creatures, as flies gnats, or the like, but by others of more strength is
broken in pieces: the light and more simple sort in the Church are deceived by
their errors, when as they cannot seduce such as are strong in the truth of
faith. So he of all heretics, and I of M. Hall. Read what I write, and then
believe as you find; this Paragraffe is long and bears this inscription.

A detection of sundry errors committed in M. Halles writings, which he shall
do well either to amend, or else hereafter to be altogether silent.. 4.

The length of the thing makes me sometimes, as occasion serves, to speak to
M. Hall, sometimes to the Reader, sometimes to your self: no other thing is to
be noted, and for that the rest is directed to you alone, I will not here give
you the farewell, but refer that until I come to the end of the whole.

The doctrine of the Apostles expressed in Scripture, and alleged by M. Hall
for the marriage of Priests, and his other proofs for their practice, are
examined and refelled: the vow of chastity is proved to be lawful, and not
impossible.. 1.
BEFORE I descend to the particulers of M. Halls Apologeticall discourse for
the marriage of A censure of M. Hals manner of writing.
Ecclesiastical persons, this briefly in general I must say thereof, that I
have not read a more loose, base, and ragged piece of work, or so many
impertinences couched together in so narrow room in any matter, or writer of
co^trouersyes which I have seen between the Protestants and us, as in this;
which made me wonder to behold one so busy of so little ability: for the
learning he every where shows is less then mean though his malice be great,
and does still over reach his knowledge, and surpass all modesty: but much
more did I marvel to see such passions so predominant in him as he could not
conteyne them within some of the bounds of his own Characters of moral
Courtesy, but was transported by their violence so far as to transgress not
Christian charity only, but even the prescript of common ciuility, as every
where you will see: for in this short Letter, upon no occasion or ground at al,
he breaks forth into such base and reproachful terms, uses such
insultations and insolencyes, such false accusations and impostures against
Catholics, as will loath any modest man to read, and must needs argue little
wit, and good intention in the writer, who in so grave a matter is forced to
stoop to so Ruffianly demeanor.

7. And truly this base spirit seems to be so habitual in M. Hall, as I can
expect nothing M. Halls railatiue speeches taxed.
from him in case she should reply, but whole cart loads of contumelies, so
fast they do flow from him, and so little power he has to bridle these
impetuous motions of his discomposed mind, that notwithstanding in his vows
and meditations he say: that if he cannot tame his passions Lib. 2.. ^^.
that they may yield to his case, yet at least he will smother them, by
concealing that they may not appear to his shame, yet so unable he is to do
the one or the other, as that even where shame should have withholden him most,
I mean in the pulpit deputed for the word of God, and instruction of the
faithful (in delivery of which we can never be to grave or modest) even there
I say, he could not conteyn, but in two sermons has uttered more unsavory
filth, then the Jesuits, take them al together, have done in two thousand, or
in all the sermons of theirs extant in print (so different are their spirits,
and therefore no marvel if he bear them such implacable hatred) for thus in
one sermon he says: If ever you look to see good days of the Gospel, the
vnhorsing and confusion of that strumpet Pharisaisme and Christianity page 55.
of Rome etc. Again, do thou think he sees not how smoothly thou have
dawbed on thine whorish complexions? and yet further, in belying the Jesuits,
wherein he is copious without end, malicious without wit, and railatiue without
measure. A poor widows cottage (says he) filled the panch of that old
Pharisy, how many fair patrimonyes of devout young ge^tlemen druryed by them
(pardon the word, it is their own, the thing I know and can witness) have gone
down the throats of these Loyalists, let their own Quodlibet and Catechism
report. And is it tolerable, trow you, thus with lying ribaldry to intertayne
the people gathered to hear his sermon? is this the word of God which he does
preach? is this the modesty of the Gospel? and for the two books which he
calls their own, it is his own untruth, for they were composed by their
enemies, I mean by men of as much credit as himself, and one of the writers
publikly at his death recalled what he had written, and craved pardon of the
Jesuits for the wrong; and of the world for the scandal which he had given by
his books. But M. Hall himself will needs out of his kindness forsooth enter
for a wittnes in a thing which he does know to be true, but this you must
understand to be only a Puritanical truth, which is nothing else but a stark
lie, as in the last paragraffe shall be declared; for these men neither in
printed books or pulpits are to be believed if they speak against Catholics,
specially if they rail against Jesuits, wherein they use all lawless liberty,
and in despite of truth will lie for the advantage.

8. Which point is not only the triuiall subject of their ordinary sermons, I
mean to lie, and M. Halls passionate sermon of our Saviors passion.
to use such loathsome terms as none in such occasions would use but
themselves; but also in the most grave and holiest matters, as of our Saviors
Passion, of all theames the most sacred, and that on good friday, at Paul's
Cross, they cannot refrain; so as no place, time, or theme i^ able to bridle
the unbridled passions of our English ministers: for this man speaking of
pardons or Indulgences (which I think he understands not) in his Passion
sermon, he very modestly says of the Catholic Roman Church, that strumpet
would well near go naked if the were not: and further talks or rather tatleth
o^ Antichristian blasphemy, furious bulls that bellow ^^ threats, and toss
them in the air for heretics, and the like, much less beseeming the pulpit,
then ^ fools cap the preacher. But of this dealing of his, I shall after have
more occasion to warn^ him, and by this little you may see how iustl^ now and
then I am moved to use a rough wis^ to scour so unclean a vessel. Let him be
more temperate and I will never be sharp: if stirre^ thereunto by his example I
should observe Lege^ talionis, let him thank himself who without all example
or occasion offered did first prouo^ me thereunto, though yet notwithstanding
hi^ provocation I intend not paribus concurrere telis, ^ encounter him in the
like style with maledictum pro maledicto, leaving that as hereditary to
Protestants: my words shall still beseem my self, have modesty and truth for
their characters, they shall offend no chaste ears, and as little as may be M.
Halls patience (which yet I take to be very tender) unless it be where he
offends others of much better credit and esteem then himself, and that also
shall be rather for his correction that he may see his own error and amend
it, then for any ill will I bear his person, or delight I take in that vein
of writing. But to proceed.

9. Although that M. Hall be every where M. Halls Thrasonicall vanting, though
he perform nothing.
virulent against us as you see, yet is the man very favorable and ouerweening
toward himself, for albeit he scant understand the true state of the question
he treats, albeit he produce nothing but either by wrong interpretation
misunderstood, or by corruption forged, or of it self counterfayt, and albeit
he never bring true authority (one only excepted and that of no credit) that
touches the controversy, no argument that concludes, nothing in fine of any
weight or moment; yet does he so vaunt every where over his adversaries, so
advance himself, is so courageous and confident, as though he were some great
Golias waging war with Pigmeyes, and that his adversaries were so far from
withstanding his force, as they durst not stand before him, or endure his
assault: for as though that God and man conspired in this without all
contradiction, he tells us, that if God shallbe Judge of this controversy, it
were soon at an end, and to us he cries out, hear o ye papists the judgment
of your own Cardinal, and confess your mouths stopped: and of himself,
that if I fre not this truth let me be punished with a divorce, yea so light
does this grave man make this controversy, and the truth thereof on his behalf
so clear, as though none but some Carpet knight did doubt of it, or dispute
against it: some idle table talk (says he) calls us to plead for our wives,
perchance some gallants grudge us one who can be content to allow themselves
more, and for a scholar to refute table-talkes, or young gallants, is as you
know no great maistery, nec habet victoria laudem.

10. But presently forgetting his young gallants and table-talkes, he bordeth us
and never leaves us till the end of the epistle, so as his whole scope is to
disprove the single life of Catholic priests, and thereby to impugn our
doctrine in that behalf: in which fynding other adversaries then young gallants,
or idle table talkers, and stronger arguments then he knew how to dissolve,
being on the one side unwilling to be silent, and on the other not able to
perform what himself desired and friends expected, like a right Crauen flies
out of the field, never so much as looking on the proofs for our assertion
which to much affrighted him, as being all endorsed with a noli me tangere: but
seeing many objections in Bellarmyne out of Calvin, Melancthon, the
Magdeburgians, and others answered, and so answered as he could make no reply,
the poor man was driven to that exigent, as he was forced to borrow from
thence the objections, but without any mention at all of any solution given by
the Cardinal, and so he comes forth with his answered arguments, as with
broken shafts, and florisheth in the air, and vaunteth above measure.

11. You may think perhaps that I extenuate too much M. Halls learning, or
exaggerate too M. Halls arguments in Bellarmine and their solutions dissembled.
far his insufficiency, for being reputed and taken for a scholar, he could
not but see the discredit that would follow of such dealing: but in this I will
make your self witness, yea a judge also, for the books themselves will
speak, and there needs no more in one who understands Latin, then to bring
his eyes and read both Authors: for what place of Scripture does M. Bellar. de
Clericis l. 1. c. 20. etc. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 3. Hebr. 13.
Hall produce that is not there answered? there he shall see his text of the
doctrine of Devils explicated, there that other, Let him be the husband of one
wise, there lastly, how marriage is honorable in all, and yet not lawful
between brother and sister, Father and daughter, friar and nun, or in any
person that has vowed the contrary: there of the Apostles wives in general,
and of S. Paul's in 1. Cor. 9. Philip. 4.
particular: for Counsels there the Canon of the Apostles, and the sixth
Synod, there Pope Steuens decree, there in fine is the history of Paphnutius
rejected, the letter of S. Vdalrick disproued, the examples of married Bishops
answered: so as there is all the sap and substance of this letter refuted, for
on these things specially does it rely, and yet as if nothing had been said
unto them they are here again repeated, and Bellarmine not so much as once
named in all the letter, but this silence proceeded of no ill policy: for he
was loath to name the place from whence he had fetched his store, least there
the Reader should by his recourse have found the answers, and discovered his
weakness.

12. And the like policy he uses in painting out his margent with Greek and
Latin sentences, Great vanity and ostentation.
which to the simple who understand neither the one or other tongue makes a
great show of sincerity and learning: especially being conjoined with so many
resolute speeches, as when he says, That he passes not what men and Angels
say whiles he hears God say, let him be the husband of one wife, that one word
(says M. Hall) shall confirm me against the barking of all impure mouths.
Again, That if he convince not all adversaries, he will be cast in so just a
cause: with so many eager chargings of us, with burning, blotting out, cutting
away, and perverting what we cannot answer. What (says he) dare not
Impudency do? against all evidences of Greek copyes, against their own
Gratian, against pleas of antiquity? this is the readyest way, whom they
cannot answer to burn, what they cannot shift of, to blot out, and to cut the
knot which they cannot untie: and last of all with beating us back, as he
would seem with our own weapons: For besides the Scriptures, you have
Counsels and those sacred, Fathers and those ancient, the Popes decrees,
Gratian the Canonist, the later Cardinals, the Greek Church, and purer times:
which names alone wherewith his text and margent is stuffed, being thus ranged
together, cannot but make great impression in the eyes of the ignorant, who
without further enquiry (as being not able to search into these matters) take
all for true which with these circumstances are delivered unto them.

13. But these are now, have heretofore been, and will be always the sleights of
heretics to cover Heretics cover a wolf with a sheep skin.
a wolf with a sheeps skin, and on the fowlest matters to make the fairest
pretense, never making a deeper wound then where they would be thought to work
their greatest cure; or using more deceit, then when they most preach of plain
dealing: for here M. Hall would seem to stick to God against men and Angels
when as he clean leaves him; he offers to be cast in his cause if he do not
euince it, when as he relates a mere fable, a notorious untruth; talks of
our burning of books, tearing out of places, and the like, where there is no
show or shadow thereof; he alleges Canons, Counsels, Fathers to no purpose
but to delude his reader with their names, and to hide his hook with a more
alluring bayte, for without this art his words would be of no regard, or able
^o persuade any. Nam nec venator seram (says S. Greg. l. 7. epist. ep. 112.
Gregory) aut auem auceps (...)ret etc. For neither ^he hunter would catch the
beast, or the fowler ^he bird, or the fisher the fish, if either the hunter ^r
fowler should lay their snars open to be seen, ^r the fisher with a bayte
should not hide his ^ooke: by all means we are to fear and beware ^f the
deceit of the enemy, least by a secret blow ^e do not more cruelly kill, whom
by open ten^tion he could not overthrow. So he, of the di^ls, and we of
heretics.

14. But now let us come to the particulers ^ M. Halls proofs, and behold how
well they ^nclude, for somewhat you may imagine he Bernard. ep. 190.
^th found out quod tot latuerit sanctos, tot praeterierit ^ientes, or else he
would never use such confidence and Thrasonical vanting, and offer the hazard
of a divorce: and to the end there may be no mistaking you must know that our
controversy is not whether any Priests and Bishops have been married, or had
children, for of that there can be The true state of the question is set down,
which in this controversy is much to be noted.
no difficulty, it being evident the Father of S. Gregory Nazianzen, afterward
Bishop, S. Hilary, S. Gregory Nassen, and others named in this epistle to have
had wives, and some of them by their wiue issue, but our question only is
whether any afte^ they were made Priests or Bishops did ever ma^ry, or if they
married not, whether yet they use their wives which before they had, and wheth^
that use was approved as lawful. And this the protestants affirm both in
doctrine and practis^ and we deny; and for our denial bring the consent of all
times, all places, all Authors of no^ and credit for our assertion: whereas M.
Hall^ now you shall see, produces little else but i^ allegations, impostures,
and mere untruth this we shall now examine.

15. After a few idle words to no purp^ thus he writes. But some perhaps
mainteyn o^ M. Hall begins with a cluster of untruths.
Marriage not to be lawful out of judgment, by them make much of that which
Paul tells the^ is a doctrine of devils, were it not for this opini^ the
Church of Rome would want one euide^ brand of her Antichristianisme: let their
shaueli^ speak for themselves upon whom their y^ lawful vow has forced a
wilful and imp^ssible necessity: I leave them to scan the old ru^ in turpi
vote muta decretum. So M. Hall, making you see his first entrance with a fierce
assa^ being set as it should seem into some choler, ere we end, I hope we
shall in part cool his courage, and show his chiefest talent not to be in
disputing, in which he is no body, but in railing and lying, wherein we contend
not with him, but willingly give him the garland of that conquest: and as for
untruths they will be very frequent with him when as even here he begins
with such a cluster together.

16. For truly if any one out of judgment In few lines no less then five
untruths.
doubted of the marriage of priests and clergy men, he cannot but be further off
from believing it, when he sees M. Hall so, without judgment learning, or
truth, to mainteyne it: for omitting his railing in these few words are fine
untruths. 1. That S. Paul calls the single life of priests the doctrine of
devils. 2. That this is a brand of Antichristianisme. 3. That this vow is
unlawful. 4. That it forces an impossible necessity. 5. That it is turpe
votum, which are contradictory terms, for a vow can never be turpe, because it
is defyned by deuins to be promissio socta Deo de meliore bono, which can
conteyne no turpitude in it. I see we shall have a good harvest ere we come to
the end, seeing he begins with so great abundance, for all this his entrance
consists only of untruths.

17. Which untruths albeit I might with as great facility reject as he does
aue^re them, The first untruth refuted.
seeing they have no other ground then his bare assertion for their proofs* yet
very briefly I will touch them all in order as they lie. I say therefore that it
is untrue, that S Paul calls the single life Theodor. in Com. Haymo ibidem.
of priests the doctrine of devils, for he speaks of those, as Theodore^
does expound him, qui execrabiles nuptias and plurimos cibos appellabant, who
called marriage and diverse meats execrable: he speaks Tract. 9. in loan.
of those, as S. Augustine says, who said: quod malae essent nuptiae, and
quod diabolus eas fecisset, that marriages were naught, and that the Devil had
3. Stromatum.
made them: he speaks of those according to Clemens Alexandrinus, qui
matrimonium abhorrent, abhor matrimony: in one word he speaks of the
Manicheans, and other heretics, as S. Ambrose, Epiphantus, Ambr. in comment.
and others expound him, who held matrimony in it self to be unclean and
impute August. haeres. 22. Epiphan. haeres. 42. and 66.
from which the Catholics are so far, as they not only allow it as clean,
torus immaculatus, the bed undefiled, but also approve it for a Sacrament.

18. And it follows not as M Hall surmizeth, that because priests and
Religious refuse to marry, therefore they condemn marriage, and teach the
doctrine of devils: for as S. Augustine well notes: Si ad virginitatem sic
hortaremini, quimadmodum Aug l 30. contra Paustum Manic. c. 6.
hortatur aposto ica doctrina: Qui d^t nuptum, benefacit, and qui non dat
nuptum melius facit: vt bonum esse nup^ias diceretis sed meliorem virginitatem,
ficut facit Ecclesia quae vere Christi est Ecclesia, non ves spiritus sanctus
ita prenuntiaret. dicens etc. ^f you (says he to the Manichees) did so exnort
to virginity as the Apostolica^l doctrine does, saying: he that matrieth his
daughter does well, and he who matrieth not does better, that you would grant
marriage to be good, virginity to be better, as the Anselm. in comment.
Church does, which is truly the Church of Christ, the holy Ghost would not so
forwarn us of you; saying, prohibentes nubere, forbidding to matry: and then
adds this sentence which verbatim S. Anselm in his co^mentary has taken of
him: I^e prohibet qui hoc malum esse dicit, non qui huic bono aliud bonum
anteponit. He forbids a thing according to S. Paul, who says it is ill,
not he who before one thing that is good prefers another that is better: which
is the very case of those mentioned, as is evident. And the self same has S.
Chrysostom in his Commentary. Aliud Chrysostom. in comment.
(says he) est prohibere, aliud suae voluntatis dominium relinquere etc. It is
one thing to forbid marriage, another thing to leave a man free: for one (as
the before named Heretik) so far as he is able forbids marriage, another (to wit
the Catholic) exhorts unto Virginity, as the more noble: neither does he do it
as forbidding to marry, sed celsioris virtutis merita sectanda proponit, but
sets before there eyes the pursuit of the merits of a more Fulgen. ep. 3. cap. 9.
eminent virtue. So S. Chrysostom. And S. Fulgentius in few words answers
this stale cavil, saying: Neque sic virginitatem frumentis ascribimus, vt
coniugium inter zizania deputemus. We do not so compare virginity to pure
corn, as to cast matrimony amongst the unclean cockle.

19. The second untruth is, that this is the The second untruth refuted.
brand of Antichristianisme: belike none of Antichrist his Chaplyns shall have
wives, or else I see not why this should be his brand: for if he mean as he
seems to do, that to profess continency out of marriage is Antichristian,
whether in widows, or virgins; with our Clergy, and Religious he will brand
also S. Paul, who in the very next Chapter after this cyted by himself
speaking of certain young widows who after their vows would marry says:
damnationem 1. Tim. 5.
habentes quia primam sidem irritam secerunt, having damnation because they
have made void or broken their first faith: where by the word faith all
Fathers without exception understand a Vow, or promise made to God of
continency in the state of widdowhood. S. Chrysostom, Theophilact, and
Oecumenius call it pactum, a covenant or accord. By which word that a vow i^
meant is plain by Theodoret, where he says: hoc autem (non peccat) dicit de
ijs quae virginitatis pacti Theod. epitom. di(...) decreto. cap. de virginet.
conuenta seu vota nondum secerant: that which the Apostle says (he does not
sin) he says of those who as yet had made no covenants or vows of virginity.
S. Hierom calls it a promise, S. Ambrose a profession, and the same does also
Theodoret saying: Cum enim Christo professae sunt in viduitate cast viuere,
secunda Matrimonia contrahunt, when as they had professed to live chastely in
widdowhood, they married the second time, and which is all one with the former.
S. Augustine in many places calls it a Vow, and says that these wanton
widows were condemned for breaking their Vows made of not marrying any more.
Non quia (says he) ipsae nuptiae velut malum iudicantur, August. sermon. de bono
viduitatis^. 8. and 9.
sed damnatur propositi fraus, damnatur fracta voti fides. These widows are
not therefore condemned for marrying because marriages are held to be naught,
but the transgression of their contrary purpose is condemned, the breach of
their vow is condemned. So he. Again in another place, the Apostle speaking of
certain who vow chastity, and after will marry, which before their vows was
lawful for them to do, he says: they have damnation, because they have made
void their first faith. In this manner also Primasius expounds this Text:
quia fecerunt sibi illicitum, quod licebat vouendo castitatem, they made that
unlawful which before was lawful by vowing of chastity. The same has Haymo, S.
Ambrose, S. Thomas, and others, yea all that I could ever find to comment on
this passage, as well Greek as Latin.

20. But what need I stand upon particular Authors, when I may bring two
hundred and Council. Carthag. 1. Canon vltimo.
fourten together, al Bishops, all sitting in Council at Carthage, all
agreeing in this exposition, amongst whom S. Augustine himself was both
present and subscribed: in this Council, I say, in the very last Canon it is
decreed, that if any widow after she has received the habit and vowed
thastity shall marry again that she shall be excomunicated, and the reason is
assigned, because according to the Apostle damnationem habebunt queniam fidem
castitatis quam domino vouerunt irritam facere ausaesunt. They shall have
damnation because they presumed to break the promise of chastity which they
have vowed unto our Lord. What more clear?

21. Wherefore this being the uniform opinion M. Hall hardly urged.
of all antiquity, avouched by so many, and never by any contradicted, of the
sense of this place, I demand now of M. Hall whether these young widows in
breaking their vows did sin or not; if they did not, why shall they have
damnation? and why are they condemned by the Apostle for breaking their former
promise? Why is their marriage reproved which they might lawfully contract? if
they did sin, as indeed they did, then how is the vow unlawful? how the brand
of Antichristianisme? how does it induce an impossible necessity? For no man
synneth where there is either necessity or impossibility, much less in
breaking a filthly vow, as this impure companion speaks, which never binds
the maker: let him turn himself into all Pretheus his forms, he shall never
avoid the force of this reason. For either he must deny the word Faith, to
signify a promise, vow, or covenant and then he condemns the Ancient
Fathers, or say that these widows sinned not, and then he condemns S. Paul;
or grant that they did sin, and then he condemns himself. This Gordian
knot requires more strength then M. Halls learning, and a sharper edge then
Alexanders sword, to dissolve, or cut it asunder.

22. And herein I appeal to the judgments of al scholars, whether this one
inference of the Apostle, do not forcibly overthrow all his untruths together:
for supposing these widows to have vowed, their vow to have been lawful,
the transgression damnable, the observance laudable, who sees not that it is
no doctrine of Devils, but divine and Apostolical; no brand of
Antichristianisme, but a band of Christian perfection; no unlawful vow; no
impossible necessity; no turpitude, but Angelical purity to be contained
therein, and the like. I know Caluins ridiculous cuasion.
some Heretics of our time, do understand this first faith of the faith of
Baptism, but how can this faith hinder marriage? or how do they break this
faith, that thereby they should incur damnation? This alone might suffice for a
full answer to all his first objection, yet to deal more friendly with him, I
will add a word o^ two more touching the other three untruths.

23. The third untruth is, that this vow is The third untruth refured.
unlawful which he proves not, though it be a fundamental point in this new
Gospel, and was the plea of M. Halles Heroical Luther (for so he styles
him) when he became so wanton, as he In his Passion Sermon.
could no longer be without his woman, and so lewd as to make laws to
mainteyne his unlawful lust: for by these good works was the fleshly fancy of
justification by only faith, first framed and set on foot, and therefore this
point being so essential, deserved some better proof, then a bare auouching,
unless perhaps M. Hall think to have proved it to be unlawful, by affirming it
to be impossible, but that is nothing else, then to prove only by making of
another, or to speak more properly, boldly without proving anything to
multiply untruths, and abuse his Readers: and indeed such Propositions deserve
no other answer then a resolute denial, with some check of the maker, for
supposing the thing that most of al imported him to prove, and that against all
the laws of learning, which call this dealing petitionem principij, a fault
unworthy of a puny Sophister, who will shame to assume that as evident which is
denied by his adversary, and instead of proving fall to supposing, by which kind
of arguing he may prove what he list, and make an ass to have eight ears,
because he may suppose him to have four heads.

24. Nevertheless that this new heresy began with breaking of vows, and
pleading the vnlawfulles and impossibility of them, I mean upon the occasion
offered of M. Halls words, to discuss a little either member a part, and let
you see both, what our Adu^rsaries now say, and what the Fathers, whose
authority M Hall so much does reverence, have said in this matter: although for
the later none can be ignorant who read their works, how vehemently they have
approved vows, and without all disproofe of marriage, have extolled single
life both for perfection and merit before matrimony: and M. Hall against vows
of virginity and chastity, from them fetches no testimony, but relyeth on his
two foresaid supposed, and not proved principles, to wit, that they are
unlawful, that they are impossible, and so being vnlaw^ull they may not be
made, being impossible they cannot be kept: and for that the vnlawfullnes he
mentions may be as well meant of that which flows from the very nature and
essence of such vows, as from the surmized impossibility of the object, in
regard whereof he calls it turpe votum, a filthy vow, as including in it
self some uncleanness; I will show such vows to be far from all impurity, far
from impossibility, and consequently that they may lawfully be made, and
inuiolably observed by the makers.

25. Which point deserves the greater discussion for the cause alleged, I
mean for that these later heresies began by vow-breakers who to excuse their
incontinency condemned al vows, and made this in particular to be worse
Luther. l. de votis Monast. tom. 6. Ggr. page ^32.
then aduowtry, to be unlawful, to be impossible: Quid igitur de voto
castitatis (says lewd Luther) amplius dicam etc. What then shall I say more of
the vow of chastity? my purpose is not to declare by what means it is to be
kept, but by what means it cannot, or ought not to be kept. And what think
you to be the cause hereof? no other truly but that which M. Hall does here
allege, that it is an unlawful vow. Quomodo fieri potest (says Luther) vt
tale votum non sit. pe^us quam adulterium seu fornicatio? How can it otherwise
be, but that such a vow of chastity is worse then adultery, or fornication? And
in the same book he says, that a man does mock God by these vows no less,
then if he should vow to be a Bishop, and that God does reject these vows no
less then if he had vowed to be the mother Luth ep. ad VVolfga^gum
Reissenbusch.
of God, or to create a new Heaven. Again against Catharinus he says, that
the tenth face of Antichrist is the single life of such as do vow chastity:
plane Angelica facies, sed diabolica res; indeed it is an Angelical face, but
a diabolical thing, and to vow the same is nothing else, then to condemn and
accurse matrimony. With this mad Martin, Pelican and Bucer two other married
Friars In cap. 1. Matthew
do in judgment and opinion accord: for they will have the Law and Commandment
of God to be to the contrary, that is, to inhibite the vow of chastity, and to
command all men to be householders, all women to be house-wiues.

26. And so far did Luther think men to be bound by the obligation of this
law, as thus he In eolloquijs German. c. de vita coniugali.
writes of himself: Ego priusquam matrimonium inieram, omnino mecum statueram
etc. I before I was married had fully determined with myself that in case I
should dye sooner then I expected, that even in the agony or pang of death I
would betroth my self to some young maid. So sharp set was this wanton
companion on marriage, as he thought it necessary, and that also necessitate
medi to salvation: and he who will consider the quick dispatch he made in
marying, shall find that his have was somewhat more then his good Epist. ad
Patremsuum Ioannem tom. 2. latin. Wittenberg. Epist ad VVm^eslaum Linchium.
Luther. ep. ad Joan. Ruell, Ioa^. Durr, and Gasp. Miller. to^. 9. German.
speed, for having cast of the yoke of all regular discipline, and bragged in a
letter to his father that now he was under none but Christ, ipse me^^ est
immediatus (quod vocant) Episcopus, Abbas, Prior, Dominus, Pater, and Magister,
alium non noui amplius Christ is my immediate Bishop (as they call it) he is my
Abbot, Prior, Lord, Father, and Master, now I know no more but him: the next
year after he married (to use his own words) cum honesta virgin Catherina
Bore, quae aliquando monialis fuit, with an honest virgin Catherin Bore, which
once had been a Nun: and to make sure work, ne quod impedimentum
obijceretur, mox etiam festinatum adieci concubitum, and least any impediment
should occur etc.

27. And he did well to mention his hasty copulation, or else the effect had
appeared before the cause, and his Kate had showed herself a mother before she
had been known to be his Erasm. ad Danielem Mauchium Vlme^sem.
wife: for Erasmus writing to his friend Daniell Mauchius of Vlmes, thus
reports the matter. Mo^tini lepidissimis literis nescio an vacet nunc
respondere etc. I know not whether I shall be at leisure now to answer the
pleasant letter of Montinus, you shall The vnluckines of Luthers over hasty
marriage.
tell him a pretty jest: Luther laying aside his Philosophical cloak has
married a wife, of the noble family of the Bores, a very fair maid of six and
twenty years of age: but he has no dowry with her, and she had been a Nun;
and that you may know this marriage to have been very lucky, a few days after
the marriage was celebrated, the new wife was brought to bed. so Erasmus: and
more compendiously Iustus Baronius: Iustus Baronius opere de praescriptionibus.
Lutherus heri Monachus, hodie sponsus, cras maritus perendie Pater: Luther was
yesterday a monk, to day a bridegroom, to morrow a husband, the next day after
a father. So he. Which as you se was somewhat to hasty indeed, and yet
notwithstanding which is more strange, after he had known his harlot, and she
was known to be great with child, he wrote a letter to one Spalatinus, Epist.
ad Spalatin.
and calls his wife a virgin: Spero (says he) me os obtur ass ijs qui me
vna cum mea desponsata mihi virgin Catharina de Bore traducunt and dissama^t:
I hope now that I have stopped their mouths who staunder and defame me
together with my espowsed virgin Catherine Bore. And the like he writes to
Nicolas Amsdorsius, calling her after this again virtuosam virginem, a
virtuous virgin: but such virtue, such virgin: a fit matron she was for so mad
a friar.

28. Besides this precept and practice of marriage in these men, to add further
that the vow of perpetual chastity is impossible to be kept, may well seem a
thing impossible to be affirmed by a Christian man, but Afric was never so
full of different monsters as these men are of prodigious opinions: for now
nothing is so improbable but may find an Author, and this of chastity howsoever
it be a brutish paradox, is affirmed by Luther, and that in such blunt and
beastly manner, as I am ashamed to put down all his words, as unwilling to let
any thing pass my pen that may defile your cares, or by reading offend any
chaste mind. Wherefore to omit other his base speeches to show a vow of chastity
for term of life to be impossible, thus he writes: Ponamus quod aliquis Tom.
6. de votis. Monasticis page 221. and Epist. ad VVolfgangum Reiss^nbus.
voueat condere nouas stellas, montesque transfer, a^ non iure vocares
amentiam? sed enim vo^um castitatis a tali voto nihil differt. Let us suppose
that one should vow to make new stars, and to remove mountains, would you
not worthily call this vow a mere madness: but there is no difference between
the vow of chastity and this vow. So Luther, and again to the same effect:
Cast and integre viuere tam non est in manu nostra quam omnia reliqua Tom. 7.
page 505.
Dei miracula: to live chastely and continently is as little in our power as are
all the other miracles of almighty God: and so whereas it lies not in our
power to work all the miracles of God, to make new stars, to remove
mountains, and the like, no more is it in our power to live chaste, which
says this Epicure, homini a Deo nullo modo conceditur, Greg. Thaumaturgus vt
referunt Basil. Grego. Nissen. Beda, alij.
is not granted by God to any man: and indeed though I have heard of one who
removed a mountayn, yet did I never read of any that made new stars, though
some by the revolution of their Epicycles have newly appeared, but they were
made by the same hand which made the rest, and at the same time, and therefore
by good illation it will follow, that as no man is able to make a new star, so
by Luthers doctrine no man is able to live chaste.

29. And this might suffice to show his opinion of this impossibility, and it
is to monstrous as yowsee, but yet as though this were not more then enough, he
further puts down for surplusage this position: Quam parum in mea potestate
situm est, vt vir non sim, tam parum etiam in mea potestate Luther. lib. de
vita coniugali Tom. 6. VVitemberg. Germ. page 171.
situm est, vt absque muliere sim: ac rursum, quam parum in tua potestate est,
vt mulier non sis, tam parum etiam in tua potestate est, vt absque viro sis,
quia hac res non est arbitaria seu consilij, sed res necessaria ac naturalis,
vt omnis vir multerem habeat, and omnis mulier virum etc. estque hoc plusquam
praeceptum magis necess^rium quam comedere and bibere, purgare and exspuere,
domire and vigilare. As little as it lies in my power not to be man, so little
is it in my power to be without a woman: and again as little as it is in thy
power not to be a woman, so little is it in thy power to be without a man.
Because this matter is not left in our own hands, but it is both necessary and
natural, that every man have a woman, and every woman have a man etc. And this
is more then a commandment, and more necessary then to eat and drink (
purgare and exspuere are to homely stuff to be Englished) to sleep and wake.
So far this Christian Epicure: and some 6. pages after he counsaileth what is
to be done in case the wife be froward, and will not come at her husbands call,
and his advise is to leave her in her frowardnes and to take some other: to
seek some Hesther and leave Vasthy, with other such beastly impertinencies.

30. By this you see how Luther, and M. Hall The first point is discussed, to
wit, whether the vow of chastity be Unlawful or not.
like Pilate and Herod though at variance between themselves, yet in this do
agree against us, that the vow of castity is unlawful and impossible: let us
now debate friendly the matter it self in either member, and see if this either
in reason or from the warrant of Scriptures or the Fathers can subsist. And to
begin with the unlawfulness: if the vow of chastity be vnlawfwll it must either
be in respect of the vow, or of the matter vowed; but from neither of these two
branches can this unlawfulness proceed, and consequently it is not unlawful at
all. Not from the first, because Deuteron. 23. Eccles. 5. psalm. 21. 49. 65. 75.
vows in general are lawful, and as such are allowed in the old and new
testament, and of the Messiah it was prophesyed, that the Egyptians should
worship him in sacrifices and gifts: and further, Vota vouebunt Domino and
soluent, they shall Isa. 19.
make vows unto our Lord and shall perform them, and these vows do more
straytly bind us unto God, then any promises made amongst men do bynd them to
one another. Quam grauia Ambros. lib. 9. in Lucam in caput 20.
sunt vincula (says S. Ambroise) promittere Deo and non soluere etc. How
grievous are the bands to promise to God and not to perform? It is better not
to vow then to vow and not to render what we have vowed, Mayor est contractus
fidei quam pecuniae, the contract or promise of Religion, is greater then the
contract or promise of money: satisfy thy promise whiles yet thou art alive
before the Leo epist. 92. cap. 15.
Judge come, and cast thee into prison. So he. The same, to omit others, has
S. Leo: Ambigi non potest etc. It cannot be doubted that a great sine is
committed where the (religious) purpose is forsaken and vows violated. The
reason whereof he yeldeth saying: Si humana pacta non possunt impune calcari,
quid de eis manebit qui corruperint foedera diuini Sacramenti? If humane
contracts are not broken without punishment, what shall become of them, who
have violated the co^tracts of their sacred promise made unto God? So he. And
this was the cause why the Apostle said, that the young widows by violating
their vow, had incurred damnation, because it was made to God, and so could not
be made void at all. Quid est, says S. Augustine, August. in psalm. 75.
primam fidem irritam ^ecerunt ^ vouerunt and non reddiderunt. What is meant,
that they made void their first faith? they vowed and performed not their vows.
What more clear? And in another De virginitate cap. 33.
place: primam fidem irrittam fecerunt, id est, in eo quod primo vouerant non
steterunt, they made void their first ^ayth, that is, they remained not
constant in that which they had first vowed.

31. And this place, not only proves a vow to be lawful in general, but even
in this particular matter we now speak of, I mean of chastity. Because these
widows were reprehended of the Apostle, for that they would marry, and not
live chastely in widdowhood as they had vowed, as before I have showed: to which
end, and to prove the perpetual band of these vows, it is applied also by S.
Fulgentius, when Fulgentius de fide ad Petrum cap. 30.
he faith: Quistatuit in cord suo firmus, non habens necessitatem, potestatem
autem habens suae voluntatis etc. He who has determined in his heart being
steadfast, not having any necessity, but having power over his own will, and
has vowed chastity to God, he ought with all care, and solicitude of mind to
keep the same until the end of his life, least he have damnation if he shall
make void his first faith. So he. And to the same effect before him wrote S.
Hierom saying: Nazaraei Hierom. in caput 46. Ezechielu. ^
sponte se offeru^t, and quicumque aliquid vouerit and non impleuerit votireus
est etc. The Nazarites volu^tarily offer themselves, and whosoever has vowed
any thing, and not fullfilled it, is guilty of his violated vow, whereupon of
widows it is said, when they wax wanton in Christ they will marry having
damnation etc. for it is better not at all to promise, then not to fulfill what
is promised: Lib. 1. in Iouinian.
and in another place against Iouinian: If Iouinia^ shall say that this was
said of widows, how much more shall it be of force in Virgins, and i^ it were
not lawful for widows, for whom^ shall it be lawful? So S. Hierome.

32. And further to prove the lawfullnes o^ a vow in this particular matter, to
wit, of chastity either virginal, viduall, or of single life (the special
subject of our controversy) to om^ other arguments, I will only touch five, ^
which four shallbe taken out of such Father^ writings, as M. Hall does
acknowledge, and ^^ whom he refers his cause. The first where^ shallbe their
comparing the state of such as liu^ a chaste life, with the state of Angels,
and exhorting thereunto. Secondly their preferring of^ before marriage. Thirdly
their sharp rebuke^ such as have broken their vow. Lastly the condemning of the
marriage of vow-breaken calling it worse then aduowtry etc. To these will add
the approuance of the Canon and punishments appointed by the Civil laws for
such: abused Religious women, and then leave it ^ any to judge, whether it be
turpe votum, a brand^ Antichristianism, worse then aduowtry, a diabolical
thi^* or the like, or whether this base assertion w^ ever taught or believed in
the world by any ^ther then Heretics. And M. Hall if he will sta^ to the
trial of antiquity, shall I assure him ^ this be either forced to acknowledge
his errou^ or else to recall what he has written: that the Fathers trial it as
reverend, as any under heaven, and further: Hall decad. 4. ep. 8. to tippling
Thomas of Oxford.
certaynely it cannot be truth that is new, we would renounce our Religion, if
it could be over looked for time: let go equity, the older take both. So he. And
we shall by this particular see, whether this frank mercha^t venturer that
hazards so easily his faith, and salvation upon antiquity, although erroneous,
will stand to his word in this doctrine of chastity: for if he will maintain
his former grounds, he must allege more ancient, and authentical records,
then those here produced, or disprove such as we bring against him, which he
shall never be able to do. Or finally deny what he has said of the vow of
chastity, in calling it a filthy and unlawful vow, which by so great and so
grave authority, is taught to be both lawful, sacred, and Angelical.

33. The praises then given to Virgins, and single life by these renowned
pillars of truth, The state of chaste livers Angelical. August. l. 6. confess.
cap. 3. Of S. Cyprians book of virginity, S. Hierom^ makes mention Epist. ad
Demetriad. in sin^.
myrrours of learning, and patrons of all purity, are so plentiful, as they
take up no small room in the vast volumes of their renowned works. S. Ambrose
alone, whose chastity S. Augustine so much admired, has three books of
Virgins, besides one of widows, one of the trayning up of a virgin, and
another entitled, a persuasion to Virginity. Of this S. Cyprian, S. Augustine,
S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory Nissen have whole books, of this S.
Hierome to Eustochium, Demetrias and many others has very long epistles, and
as well these as diverse grounding themselves upon the words of our Savior,
that in heaven there is no marrying, because the Saints are equal unto the
Angels, show the life of such as vow chastity to be Angelical. S. Ambrose in
the last book above cited says: Audistis quantum sit praemium Ambros. tract.
de hortat. ad Virgin. post initium.
integritatis: regnum acquirit and regnum caeleste, vitam Angelorum exhibet
etc. You have heard how great the reward is of Chastity, it purchases a
kingdom, and a heavenly kingdom, it exhibits unto us the life of Angels: this
I persuade you unto, then which nothing is more beautiful, that among men you
become Angels, who are not tied together by any band of marriage. Because
such women as do not marry, and men that take no wives, are as Angels upon
earth; in so much, as they feel not the tribulation of the flesh, they know
not the bondage, they are freed from the contagion of worldly desirs, they
apply their mind unto divine matters, and as it were delivered from the
infirmity of the body, do not think of those things which belong unto men,
but which appertain unto God. So S. Ambrose, as contrary to M. Hall, as heat
to cold, white to black, truth to falsehood.

34. S. Bernard styled by M. Hall devout Bernard, uses also the same
similitude saying: Quid castitate Bernard. epist. 42.
decorius? quae mu^dum de immundo conceptum semine, de host domesticum,
Angelum de homine facit etc. What is more beautiful then chastity, which makes
Hall. Decad. 4. ep. 3.
him clean who was conceived of unclean seed, makes a friend of an enemy, an
Angel of a man? For albeit a chaste man, and an Angel do differ, yet is their
difference in felicity, not in virtue: and although the chastity of an Angel
be more happy, yet is the chastity of man of greater fortitude; only chastity
it is which in this place and time of mortality, represents unto us a
certain state of the immortal glory, because it alone, amongst the marriages
here made, follows the custom of that happy Country, in which (as our
Savior said) they neither marry, nor are married; exhibiting in a certain
manner unto the earth an experiment of that conversation which is in heaven. So
S. Bernard. And a little after, hoc itaque tantae pulchritudinis ornamentum
etc. This ornament of so great a beauty I may worthily say does honor
priesthood, because it makes the Priest grateful, or beloved of God and man:
and although he be yet on earth, makes him in glory like unto the Saints. So
he. With S. Ambrose and S. Bernard let us join him, who is all in all
heavenly, S. Augustine, as M. Hall terms him, August^ sermon. 24^.
who says, qui in castitate viuunt Angelicam habent in terris naturam,
castitas hominem cum Deo coniungit, Angelis facit ciuem; they who live chastely
have an Angelical nature on earth, chastity conioyneth a man with God, and
makes him a citizen with Angels.

35. As with the same spirit, so with the same tongue do the other Fathers
speak both Greek and Latin. Tertullian says that Virgins are Tertul. l. ad
vxorem cap. 4. Hieron. ep. 22. ad Eustoc. cap. 8. Athan. l. de virginit. Cyril.
Catechesi. 12^
de familia Angelica, of the company, or household of Angels. S. Hierome, that
the life of Virgins is the life of Angels. S. Athanasius cries out, O
continentia Angelorum vita, Sanctorum corona! O chastity the life of Angels,
the crown of Saints: yea it is also an Angelical crown, as S. Cyrill of
Jerusalem says, and above the perfection of humane nature: and further he
adds that chaste livers are Angels walking upon the earth. S. Gregory
Nazianzen speaking to a Virgin says, Angelorum* Nazian. orat. 31.
tam elegisti, in eorum ordinem te aggregasti. Thou h^ chosen the life of
Angels, thou have put the self into their rank. S. Ephrem, O castitas quae ^
Ephrem. sermon. de castitate.
mines Angelis similes reddis! o chastity which m^keth men like unto Angels:
and not only like but equal, says S. Cyprian, cum castae perseueratis ^ Cypr.
l. de discipl. and habitu virginum. Basil. de vera virgin. longius a fine.
virgins Angelis Dei estis aequales, whiles you remay^ chaste and virgins, you
are equal unto Angell^ yea most noble and eminent Angels says S Basil, qui
virginitatem servant Angeli sunt, non obscuri a qui sed sane illustres atque
nobilissimi, they who preserve their virginity are Angels, and not some
i^feriour obscure Angels, but eminent and mo^ noble: yea in one respect as S.
Bernard above cited did note, and before him S. Cyprian, S. Ba^ S. Chrysostom
and others, they are more nob^ then all the Angels together: Virginitas
aequat^ Cypr. de discipl. and beno pudicitiae.
Angelis, says S. Cyprian, si vero exquiramus etiam e^ cedit etc. Virginity
equals it self with Angels and if we penetrate the matter further it also
e^ceeds them, whiles in this frail flesh which Angels have not, it gets
the victory even against Nature. So he: Angeli carneis nexibus lib^ Basil. l.
de virginit.
(says S. Basil) integritatem suam in caelis servant etc The Angels free from
all fleshly bands preser^ their purity in heaven, both in respect of the place,
and their own nature inviolable, being still with God the supreme King of al:
but virgins by wrestling here on earth with the allurements and pleasures of
the flesh, and by continual combats overcome the tentation of the Devil, and
with singular virtue before the eye^ of their Creator have preserved their
integrity equal even unto the purity of Angels. So S. Basil. But for that
this point is more lively set down by S. Chrysostom, I will with his words
end this matter: for he who by all these testimonies is not convinced, will
never be persuaded by the authority of Fathers.

36. Thus then writes this flowing Father in the praise of virginity: Bonum
est virginitas, and Chrysostom. l. de virgin. cap. 10. 11.
ego consentio, and matrimonio etiam melior, and hoc confiteor etc. You say
then that virginity is a good thing, and I do grant it; it is better then
matrimony, and this also I grant: and if you will, I shall show you how much
it is better, to wit, by how much heaven is better then earth, Angels then
men, yea to speak more resolutly, more then this: for albeit that Angels
neither marry, nor are married, yet are they not made of flesh and blood, they
dwell not on the earth, they feel not the sting of the lust, they need not
meat, nor drink, they are not allured with sweet songs, beautiful aspects, or
any such like thing, but as at high noone we see the clear heaven ouercast
with no cloud, so their natures most clear and lightsome, must needs be free
from all lust: but mankind inferior by Nature to Angels, forces it self,
and by all means strives to match them, and this by what means? Angels
marry no wives, nor are married, no more does a virgin; they assist, and serve
always before God, the like does a virgin: Wherefore the Apostle puts them
from all care or solicitude, that they may be continual and not divided: if
so be that they cannot ascend into heaven as Angels do, their bodies keeping
them on earth; yet from hence they have a noble recompense, because they
receive the Lord himself of heaven, because they are holy in body and mind: do
you see the honor of virginity? It strives to make the lives of them who live
on earth to resemble the lives of the heavenly spirits, it makes them contend
with Angels, and not to be overcome by these spiritual troops, it makes them
competitours with Angels. And again after alleging the examples of Elias,
Elizaeus, and S. John Baptist he says: Etenim qua re, dic sodes, ab Angelis
disferebant Elias, Elizaeus, Ioannes germani hi virginitat^ amatores? nulla
nisi quod mortali natura erant obstrich etc. For tell me I pray you, in what
thing did Elias, Elizaeus, and John these sincere lovers of virginity differ
from Angels? in nothing, but that by nature they were mortal, in other things
if you consider them well, you shall find then nothing inferior, and this very
thing wherein they seemed inferior, does much make to their commendation: for
living upon the earth and under the necessity of mortal nature, conside^ what
fortitude and industry was required to be able to reach to so great virtue.
Hitherto S. Chrysostom.

37. Now this being the opinion of these Fathers touching this vow and virtue,
I would An inevitable consequence.
ask of M. Hall, how the object can be of such purity, such perfection, and
the act that tendet^ directly thereunto be impure, and unlawful* That is, how
chastity can be in it self Angelical, and yet the vow made of observing the
same be filthy and diabolical? Truly he may as we^ tell me, that albeit
adultery be a damnable sin, yet are the adulterers very honest men, and such as
resolutly purpose to be naught in that kind, to purpose nothing else but an
action of virtue: for if in this case he say, that the object is bad, and the
intention of committing that act cannot thereby but be necessarily unlawful;
so will I on the other side answer him, that this object is Angelical, and
consequently the vow made for that end, having no other ill circumstances
annexed, must needs of his own nature be both lawful, virtuous, and
commendable: but these men measuring all matters by their own manners, will
commend no more then themselves do practice, or admit any other virgins, then
such as having known their husbands, are now ready to be made mothers.

38. If M. Hall do say that in wedlock there Marriage much inferior to
Virginity.
is also chastity, and that these praises may be given thereunto: as I grant
the former part to be true, so I deny the later, and he shall never show me in
the ancient Fathers, the state of marriage to be called Angelical, but still to
be inferior to that title, as S. Chrysostom has now declared who makes as
large a difference between the one and the other state, as there is between
heaven and earth, Angels and men: Virginalis integritas August. de sancta
Virginitate. cap. 12.
(says S. Augustine) and per piam continentiam ab omni concubitis immunitas,
Angelica portio est, and in carne corruptibili incorruptionis perpetuae
mediatio: cedat huic omnis soecunditas carnis, omnis pudicitia coniugalis.
Virginal integrity, and freedom through pious continency from all carnal
knowledge, is an Angelical portion, and in this corruptible flesh a meditation
of the everlasting incorruption: to this the fruitful issue of the flesh, and
conjugal cleanes must yield, or give place. So S. Austine; and so far does
this holy Father proceed heerin, as he says: Sacratae vero virginitati nuptias
De Eccles. dogmat. cap. ^8.
coaequare etc. to equal marriage with sacred virginity, and to believe no
merit to accrue to such as for the desire of chastizing their bodies absteyne
from wives and flesh, is not the part of a Christian, but of an heretical
Iouinian. So he.

39. S. Cyril and S. Hierome also speaking of Cyril. cateches. 4. Hier. Apolog.
ad Pamach. c. 1. Lib. 2. ep. 13^.
the same thing say, that virginity or continency in respect of marriage, is
like gold in respect of silver, both are good, both are clean, yet the one
more pure, more precious then the other, and Isiderus Pelusiota adds: Bonum
est matrimonium, sed melior virginitas, pulchra est Luna sed Sol praeclarior.
Matrimony is good, but virginity is better; the Moon is fayer, but the Sun
more illustrious. And S. Ambrose, multo prastantius est diuini operis
mysterium, Epist. ^1.
quam humanae fragilitatis remedium: the mystery of Gods work (to wit
virginity) is more noble then the remedy of human frailty (in marriage) but
because this diversity is more fully delivered by S. Fulgentius, omitting all
the rest, I Fulgent. ep. 3. ad Probam cap. 9.
will with his words alone decide this controversy of the different dignity of
marriage and virginity or single life: for thus he writes: Dicimus, a sanctis
nuptijs, vbi nubunt qui se continere non possunt, sanctam virginitatem merito
potiore distare, quantum distant a bonis meliora etc. We say holy virginity for
more eminent merit to be so far above holy marriage (where they marry who
cannot live continent) as far as the things that are better differ from the
things that be good; the more blessed from the blessed; the more holy from the
holy; the cleaner from the clean; the immortal wedlock from mortal marriage;
as far as the spirit differs from the flesh, strength from weakness, the fruit
of an ever enduring offspring, from the issue of a transitory child, as far as
security is from tribulation, tranquillity from trouble, a greater good combined
with an everlasting joy, from a lesser that is momentary, and accompanied with
anguish. So he. The excellency of virginity above marriage grounded on the
Scripturs. Matthew. 13. Augu. do virgin. cap. 44. and haeres. 82. and 15 do
ciuit. Dei cap. 26. Hier l. 2. in Iouin. and Apol. ad Pammach. c. 1. Ambros.
epist. 82. 1. Cor. 7. Chryso. de virg. c. 34.


40. And this great disproportion between these states, is not only gro^nded
upon the authority of Fathers, but their authority is warranted by the
Scriptures, especially in two places of the new Testament. First in S. Matthew
where our Savior speaking of diversity of merits, under the names of a
hundred, threescore, and thirty fold fruits, yielded according to the variety
of the soyles that receive the good seed, which are interpreted by S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose to signify the state of virgins, widows,
and married folks; the first yielding a hundred, the second threescore, the
last thirty: out of which is concluded the difference of these merits, to arise
from the essential difference of the virtues themselves, and preeminent
excellency of the one above the other: and more plainly is this deduced out of
the seventh Chapter of the first to the Corinthians, where the Apostle in
express terms prefers virginity, and the state of single life before
marriage, and magnum inter vtrumq, ponit interuallum, makes a great distance
between them, says S. Chrysostom: with whom agree in the same exposition S.
Sermon. de virginit.
Ephrem, In Leuit. f. 330.
Procopius, Lib. 1. ad vxo. c. 3 (d) In Iouin. cap. 7. and ep. 22. ad Eustoc.
Tertullian, S. (e) Hierome, and others.

41. Which doctrine is further confirmed by the practice of the whole Church:
for who so lists to search the records of antiquity, shall find many husbands
to have left their wives, and wives their husbands, and that with great and
singular commendation, as S. Metaphras. in vita.
Alexius, S. Ambr. l. de virginibus, haeres. 78.
Tecla, S. In hist. vitae S. Ceciliae.
Cecily, Greg. l. 3. Dialo. cap. 14.
Gregori^, Hieron. apud Gratianum 27. q 2. cap. Scripsit. Epiphan. haeres. 61.
The eager and sharp reprehensions used by the Fathers toward such as by
incontine^cy did violatate or break their vow.
Macharius and others, but there is no one sentence or syllable to be found in
them all, that ever it was held lawful for one who had professed chastity, to
return to marriage, but the quite contrary, tradiderunt sancti Dei Apostoli
(says S. Epiphanius) peccatum esse, post decretam virginitatem ad nuptias
conuerti: the holy Apostles of God have declared it to be a sin after the vow
of virginity to return to marriage, which argues the vow of chastity, not
only to be lawful, but of far greater perfection, then the state of marriage,
because such as have left their husbands on earth, as S. Gregory notes, have
deserved thereby to have a spouse in heaven.

42. And to join the two contrary extremes together, which will make the
fairenes or filthiness of either the better to appear: he who shall read the
sharp inuectiue which S. Ambrose did write, ad Virginem lapsam, to a virgin who
was fallen into that sin, and consider with what vehemence he does check her
incontinency, will better perceive both the beauty of this chastity, by the
baseness of the transgression ( nam priuatio optimi est pessima) and how
different the spirits of these Saints were from the spirits of these new
Masters now adays: seruare te oportuit fidem (says S. Ambrose) quam sub
tantis testibus Ambr. ad virginem lapsam c. ^.
pollicitaes etc. it behooved thee to keep the promise thou did make before so
many witnesses, and always to think, to whom thou had offered thy
virginity; thou should more easily have lost thy blood and life then thy
chastity: and a little after: nam si inter december testes etc. for if before ten
witnesses when the spousalls are made, and marriage consummated, every woman
joined to a mortal man, does not without great danger of death commit aduowtry,
what think thou shall be done, if the spiritual conjunction (between God
and thy soul) made before innumerable witnesses of the Church, before the
Angels and hosts of heaven, be dissolved by aduowtry? I know not if any
condign death or punishment can be devised. Some will say it is better to
marry, then to burn: but these words concern not one that has vowed, one
that is veyled: for she who has espoused her self to Christ, and received the
holy veil, is already married, is already joined to an immortal husband. So
S. Ambrose, and in the eight chapter he wills her to take on a mourning weed,
to cut off the hair of her head, to weep, and bewail her offense, to punish
her body with fasting, and haire-cloath, and to use other works of a
penitential life: and this was the sense and judgment of divine Ambrose, as M.
Hall calls him, touching the lawfullnes of these vows.

43. Of the same argment, and in the same style S. Chrysostom wrote two books
to Theodorus, S. Basil three epistles to others fallen from that chastity which
they had vowed, and both do urge, and inculcate severe penance to be done for
the fault committed: and the former to this purpose, because examples are more
perswasiue Chrysostom. paren. 1. c. 11.
then words, recounteth the fall of a young man, who although he sinned but
once, yet returning to himself, the better to do penance. and make
satisfaction for his fault committed, shut himself up for the term of life
in a little cell, his fellow every other day bringing him bread and A rare
example of penance.
water, and in this severity as long as he lived did he persevere in ieiunijs,
in precationibus, in lachrimis, repurgans animam ^ sorde peccati: in fasting,
in prayers, in tears, cleansing his soul from the filth of sin: and to the
same does S. Chrysostom inuit Theodorus, though he were not so happy as to
follow so good counsel, but wallowing in filthy lust, became by favor at
length to be Bishop of Mopsuesta, and afterward was master of Nestorius the
heretic: malus coruus, malum ouum. For this sensual voluptuous spirit is the
seed of heresy, and so infecteth the stalks, that as S. Hierome says,
difficile sit reperire haereticum, qui diligat Hier. in c. ^. Oseae.
castitatem: it is hard to find an heretic, that loves chastity, the cause
whereof I shall after assign. Only here M. Hall may see how different the
doctrine of the Fathers is from that which he teaches, and how contrary the
Counsel of these Angelical Saints, is to that which lewd Luther wrote of S.
Hierome, saying: Sanctus Hieronymus scribit detentationibus carnis, paruares
est, vxor domi In colloq. Germ. titulo de vita co^iugali.
detenta facile huic morbo mederi alicui potest: Eustochiu^ hac in re potuisset
Hieronymo auxilio venire. O impure lips, and incircumcised tongue! o beastly
beginner of this new belief.

44. Let M. Hall, if he be able, produce us some proof, although but one
classical authority of any one ancient writer, where he has ever persuaded
such as having solemnly vowed chastity to use marriage, as a means to
overcome tentations, and he shall have some excuse for calling it a filthy vow,
and his Heroical Luther for tearming it a diabolical thing: but this is to
hard a task, and his own Trullan Council in this allows him no liberty,
howsoever in one only point (as in the next Paragraffe shall at large be
showed) it do favor him: for thus it defines, Si quis Episcopus, vel
Presbyter, vel Diaconus etc. cum Council. Trullan, can. 4.
muliere Deo dicata coierit, deponatur, vt qui Christi sponsae vitium
attulerit: sin autem laicus, segregetur: It any Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon
etc. shall carnally know a religious woman, let him he deposed, as one that
has deflowred the spouse of Christ, but if he be a lay man, let him be
separated, to wit, by excommunication from conuersing with other men: and this
was made against the secret abuse, for public marriage was never permitted by
any, but still condemned by all.

45. Which in my opinion is a matter so out of controversy, I mean the not
permitting and Marriage never permitted to votaryes.
the condemning of these marriages, which is the last proof I promised out of
the Fathers, as he who denies the same, and yet will offer to stand to their
trial, may seem to be either very ignorant, or impudent; ignorant, if he know
not their doctrine; impudent, if he will withstand his own knowledge, and
wilfully reject, as reverend a trial as any under heaven: for hear I pray,
what they teach touching this matter. Illis quae non se continent (says S.
Augustine) expedit nubere, August. de adulter. coniugijs lib. 1. c. 15.
and quod licet expedit: quae autem vouerint, nec licet, nec expedit: It is
expedient for such women as cannot conteyne to marry, and that is expedient
which is lawful: but such as have vowed chastity, for them is neither
expedient, nor lawful: and in another place speaking of such a one as had vowed
never to marry. He says: Non damnaretur Praefat. in psalm. 83.
si duxisset vxorem: post votum quod Deo promisit si duxerit damnalitur; cum
hoc faciat quod ille qui non promiserat, tamen i^e non damnatur, iste damnatur:
quare? nisi quia iste respexit retro? He should not have been damned if he had
before married a wife, but after his vow which he has made to God, if he shall
marry, then he shall be damned: when as he does but the self same thing which
the other does who made no vow, and yet this other is not damned and he is; and
this for what other cause, but for that he who vowed has (with Lots wife)
looked backward? So S. Augustine, whose heavenly opinion touches very near
the fleshly beginners of this new Ghospel, whether we respect the first root
thereof in Germany, Luther, Bucer, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr, and others, or
our first English Patriarch Cranmer and his adherents, whom no vows made to
God, no shame of men, no conscience, or other band or bridle, was able to keep
back from their filthy lust, colored with the honest title of wedlock, but
this wedlock of theirs in the Fathers writings has another, but not so honest
title as presently we shall see.

46. S. John Chrysostom writing unto Theodorus the relapsed Monk who
presently thought Paraen. 2. cap. 2.
upon marriage, or how to have his harlot says: Si militiae vincula non
tenerent, quis sibi desertionis crimen obijceret? Nunc autem in te nihil
penitus tui iuris est etc. If the bands of this spiritual warfare did not
hold, who would ever object unto thee the crime of this revolt? but now thou
have no power or authority over thy self at all, because thou have entered
under the ensigns of Christ: for if a woman have no power over her own body,
but her husband; much more those who live more to Christ then themselves, can
have no dominion over their bodies. Thus he. And this reason moved the ancient
Fathers, not only to condemn these marriages, but further to esteem the
vow-breakers, as adulterous persons, because they brake their first faith,
promise, contract and spiritual conjunction by purity of life with Christ, by
a contrary faith, promise, contract and carnal union with a mortal creature,
an injury too grosle to be offered unto our Savior, a vow to sacred to be
violated by so base a motive, an obligation too great so rashly to be broken:
Si de eis aliqua corrupta fuerit deprehensa, says Cypr. ep. ^2.
S. Cyprian, agat poenitentiam plenam, quia quae hoc crimen admisit non mariti,
sed Christi adultera est. If a virgin that has vowed chastity be found to have
been deflowred, let her do full penance, because she who has committed this
crime is an aduowtresse, not of her husband, but of Christ. So S. Cyprian.

47. And to Theodous the Monk who made lococitato.
the common objection of our lascivious Ministers, that marriage is for all, and
denied to none, S. Chrysostom answers: Neque vllus te forte decipiat dicens,
nihil de non accipienda vxore Dominus praecepit etc. let not any perchance
deceive you saying, God has commanded a man nothing for not taking of a wife,
I know very well he has forbidden adultery, not prohibited marriage: but you
shall commit adultery in case (which God forbid) you should ever think upon
marrying: and what S. Chrysostom wrote to this Apostata Monk, S. Basil wrote
to a corrupted Nun, to whom Basil. ep. 18^. ad virginem lapsam.
speaking in the person of God he says: Ipsa antem dilexit alienos, and
viuente me viro immortali adultera appellatur, and non timet alteri viro
commisceri. She has loved others, and I her immortal husband being alive, she
is called an aduowtresse, and she fears not to be naught with another man for
which cause the said Father in his Canon^ to Amphilochius putting down the
penance of Epist. 3. can. 60.
such who after the vow of chastity had fallen into that sin says: peccati
adulterij tempus conplebit: such a one shall fulfill the penitential time of
the sin of adultery: which thing is more exaggerated by S. Ambrose upon the
like occasion, who doubted whether any penance be Ambros. ad virg. lap. cap. 5.
great enough for so foul an offense, for thus be writes: Quae se spopondit
Christo and sanctum velam accepit etc. she who has betrothed her^selfe to
Christ, and has received the holy veil is already married, is already joined
to her immortal husband, and now if she will marry by the common Law of
wedlock, she commits aduowtry, she is guilty of death. So S. Ambrose And
would these Saints, trow you, ever use su^ vehemence, or show such zeal, if
these vow were filthy, unlawful, or diabolical? No, no. Their saintly
spirits abhorred such sensual uncleanness, and brutish doctrine.

48. Neither were the Fathers content to call this sin aduowtry, but they
further added that it is worse then aduowtry. So expressly S. Loco citato. Mark
this M. Hall.
Chrysostom: Legitima and iusta res coniugium etc. Wedlock is a lawful and
good thing etc. but to you it is not now lawful to observe the laws of
wedlock: for one who is joined to the heavenly bridegroom, to forsake him,
and entangle himself with a wife, is to commit adultery: and although a
thousand times you will call it a marriage, yet do I affirm it to be so much
worse then adultery, by how much God is greater and better, then mortal men.
By which proportion we may see, of what sanctity the impure marriages were
which Luther, Bucer, and other renegate Friars did make with Nuns, how
lawful it is to break these vows, and finally what is to be thought of such
married Apostata Priests, as still speak honorably of matrimony, that thereby
they may seem not out of frailty good men, but out of mere devotion, to
commit adultery, or rather a greater sin: plane August. de bono viduit. cap. 11.
non dubitauerim dicere (says S. Augustine) lapsus and ruinas a castitate
sanctiore quae vouetur Deo, adulterijs esse peiores. Certainly I dare affirm
the falls and slidings away from that more sacred chastity Basil. hom. quo
pacto amit^imus and recuperamus imaginem Dei.
which is vowed to God, to be worse then adulteryes. So, and in so plain
terms S. Augustine.

49. And this so grievous a sin is termed by S. Basil, and S. Ambrose
sacrilege: Quando se Deo semel authorauit (says the former) per vitae
continentiam ac perpetuam castitatem, hoc detrectare non licet etc. When one
has bound himself by vow unto God by continency of life, or perpetual
chastity, is it not lawful for him to slide back: and so warily he must keep
himself, as he would keep a present, or sacrifice offered to God, least our
Lord at the day of judgment condemn him, as guilty of sacrilege. So S. Basil:
and against him, who had abused the virgin before mentioned out of S. Ambrose,
thus does the same Father Ambros. ad virg. lap. cap. 8
exclayme: De te autem quid dicam, fili serpentis, minister Diaboli, violator
templi Dei; adulterium vtique and sacrilegium etc. What shall I say of thee,
the son of a serpent, the minister of the Devil, the deflowrer of the temple
of God, who in one filthy act have committed two sins, to wit adultery and
sacrilege? sacrilege, for that through thy mad rashness thou have polluted the
vessel offered to Christ, dedicated to our Lord etc. Neither is it only a
double, but a threefold sin: for besides the adultery and sacrilege, they
also commit incest: Christus Dominus noster cum virginem suam Cyprian. Epist.
62.
sibidicatam, and sanctitati suae destinatam iacere cum alter^ cernit quam
indignatur? and irascitur? and quas poenas inincestuosis eiusmodi
coniunctionibus comminatur? Christ our Lord and Judge how does he abhor, how
is he offended when he sees his virgin dedicated (by vow) unto himself, and
deputed to his holiness to lie with another? and what punishment does he
threaten to these incestuous copulations, says S. Cyprian? Quae post
consecrationem Lib. 1. Iouinian.
nupserint, non tam adulterae sunt quam incestae. Such virgins as after their
vows and veiles shall marry, are not so much aduowtresses, as incestuous,
says S. Hierome.

50. Finally this base thing, either for practice or opinion, was never used or
taught, but by the enemies of Christ his Church, which point is worthy of
special consideration: for as we in this, and all other points do adhere unto
the ancient Saints and Fathers, whom we reverence, admire and follow: so does
M. Hall and his unto such as they have censured, discarded, and condemned, that
is, we join with Catholics, they with heretics; we tread the plain The
progenitors of our English Protestants in the breach of vows.
beaten path of truth, they of error; such as we follow were the lights and
shining lamps of the world, their progenitors were the shame and steyne of
Christianity. The first that I can find recounted in particular to have put
this filthiness in practice was one Tiberianus who having written a book to
clear himself from the heresy of Priscillian, revolted again unto the same:
Tiberianus Boeticus (says S. Hierome) taedio victus exilij, Hier^ de viris
illustr. in Tiberian^^.
mutauit propositum, and iuxta sanctam Scripturam canis reuersus ad vomitum
suum, filiam deuotam Christo virginem matrimonio copulauit. Tiberianus of
Andalusia in Spain, overcome with the tediousnes of his banishment, according
to the holy Scripture, like a dog returning to his vomit, caused his daughter
that was a Nun to marry: and he who first taught this to be lawful was
Iouinian: Formosus Monachus (as the same Father painteth him out) crassus,
nitidus, dealbatus, and quasi sponsus semper incedens. A fayer Monk, fat,
neat, white, and going always as gay as a new married man. And a little after:
Rubent buccae, nitet cutis, comae in occipitium Lib. 2. ^^ Iouinian.
frontemque tornantur, protensus est aquiliculus, insurgunt humeri, turget
guttur, and de obesis saucibus vix suss^^^ verba promuntur. His cheeks are
red, his (...) fair and smooth, his locks behind and befo^ are frizeled, his
belly bears compass, his sho^ders rise aloft, his throat swells, and his
st(...)gled words can scarce find passage through ^ fat chaps.

51. This man so fine as most of you Min^sters, and so fat perhaps as Marcus
Antonius de Do^^ (that could not pass to the pulpit) a^beit ^ proceeded
nothing so far as M. Hall does, to^ the vow unlawful, filthy, and a brand of
Antichrist^nisme, much less so far as Lu^her, as to marry Nun, yet for that
he did equal the merit^ marriage with the meed of virginity, and cause some to
marry, was by all condemned for an heretic, of whom thus writteth S.
Augustine Virginitatem etiam sanctimoni-lium, and continentia^xus August.
haeres. 82.
virilis coniugiorum castorum, and fidelium meritis ^^ qu^bat etc. He did
equal the virginity even ^ Nuns, and continency of men chosing a sin^ life
with the merits of the chaste, and fay th^^ married folk: and certain old
virgins in R^ where he taught this doctrine, were said ^ hearing of him to have
married: himself true neither had, nor would have a wife, which ^ said, he did
not teach for any greater merith held to be in virginity before God, that mig^
avail us in the kingdom of everlasting life but for that it did more avail
the present necesity of this, that is, least a man should be co^bred with the
troubles of marriage. In which words of S. Augustine we see two things graunter
by our Adversaries, and denied by this Father and us; the first, that it is
lawful for such as have vowed to marry; the other, that virginity is not
meritorious to everlasting life: for M. Hall, as after we shall see, can endure
no merits of our works: and C^lu^^ ^n this will have virginity only to be
better then marriage, because it is less subject to worldly entanglements, not
for any merit or sanctity that he will have to be in the same, wherein he
agrees with Iouinian, as you see, as we with S. Augustine. And this much out
of the Fathers.

52. There rests to shut up this matter, that we also allege the Canon and
Civil laws Proofs out of the Canon and Civil law.
which for that I have been so prolix in the former authorityes of the
Fathers, I will the sooner dispatch, and have to come to the other part of the
Impossibility, avouched by M. Hall, in which I shall be forced to make some
little demurre. The Canons therefore show how Eusebius Gratim. causa* ^. q. 2.
cap. d^ponsa^a^ and cap. De^reta. Greg. l. 6. epist. 20.
the Pope decreed, that if a virgin be betroathed to one, her parents cannot
force her to marry with another, but it is lawful for her to enter into a
monastery and become Religious: which case happening after in the time of S.
Gregory the Great at Naples, where not the parents, but the party to whom the
virgin was assured, either of grief, or despite kept al her goods from her,
S. Gregory commanded the Bishop Fortunatus to see all restored, because says
he, the decrees of the Canon law do no ways permit any to be punished with
whatsoever mulct who will become Religious. So he. And here as you see the
state of virginity is preferred before marriage and the monastical life exalted
without any touch of vnlawfullnes, filthiness, or Antichristian brand.

53. In the civil is that resolute degree of Iouian successor to Julian the
Apostata, still extant in the Code: Si quis, non dicam rapere, sed attentare
Codice de Episcop. and Cleric. lege si quis.
tantummodo iungendi causa ^atrimonij sacratissimas virgins ausus fuerit,
capitali poenaferiatur. If any one I will not say shall ravish, but shallbe so
bold as to attempt only to solicit the most holy virgins with intention to
marry them, let him be put to death. So the law. And the occasion whereupon it
was made, is very remarkable: for Julian the Apostata attayning to the Empire,
and reuolting from Christian faith unto Paganism, dealt with holy Virgins, as
our King Henry the eight with all the Religious of England (so well did these
two Princes agree,) for he permitted certain lewd companions to marry some of
them, and without all check or rebuke to solicit others to that uncleanness:
the matter by Sozomen is thus related: Istam legem ideotulit quod Sozomen. l.
^. cap. 3.
quidam improbi viri etc. Therefore did Iouian (or Iouinian as some call him)
make this Law, because some wicked men under Julian the Emperor had married
some such virgins; making them either by force or persuasion to yield to this
abuse, as it usually falls out when in the troubled state of Religion filthy
lust finds freedom The singular zeal of Iouian in defending the purity of
Religious Virgins.
without punishment, to commit such villainy. So he.

54. And in setting down the words of the law this Historian expresses one
clause omitted in the Code, which shows with how great zeal this worthy
Emperor embraced this thing; for he not only made it death to persuade such a
virgin to marriage, and much more to ravish her by force, but further added
that the same punishment should be extented to whosoever else, that lasciuo
solum obtutu aspiceret, should but as much as cast a wanton look upon them:
and we may conceive, what he would have said and done, had he but found Friars
married to Nuns, or a lay man in his Empire under the title of his Vicar
general (as was Thomas Cromwell Thomas cromwell.
to King Henry) visiting all the Abbeyes, Prioryes, Monasteryes, Nunneryes of
his dominions, putting forth all Religious persons that would go, and forcing
all under the age of 24. to go whether they would or no, and that in secular
attire, to seek their fortunes: doubtless this puissant Prince had never
expected so long another occasion to cut off the head of such an impure
monster, as King Henry did, who after diverse years charged him with heresy,
treason and robbery: for this alone had suffised, this had been more then
enough if King Henry the eight had not been more like unto Julian the
Apostata, then devout Iouian; and others about him at that time, like the
Heliotropium which bends always his head to the Sun, had not flattered and
followed him, I mean in all his wicked designs: among which sort of people it
was no miracle to find such base spirits, because men of that stamp, as Iouian
was wont to say: Non Deum sed purpuram colunt, make the Kings robes the rule of
their Religion, seek to rise by other men's ruins, procure their private
advancement by public spoil, and without al care or conscience transgress
and break all laws of God, or man, rather then they will withstand the unjust
pleasure of any licentious Prince, by whom they may expect to be preferred.

55. This just and rigorous decree of Iouian is further seconded by another in
Justinian, where there is extant a law against those that should Lege 41. de
Episcop. and Clericis.
by violence ravish virgins, diaconesses, or widows, that if such were taken,
adhuc flagrante delicto, they should being convinced by the parents of the said
virgins, widows etc. or their kinsfolks, tutors, or procuratours, be put to
death: and then further it is enacted, vt huic poena omnes subiaceant etc. that
all be liable to the same punishment, whether the fact were committed with the
consent, or against the will of the said Religious woman, Diaconesse, or
widow. So as not only the sin of rape, but their voluntary lapse is also
punished by death, in such as had abused virgins etc. Whereof I conclude all
manner of authority to stand for us for the lawfullnes of vows. And continent
life: and he who lists to see this matter more confirmed, and all arguments
solued, which the Protestants object to the contrary, may read the same very
learnedly and largely handled by the Author of the work, entitled of Policy
and Religion in the second M. Thomas Fitzherbert Priest now of the Society of
Jesus.
part, and third Chapter, of which if I had not been ignorant, and taken my
first view thereof after that I had ended, what I have now written, I should
have used his labor, and spared mine own, and remitted M. Hall to that grave
and learned Author for a sincere, full, and resolute satisfaction.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS PARAGRAFFE.
Wherein the observance of the vow of chastity is proved not to be impossible,
and other points before mentioned, touching the Apostles prastise, and
Constitution etc. are discussed.
OF the five untruths touched in the beginning of the former Paragraffe to be
uttered together by M. Hall, the fourth was, if you remember, the impossible
necessity which he supposed M. Hall measures the chastity of Catholic Priests
by that which he finds in English Ministers.
to be in the vow of a single life: for measuring the ability of Catholics by
himself, and his fellow Ministers, he tells us of scanning of his former
rule, in turpi voto muta decretum, if they had not rather, says he, caute, si
non cast, as if all Catholics were incontinent who vowed chastity, by reason
of the impossibility supposed, but yet that they concealed the matter so, as if
nothing were known of that which yet indeed is done: but we no less declaime
from this cloak, then from the thing it self, neither should this companion
have been so bold to charge, where (setting lies and slanders a side) he had
no shadow of proof: that wicked rule of covering a filthy life with faygned
virtue, and beastly behavior with exterior honesty, although it concern some
on all sides, for amongst great multitudes wicked will not want, and among them
such also who though rotten in the root, will yet show fayer in the rynd;
notwithstanding this is verifyed as much in English Ministers as in any other
whatsoever, which (least I seem by way of recrimination only to retort) may
perhaps be proved out of this very principle, begged by M. Hall, but not
granted by us, that the vow of chastity is impossible, and the argument may be
framed in this manner. Perpetual chastity is a thing impossible, but some
Ministers in England and Bishops also never had any wife, and are now old men,
and not like to have any, the consequence will follow which I will not express:
and if M. Hall will persist to urge us by false accusations, he may chance hear
me prove him this better by some true examples then by any mood or figure of a
logical syllogism: and my examples shallbe taken from the lives of his own
Brethren and Lords, who though unmarried have neither so caute, nor cast
carried themselves, but that their behavior is known, and lewdnes is liable
to open proof, and demonstratiue euiction.

2. Which course unless his intemperate scurrility, and injurious calumniations
force me thereunto, I abhor to take, and willingly Many of our English
married Ministers incontinent.
in disputing of matters of Religion discuss the cause, not touch the persons:
and this seely man in forcing us to the contrary, shall soon find by ripping
up the particulers what disadvantage he gives against himself, in so much as
his friends shall have little cause to thank him (his fellow Ministers I
mean) for rubbing so much on this soar, whose lives are such as most bars
and benches of the land will affoard us testimonies of their virtues, their
neighbors of their lives in general, many records of special accusations,
and some pilleryes and gibbets also of their due deserved shame: and all this
not for faults forged by malice, as in the case of Catholic Priests it falls
out, where truth is made treason by Law, and fidelity to God and his Church
disloyalty to the Prince, and emnity to the state: but by such clear and
evident proofs, as even compelled the delinquents themselus to confess their
faults, to clear their accusers, and accept their punishments as due unto them
by justice, and to have been more mildly and mercifully inflicted, then the
atrocity of their offense did require: the labor will be long, because the
store is so great of these good fellows in this carnal Clergy: and M. Hall
needed not to have been so hasty to slander others with his lies abroad, that
has so many infamous examples of his own cote at home. I speak not of his
private person which I will not touch, but of others of his rank and
profession, of whom the times past and present yield us much homely matter in
this kind: but not to go further in this till I be further urged, I return to
the impossibility.

3. Whereas therefore M. Hall says that the vow of chastity, casts upon the
makers an impossible The cause why Luther held the vow of chastity impossible.
Epist. ad Wolf. Reissenb.
necessity; this impossibility may spring from diverse heads, and so Luther
sometimes assigns one cause thereof, sometimes another; as first he casts it
upon the nature of our body, which says he, is made of woman's flesh: Corpus
nostrum pene in vniuersum muliebris caro est: Wherefore he that will not marry
must leave the name of man, and the contrary vow is impossible, impium, nullius
momenti, impossible, wicked, of no moment. Secondly for that it is as natural
and necessary to marry as to be a man, woman etc. or as to eat, Locis sup.
citatis.
drink and the like. Thirdly he deduceth it out of the end of man's creation:
Nemo hominum (says he) ad continentiam creatus est, sed omnes un a ad
generandum Tom in c. 7. primae ad Cortut.
sobolem conditi sumus, and ad matrimony toler andas iniurias. No man is borne
to live continent, but all of us together are created to beget children, and
undergo the miseries of marriage. Lastly for that chastity is the gift of God,
and independent of us, in vowing chastity, says he, what else does he do but
vow a thing, Quae prorsus nec est, nec esse potest in manibus suis, cum sit
solius Dei De votit Monast.
donum, quod accipere, non offere potest homo: Vow I say a thing which is not,
nor cannot be in our hands, because it is Gods gift alone, which a man can
receive but not offer: so as here out of man's infirmity, his essential
substance, the end of his making, and the nature of the virtue Lutherus,
Bucerus, Pellicanus sup. citati.
it self which is supernatural, and requires special help, and influxe from
God, we have these vows to be impossible, and not that only but further by a
contrary command to be condemned, even by him to whom and for whom alone they
are made and offered by the makers.

4. How far M. Hall approves all these opinions, I know not, for here without
any reason he only supposes his unreasonable position and I find him notels
where to insist on any other ground, then that only of the weakness or
imbecility of Nature: for in another letter to Sr Thomas Challenor, in which
he slanders (if his Decad. 1. epist. 5.
word be a slander) the virtuous Religious Virgins of Bruxells, after some
other foleryes, which I let pass, thus he writteth: They are willingly
constreyned (says he) to serve a master, whom they must A malicious surmize
of the English Religious of Bruxells.
and cannot obey, whom they neither can forsake for their vows, nor can
please for their frailty: what follows hence? late sorrow, secret mischief,
misery irremediable. So this wanton companion. But God, and before God and his
Angels, their own consciences, and the whole world are witnesses of their
purity, and so far they are from all sorrow, mischief, misery, as this man is
from all truth, conscience, or honesty: for besides that their innocence is so
well known, and acknowledged, if this axiom or rule of his may be granted,
none would find greater sorrow, run into more mischief and misery, then
married men.

5. And not to exemplify in any other then himself, I demand when he was in
France last with the L. Hayes, and was so long absent from his wife, whether he
would hold him for an honest man, who should either openly charge, or closely
by insinuation cast forth suspicions that both he, and at that time, was naught
with other women at Paris, and his wife with some other men in England? For any
may as well say of them both, as he of these virtuous Virgios, flesh is frail,
and M. Hall and his wife were far a sunder, temptations are frequent, a
continent life is impossible, especially amongst Ministers, for of such as had
primitias spiritus, when as yet this new Gospel was, as M. Jewel in his
Latin Apology reports, in herba, in the grass or first growth, Erasmus even
at that time did write of them all: Quae (malum) est ista tanta salacitas? vnde
tantacarnu rebellio in ijs qui se iactant agi spiritu Christi? What so great
lasciuiousnes is this with a mischief? whence happens it that so great
rebellion of flesh is in these (Ministers) who brag that they are lead by the
spirit of Christ? Which being so, that Ministers are so wanton, their wives
oftentimes but light huswiues, whereas M. Hall was far from home, and as well he
as his wife like others of the same impression, are both frail and fleshly,
what follows hence? but late sorrow, secret mischife, misery irremediable?

6. Were this Christian dealing M. Hall? does it become a Minister, a Doctor,
a Preacher, and Character-maker thus to write? This is indeed and satyrae, and
sat irae, to use your own words: for here is more bitterness and rancour then
discretion or modesty, and this vein of writing may much better beseem some
light headed satirical Poet, then one that would fain be taken for a sober
Divine. For standing on these grounds and impossibility, I may well say to M.
Hall, is it possible for you and your wife, so many months to live chastely
asunder (if you did live chastely) and is it impossible that these virgins whose
whole life is a continual practice of virtue, after their vows should remain
chaste? or can you devise a better argument to prove their incorrupted purity in
any tribunal of the world, the^ that which they do bring, I mean the
testimonies of al, as well friends, as enemies that know the^, for they live
not in any obscure corner, but the eye of the world; thither still resort
foreign Catholics, thither Heretics of all sects, thither come many English,
and there now for many years have resided either Ambassadors or Agents to his
Majesty our Sovereign, let even their enemies iuridical verdicts be taken
under their oath, whether any of them The spirit of Catholic Religious Nuns
is far different from the spirit of the heretical English Ministers*
ever heard by any of any credit, that Angelical company, either in general,
or particular to be touched, or so much as suspected in that kind? and why then
do you so maliciously go about to slander them? Why do you endeavor to make
others suspect ill of such, who yet never gave the least occasion of any ill
suspicion? What learning or conscience can warrant this dealing? I doubt not,
but if your wife should ask you* M. Hall, how you lived out of wedlock so
many years before you were married unto her, but that you would clear your
self, and make her believe, that you were an honest man: and the like would
she say and swear unto you, if you should ask her, and yet in all that time
was flesh frail, many temptations occurred, and if for so many years
together you could both live a chaste life, why no more? why not always? Is it
possible for you to live the one part of your life (and that the more
dangerous) chastely, and is it impossible to live the other? I would gladly know
the reason hereof, and wherein it is grounded, why I say the later part should
more force us to marry then the former. The impossibility of a chaste life
refuted by S. Paul. 1. Tim. 5.


7. Again this impossibility cannot stand with the doctrine of S. Paul
condemning the young widows mentioned, and counsailing S. Timo^hy to live
chaste, nor yet with the common doctrine of all the Fathers exhorting to
virginity, especially S. Ambrose and S. Augustine in their special books
thereof, of which two S. Bernard said: Ab his duabus columnis, Augustino loquor
and Ambrosio, Bernard. epist. 77.
creed mihi difficite auellor: From which two pillars, Augustine I mean and
Ambrose, believe me I am very hardly drawn: for where there is impossibility
or necessity, there is no sin, no counsel, no exhortation; as none sin in
not making new stars, in not removing of mounteynes, in not working new
miracles: and it were ridiculous for any preacher to go about to persuade their
Auditors to absteyne from all meat and drink, sleep and rest, because it is
impossible that our life can pass without these helps: and no less
impertinent was it in the Fathers to preach perpetual chastity, to veil
Virgins, to punish vow-breakers, when as they could not alter their natures, it
being as impossible for them, as these men will have it to continue in that
purity, as to live without meat, drink, or rest, yea or as it is for women not
to be women, or men not men: and as no man is punished for that he is a man, so
no woman can be punished for breaking her vow, the one as Luther does teach
being as necessary as the other: to such straits are they driven who put these
wicked, profane, and detestable impossibilityes.

8. Which doctrine how wide a gap it further The principles of Protestants open
the way unto all lasciuiousnes.
opens to all lasciuiousnes, I shall not need to write, for this will also
ensue thereof, that no Father can blame his child for being incontinent: for if
he plead this impossibility, what can the Father reply? you will say, perhaps,
he is bound to provide in this case a husband for his daughter, and wife for
his son: but that is not a work of an hours warning, and if in the mean
time they be tempted what shall they do? to contain implies an impossibility;
to do otherwise, is to offend their parents and shame themselves: offend their
parents, I say, for they cannot offend God, when it lies not in their powers
to do the contrary. If M. Hall say that for a while they are able to live
chaste, but not for any long time; I ask again how long that while shall
endure, and what warrant they have therein for not falling, seeing it may so
fall out that in the while appointed, they may be more tempted then they shall be
again in all their lives after, or were ever perhaps in their lives before,
what then shall they do? if this temptation bring an impossibility for
ouercomming it, then are parents most cruel tyrants that punish their
childrens incontinency, which lies not in their power to avoid, but are
forced thereunto by an inevitable necessity: If the children be faulty, M Hall
hardly pressed.
then it lay in their power not to fall, then was there no necessity, then as
they could overcome this tentation, they might as well overcome another,
overcome all, and remain chaste out of wedlock to the end of their lives:
where is the necessity? where the impossibility? And the same difficulty occurs
in such as having been married for a time are after some occasion, as discord,
diseases etc. separated the one from the other, and forced to live a sunder all
days of their lives, what shall such do? live together they cannot, marry
again they may not, to live continent with this man is impossible, what remedy
is to be taken? must they be premitted to wallow in all unlawful wantones?
that is more then the very Turks Alcoran will allow them.

9. Besides these inco^ueniences we say with The observance of the vow of
chastity is in our power and not impossible. August de gratia and lib. arbit.
cap. 4.
S. Augustine, that the thing is in our power, and although it require the
assistance of Gods grace (which still preuenteth our wills) yet that hinders
not, but that we may if we list our selves, live chaste all days of our life,
as we may believe in God, as we may love him, and for him our neighbor, which
no less require Gods grace for their performance, then perpetual chastity:
Numquid tam multa quae praecipiuntur in lege Dei etc. Do so many things as are
commanded in the law of God, to wit, that neither fornications, not adulteryes
be committed, show us any thing else then free will? For they should not be
commanded unless a man had free will whereby he might obey the divine
Commandments, and yet it is the gift of God, without which the precepts of
chastity cannot be kept. So S. Augustine: and a little after answering the
objection of this c^rnall impossibility: ^i dixerit, volo seruare, sed vincor a
concupiscentia mea etc. If any shall say I desire to be chaste, but am overcome
of my concupiscence (as M. Hall, Luther, and our English Ministers) the
Scripture answers to the free will of such a one that which before I said,
Noli vinci a malo sed vince in bono malum: be not overcome of evil, but Romans
12.
overcome evil with good, which grace does help us to do. So he. Never
dreaming of these impossible fancies which M. Hall and his do frame.

10. For supposing such a necessity of nature, fornication or adultery should
not be sins at all as I have said, because they are not voluntary, but
violent; as no man sins in not doing what he is not able, or in yielding to
that which lay not in his power to withstand: as no sole man commanded by his
king to subdue Constantinople, or take the vast Kingdom of China can be
punished if he do it not, for the surprising of the one, and conquest of the
other, cannot be done without many thousands, or can he put any one to death
for not going into the East, who was bound hand and foot, and violently carried
by others into the West: so if women be as necessary as our nature, as filthy
Luther did affirm, and to live chaste be impossible, as M. Hall; how are men
commanded not to commit fornication and adultery, which they cannot fulfill,
or are punished for the fact, which not their own wills did move, but violence
did compel them to commit? Wherefore if we will grant it to be a sin, we must
with all necessarily grant that it lay in our power, which without any
impossibility was able to avoid it, yea was bound to overcome it, and for not
ouercomming it is guilty of the offense, and condemned for the transgression.

11. And the same falls out in wedlock, Wedlock requires a special grace
for the chastity required therein which yet rests in our power to perform.
the chastity of which requires a special grace, no less then virginity:
which grace as it profits the weakness of nature, so is it never wanting, where
the will is ready to accept it, which will is also prevented by the same grace,
that it may not refuse to take it, and therefore both the vows of virgins, and
chastity of wedlock are alike exacted, as both resting in our power, in our
wills, and ability, which point S. Augustine in one place does excellently
deliver saving: Arbitrium humanae voluntatis ne quaquam destruimus etc. August
de bono viduit. cap. 17.
We destroy not the freedom of man's will, when not out of proud ingratitude we
deny, but out of a grateful piety we acknowledge the grace of God by which free
will is helped, it rests in us to will or desire, but the will it self is
warned that it may rise, is cured that it may be able, is enlarged that it may
receive, and is filled that it may have: for if we would not, then truly
neither should we receive the things that are given us, nor should we have
them. For who has continency (that amongst other gifts of God I may speak of
this, of which I speak to your self) who I say should have continency* but he
who would have it? For no man would take it, but he who would have it: but if
you ask me of whom it is given that it may be received, and had of our will,
mark the Scripture; yea because you know it, remember what you, have read:
When I knew, says Wisdom, that no man could be continent, unless God gave it,
and this was a part of wisdom to know whose gift it was: for these are great
gifts, wisdom and continency, wisdom I say by which we are framed in the
knowledge of God; and continency by which we are withdrawn from the world. God
commands us that we be wise, that we be continent, without which benefits we
cannot be just and perfect. And a little after: Qui dedit coniugatis fidelibus
vt contineant ab adulterijs etc. He who has given grace to married folks that
they abstain from aduowtryes, or fornications, he has also given grace to
holy virgins and widows to conteyne themselus from all knowledge of men, in
which virtue integrity of life (^y continual chastity) and continency are now
properly named. So S. Austine. Let M. Hall mark well this argument.
Out of whose words, I frame against M. Hall this Syllogism: It is as well in
the power of single men to be always contine^t, as it is in the power of the
married to keep conjugal chastity: but the chastity of wedlock is in the
power of the married: Ergo the other is in the power of the continent: and then
further out of the same Father; Gods concurrence with us by his grace (which in
every good action is necessary) overthrows not our free will, but does
perfect it, and consequently as well the election, as observance of single life
do rest always in our power and will, and is not impossible and necessary,
but free and voluntary.

12. And if in the state of matrimony grace be given to both parties to remain
faithful to each other, and that to the end of their lives, Virgins as more
united unto God then married folk, so have more strength to persevere in their
vocation.
notwithstanding that continall cohabitation breed so many causes of distaste,
and the feruentest affections in many do wax cold, and much decrease with time;
shall such want his help, who for his love despise all earthly lovers, and have
made choice of himself the author and lover of all pure desires? Shall he better
love such, who are divided as the Apostle says from his service by marriage,
then those who to serve him the better, have withdrawn themselves from all
wordly encombrances that might divide them, and bestowed themselves wholly upon
his service? or shall the grace of God granted to virgins be of less force to
keep them faithful to their lover, then that which is given to them, who for
carnal love are combyned together? These men who are thus persuaded would
never August. l. de virgin. cap. 54. Ambr. l. ^. de virginib. initio.
preach unto virgins, as S. Augustine did when he said: Si nuptias contempsistis
filiorum hominum, ex quibus gigneretis filios hominum, toto cord amate
speciosum forma prae filijs hominum: vacat vobis, liberum est cor a coniug
alibus vinculis, inspicite pulchritudinem amatoris vestri etc. If you have
despised the marriages of the sons of men, by whom you might beget the
sons of men, with all your heart love him who is fayrer then the sons of
men. You have leisure enough, your heart is free from matrimony bands, look
upon the beauty of your lover. So. Augustine. And again: Si magnum amorem Lib.
citat. cap. 55.
coniugibus deberetis etc. If you should owe great love to your husbands, how
much ought you to love him, for whose sake you have refused husbands? Let him
be wholly fixed in your heart who for you was fixed on the Cross, let him
possess al in your soul whatsoever you would not have bestowed in other
marriage, is it not lawful for you to love him a little, for whom you have not
loved that which was else lawful for you to love. And not to go further to show
the thing possible, to show it to be in our power to stand or fall, to break
off, or persevere, to begin and continue unto the end, he says: Vos autem
sequimini cum tenendo persevere anter quod vouistis, ardenter facite Cap. 58.
cum potestis, ne virginitatis bonum a vobis pereat, cum sacere nihil potestis
vt redeat. You virgins see you follow Christ perseuerantly, keeping what you
have vowed, labor earnestly whiles you are able, least ye leese your
virginity, sithence you are able to do nothing, that if it be lost is able to
recover it. So he. And does he who so teaches, so exhorts think of M. Halls
impossibility? Does he think that such virgins serve a Master whom they must
and cannot obey? whom they must for their vow, and cannot for their frailty?
His words are too clear to be corrupted by so base a commentary.

13. And no less plain, no less absolute for this purpose is S. Ambrose,
whose divine books of this subject I wish M. Hall to read: for in them he shall
find the excellency of this virtue, not more eloquently then truly described:
there he shall see the arguments of Protestants answered, there the keeping of
vows urged, veiling of Nuns mentioned, this impossibility refuted: for to such
as did cast these suspicious doubts, he says: Facessat hic sacris virginibus
metus, quibus tanta praesidia Ambr. l. de Virgin. propefi^e^* The diverse helps
which virgins have for their perseverance.
tribuit primum Ecclesia etc. Let this fear of falling be far from holy
virgins, to whom first the Church affoardeth so many helps, which careful
for the success of her tender issue, with full breasts as a wall does defend
the same, until the siege of the enemy be removed: then secondly of our
Savior with stronger force, and last of Angels: Neque enim mirum, si pro vobis
Angeli militant, quae Angelorum moribus militatis: meretur little praesidium
castitas, quorum vitam meretur: castitas etiam Angelos facit. It is no marvel
if for you Virgins the Angels do war, who in your behavior do follow the
purity of Angels: virginal chastity deserves their help, whose life it
deserves: for chastity also makes Angels. And in another place having
persuaded them to ascend above the world saying: Justice is above the world,
charity is above the world, chastity is above the world, and the like, he
proposes this difficulty which M. Hall proposes, saying: Sed arduum Ambr. l.
3. de virgin, paulo antefinem.
putas humana virtute supra mundum ascendere: been asseris etc. But if you
think it a hard matter for humane force to ascend above the world: you say
well. For the Apostles deserved to be above the world, not as fellows, but as
followers of Christ to wit, as his disciples, be thou also disciple, be a
follower of Christ, he prays for thee who prayed for them: for he said I pray
not only for my Apostles, but for those who by their doctrine shall believe in
me, that all may be one; therefore our Lord will have us to be one, that we may
be all above the world, that there be one chastity, one will, one goodness, one
grace. So S. Ambrose. Out of which words M. Hall may learn from whence all
Religious have their strength and force to continue until the end, to wit, from
the merit of the prayer of our Savior, and his peculiar assistance.

14. Furthermore concerning such enemies of purity, as M. Hall, who carped at
S. Ambrose for Ambrose ibidem circa med.
his so fervent, so frequent persuading to chastity, and forbidding Religious
women to marry, thus he puts down his adversaries charge, and his own
answer: Initiatas inquit sacris mysterijs, and consecratas integritati
pu^llas, nubere prohibes. You forbid, says my acculer, such as are entered into
Religion, and have professed chastity to marry; to which he replies: Vtinam
possem reuocare nuptur ^s, vtinam possem flammeum nuptiale pio integritatis
mutare velamine etc. I would to God I were able to hinder even such as are to
marry, I would to God I were able to change the veil of marriage with the
veil of virginity: does it seem a thing unworthy to you that the holy virgins
be not drawn from the sacred altars to marry? and for them to whom it is
lawful to choose their husband, is it not lawful for them to prefer God? And
a little after he demands whether this be, improbum, nouum, aut inutile,
unlawful, new, or unprofitable: and against the first, that This M. Hall will
grant though S. Ambrose do deny.
is against M. Hall, he shows that it is not bad, or unlawful: for then
improba essent vota omnium, improba vita est, Angelorum, quam gratia
resurrectionis imitatur; qui enim non nubunt, neque ducunt vxores erunt sicut
Angeli in caelo. All vows should be unlawful, then is the life of Angels
unlawful, which the grace of our resurrection does imitate; for they who
neither marry, nor are married, shall be like the Angels in heaven. Thus S.
Ambrose, proving immediately after, this life to be of singular excellency, out
of the words of our Savior in S. Matthew of the Eunuchs not so borne by the
imperfection of Nature, or made by the malice of man, but by free election and
voluntary choice, laying violent hands on the Kingdom of heaven, so framed by
themselves: and after allows, yea defends the entrance of young virgins into
Religion, with more to the same effect, which for avoiding of prolixity I
pretermit and conclud the possibility of this vow in all virgins, either young or
old, with the words of Origin. tractat. 7. in Matthew.
Origin, answering an objection of the Heretics that this gift is not for all.

15. Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc: all men receive not this saying but to whom
it is given, and thereby some pretended that they would willingly have lived
chastely, but were not able: Quibus est respondendum, siquidem accipimus
libenter quod dictum est, sed quibus datum est etc. to whom it is answered
(says he) if we take that simply, which is said, sed quibus datum est, but to
whom it is given: and mark not what is said in another place, Petite and
dabitur vobis, and omnis qui petit accipit, ask and it shall be given unto
you, and every one who asks does receive: either we are not of the number of
the faithful, or understand not the Scriptures: for he that will be capable of
that which is said of chastity, let him ask, and trust in him who says, and
accipiet, and he shall receive, no way doubting of that which is said, omnis
qui petit accipit, every own who asks does receive. So Origin. In whose
words is insinuated another ground, from whence not only the possibility, but
faciliiy also of these vows do proceed, that is from two main fountaynes,
whereof one is the prayer of Christ for us before mentioned, the other is our
prayers to him: the first for acceptance can have no repulse: the other has
his promise for our assurance, and both the one and the other makes all yokes
sweet and burdens light.

1. And besides these helps there is another from which this power and
possibility of a chaste life does principally flow: I mean the passion of our
Savior, the meritorious cause of all our grace and sanctification, one
special effect whereof is, that by virtue and force derived from the head to
the members, they may be able to exercise all Christian virtues, to offer up a
pure sacrifice of vowed virginity to him, who being the Author of all purity,
and son of a virgin, therefore as S. Hierome writes, among other our
redeeming torments, would be crowned with thorns, that from them the roses,
lillyes, and flowers of virginity, the chief garland of his glorious conquest
and triumphant spoil on earth might bud and spring forth: Ideo Jesus Hier. ep.
ad Demetriad. ante med.
spinis coronatus est (says he) and delicta nostra portauit etc. Therefore was
Jesus crowned with thorns, did bear our offenses, and lamented for us, that
out of the thorns and tribulations of women, to whom it was said, the woman
shall bring forth her children in sorrow and grief etc. the rose of virginity,
and lillyes of chastity might spring up: for this cause does the bridegroom
feed amongst the lillyes, and among them who Cant. 2. Apoc. 14. Eccles. 9.
have not defiled their garments, because they have remained virgins, and have
obeyed that commandment: Let thy garments be always white: and the Author and
Prince of viginity Cant. 2.
speaks confidently: I am the flower of the field, and lilly of valleys. So
S. Hierome.

17. From whose words I gather, our Adversaries in this to be injurious to our
Saviors passion, who in other things, as after we shall see to rid their hands
of all labor, will out of presumptuous temerity seem to rely thereon more
then they should: for as from that ever flowing founteyne, or rather full ocean
of merits and mercyes, whatsoever force we have to practice any action of piety
is deryued, so to deny the same unto this particular, so particulerly grateful
unto him, as to make it a thing impossible, what is it else then to weaken the
force, diminish the value, and in a manner cuacuate the whole effect of his
suffering? And to make such as are redeemed by his blood, sanctified by his
grace, and partakers of his merits, to be as faint and feeble in the works of
virtue, as any Pagan or Infidel living under the imbecility of nature, and
altogether deuoyd of these supernatural helps: and which is more, to make
that to be impossible to Christians which amongst Jews, Pagans, Heretics, and
infidells if we believe the records of all antiquity has in exterior proof
and practice been found possible: and out of this which I have delivered, we
see this impossibility so diversely refuted by the Fathers, as there are diverse
means by them assigned to the contrary. S. Ambrose as you have heard named the
protection of the Church, the patronage of Angels, the prayer of Christ; S.
Augustine adds our free will prevented by grace; Origin, our prayers
proceeding from both; S. Hierome, the grace and merit of Christ his passion
peculierly applied to virgins, all these praised, al preached, al persuaded
virginity, and not one of them all ever taught, thought of this fancy, nor yet
any other heretic before Luther (whose incontinency was notorious) that I can
remember: for albeit some abased the worth thereof, and advanced marriage too
far, and because they could not reach to the highest, would confound high and
low, gold and silver, heaven and earth, marriage and virgininity together, yet
were they not so savage, as to say that a chaste life was impossible, or by an
unavoidable necessity subject to secret mischief, and irremediable misery, as
this man and his master does tell us.

18. And this being supposed that women the weaker sex can both lawfully vow
virginity, and persevere in the same to the end; there seems to be no less
difficulty in vows of Clergy men which proceed no less from their own free
and deliberate election: for the Church forces non thereunto, but only to keep
the vows which without any enforcement they have made, which is the very case
of the widows before mentioned in S. Paul, and being come to so ripe The vow
of Clergy men voluntarily made performed with facility.
age, to so perfect knowledge of themselves, and their own forces, they may if
they list take upon them this sweet and easy yoke of a purer life, best
beseeming the calling and function of an Ecclesiastical man, and not above the
power and ability of any that will sincerely embrace it, and use the ordinary
means of prayer and such things as make our prayers more auailable, as
fasting, hair cloth, disciplines, and other mortifications to preserve it:
for if young virgins (to use S. Augustins argument, which he used against
August. l. 8. Confession. c. 11.
himself being yet in heresy, when he was persuaded as our Protestants are
that he could not conteyne) if young virgins I say in all ages have vowed and
dedicated their virginity to God, and with so singular constancy have preserved
it, why may not mature men do the like? and if to them not only marriage be
unlawful as S. Augustine says, but even the desire of marrying be damnable,
why may not Clergy men also vow, and by their vows be bound to conteyne or
punished punished if they transgress?.

19. Yea so much is this within our power, assisted with Gods grace, which is
never wanting, if we be not wanting to our selves, that in case any who had no
calling to an ecclesiastical life should unwillingly be promoted thereunto,
Many unwillingly made Priests, who yet were bound to live chaste in the time of
S. Austine.
yet were he bound unto this chastity, to vow it I say, and never under deadly
sin to violate his vow: this if the Church now should practice, how would M.
Hall, and his lascivious companions brand us with Antichristianisme, cry out
upon unlawful vows, forced continency, impossible necessity? How would he not
stir up his impure wit to invent if he could baser terms then of shauelings,
a filthy vow, a Popish tyranny, a doctrine of Devils? and yet this was not
only approved, but practiced also in the primitive Church, and that very
usually: for thus writes S. Augustine against such as committed aduowtry,
because as they said, they could not conteyne, which I fear me will prove the
center of perfection of our married Ministers: Quando terremus August. l. 2. de
adulterinis co^iugijs cap. vltimo.
ne adulterinis coniugijs haerendo pereant inaeternum, solemus eis proponere
continentiam Clericorum, qui plerumque ad eandemsarcinam subeundam rapiuntur
inuiti etc. When we terrify men (says he) least in their aduowtrous marriages
they everlastingly perish, we are wont to lay before them the continency of
Clergy men, who for the most part are taken against their wills to undergo that
burden, and having undergone it, bear it through to the end. We say therefore
unto the aduowtresse, what if you also by violence of people should be taken to
bear this burden? Would you not chastely perform the office imposed upon you,
and presently turn your selves to ask strength of God, of which before you
did not think upon? but they say that the honor does much comfort Clergy men,
and we do answer them, let fear also withhold you: for if many of Gods
Ministers have received the office suddenly, and without further thinking
thereon, because they hope thereby to shine more gloriously in the kingdom of
Christ, have lived chaste; how much more ought you by avoiding aduowtry to live
chastely, fearing (not to shinelesse in the kingdom of God but) to burn in
hell fire? Hither to S. Augustine. And where at this time was the impossibility
of which M. Hall here dreameth? necessity I grant there is of observing the
vow once made and facility, impossibility there is none.

20. There would be no end, if I should allege the Fathers words for the
possibility of single life. S. Augustine shall suffice, who says: August. l.
2. de adul. coniugijs cap. 29.
Non terreat sarcina continentiae, leuis erit si Christi erit, Christi erit si
fides aderit quae impetrata iubente quod iusserit. Let not the burden of
continency affright us, it will prove light if it be of Christ, it will be of
Christ if we have confidence, which obteynes the thing commanded of him that
commands. So he. And in another place speking of these vows, and how far they
bind the makers, he has these words: Quod cuiquam antequam vouisset De adult.
coniug. l. 1. cap. 24.
licebat etc. that which any man might lawfully do before he vowed; seeing he
has vowed never to do it, shallbe unlawful, but so as he vowed, that which was
to be vowed, as is perpetual virginity, or continency after wedlock in such as
are loosed from the band of matrimony by the death of one party, else let the
faithful and chaste couple being alive by mutual consent release to each other
these carnal duties, which for the one to vow, without the other is unlawful.
These things therefore, and the like which are lawfully vowed, when men have
vowed, are by no means to be violated etc. Thus far S. Augustine. With more to
the same effect, in many other places of his works, and so easy he makes this
matter to be, as if God did grant nothing to man more willingly then this
virtue of a pure life: Si pulsant (says he) qui desiderant castitatem, dat eis
continuo gratiam and August. sermon. 171. detempore.
sanctitatem. If they knock at the door of his mercy who desire chastity, he
gives them presently grace and sanctity: and if this in Gods grant be so
easy, from whence comes the impossibility in our performance?

21. Notwithstanding all that hitherto has been said against M. Halles
impossibility, yet to How chastity among Ministers is impossble.
end this matter, I must and will condescend so far unto him, as freely to
grant that amongst Ministers it is impossible to live chaste, taking the word
impossible in that sense, which the Apostle did, when he said: Impossible est
eos qui semel sunt illuminati, gustauerunt etiam donum caeleste etc. It is
impossible for them who have been once enlightened, Hebr. 6.
have also tasted the heavenly gift etc. and are fallen, to be renewed again
to penance: whereby impossible, as many interpret, is understood a great and
singular difficulty of rising again of such as are once fallen, and so in this
case we now treat of, albeit amongst heretics, Jews, and Pagans to live chaste
be not absolutely impossible: for some even among the ancient Romans are
reported so to have lived, and continued till their deaths, and may also among
Heretics, yet were those very rare, and the difficulty very great, as the
historyes do recount, and much greater it is in Heretics, and that for two
reasons; the one of their persons, the other of the place: of their persons
because for the most part all heretics do preach carnal liberty, and take
away all means of corporal austerityes by which the flesh is kept in
subjection to the spirit, and her rebellious appetits overcome and subdued, in
which point we have M. Halls clear Hall. Decad. 3. ep. 3.
confession saying: All false Religions are carnal, and carry the face of
nature their Mother, and of him whose illusion begot them, Satan. And long
before him S. Hieron. i^ c. 4. Hieremi^.
Hierome wrote: Nulla haeresis nisi propter gulam ventremque co^struitur, vt
seducat mulierculas oneratas peccatis. There is no herely begun, but either for
gluttony, or the belly, that it may seduce light women laden with sins. And
this being the doctrine, this the practice of all Heretics, and the one and the
other so repugnant to chastity, no marvel if they esteem it almost as
impossible to themselus thus disposed so to live, as it is impossible for one
to see where there is no light, or to walk where there is no place to fix his
feet.

22. A chaste life as it is a peculiar gift of God, and special grace, so it
requires also many The means ^^ preserve chastity.
things in the receauer to conserve it, as much prayer, mortification, watch
and custody of our senses, a humble a lowly mind, a great care to avoid all
idleness; and to live united with God, and the like, which Heretics not
attending unto, but the contrary (for how can he be united unto Almighty God,
who by schism is separated from his Church, and by that separation is become
deuoyd of grace, humility, all other virtue and supernatural help) they may
well in their words still speak of the spirit, who in their breasts have no
spark thereof, and prate of virtue, who practice none; and blush not to blaze
in pulpits, and printed books this brutish Paradoxe, that chastity is a virtue
impossible to all, because so it is to such lascivious libertines, sensual and
sinful people as heretics are: for it is not one only wantonness* but many
sins together that always attend and follow heresy, which makes all
heretics more prone to fall, and more feeble to resist tentations then other
men: Si quis dicat (says S Augustine) haereticus est, non potest ho^ solum
esse, quin and alia consequantur: carnalis est enim August. l 4. de Ba^t. cap.
20.
and an^m^lu a^ per ^oc ^mulus sit necesse est, and animosus and inuidus, and
inimicus ipsi veritati, ab eaque dissentiens. If any one say he is an heretic,
he cannot alone be such a one, but that many other things must follow: for he
is carnal and sensual, and consequently he is also contentious, stubborn and
envious, and an enemy to truth it self, and disagreeing from the same. So S.
Augustine, and that men so qualifyed should be chaste, is a thing of great
difficulty, if not altogether impossible.

23. Again the place yields great disadvantage to our adversaries: for
though all Jews The Church of Christ the place of chastity.
and Gentills be out of the Church, yet only heretics in hostile camp, as
open and professed enemies, do most violently impugn her doctrine, and scorn
her rites, when as yet she is the spouse of Christ, a pure virgin, but
fruitful mother of the faithful, and only proper dwelling place of this
virtue: Ecclesia domus est castitatis Ambr* in psalm. 11^, octon. 6. Chrysostom.
6. de virgin. cap. 1. Optatus l. 3. in (...)
says S. Ambrose* the Church is the house of chastity: Virginitatis laudem
(says S. Chrysostom) Iudaei aduersantur, admirantur and suspiciunt exteri,
sola autem colit Ecclesia Dei. The Jews abhor the praise of virginity,
aliens (or such as are out of the fold of Christ's flock) admire and reverence
it, only the Church of God does observe it. And Optatus Mileuitanus: Ibi and
sacerdotia sunt, and pudicitia, and virginitas quae barbaris gentibus non sunt,
and si essent tuta esse non possent. In the Church there are Priests, there is
chastity, there is virginity, which are not amongst the barbarous Gentiles (or
wanton heretics) and in case they were, they could not be secure. So he. And
S. Athanasius in his Apology unto Constantius the Arian Emperor, from hence
draws an argument to prove the Athanas, Apolog^^.
truth of Catholic Religion, saying: Numquam sanctum illud and caeleste
virginitatis mandatum feliciter adimpleretur, nisi duntaxat apud nos
Christianos, atque in eo magnum documentum est, plane apud nos esse veram
Religionem That holy and heavenly precept of perpetual virginity, is only
happily performed among us (Catholic) Christians, and thereby we gather ours to
be the true Religion. So he. And by this M. Hall may learn where to seek and
find chastity: and as this gift is given to the true Catholic Church, in which
it does and has always flourished even to the admiration of Pagans, so has
it very seldom been found in any schismatic company, or heretical
conuenticles, which break the unity, and deflower the purity of Christian
doctrine: for the life and belief of such is commonly alike, being all or the
most part without faith perfidious, Without charity contentious, without
chastity lascivious, without all unity seditious, disordered and turbulent. And
I have known some of special note, who leaving this confused Babylon of
Protestants and Puritans, and being reconciled to the Catholic Church, have
freely out of their own most happy experience confessed, that now they found
chastity to be very easy, which whiles they were in heresy seemed impossible,
yea they could never think upon their former frayltyes committed, without great
grief, compunction, and tears.

24. But for that modern examples do less The conversion of S. Augustine
shows the gift of chastity to be only in the Church. August. l. 8. confess.
cap. 11.
move a wilful mind: let M. Hall call to his remembrance the famous
conversion of S. Augustine from the Manichean heresy, from which not without a
strong and extraordinary calling he was recalled to embrace the Catholic
truth, and he shall find that one of the greatest motives to keep him back,
were the carnal pleasures in which whiles he was an heretic he had wallowed:
Retinebant me (says he) nugae nugarum and vanitates vanitatum antiquae amicae
meae, and succutiebant vestem carneam meam, and submurmurabant: dimittis ne
nos? and a momento isto non erimus tecum vltra in aeternum' and a momento isto
non tibi licebit hoc and illud in aeternum? The toys of toys, and vanities of
vanities my old familiars kept my back, and shaked my fleshly garment, and
whispered me in the ear saying: do thou now leave us? and from this time
shall it not be lawful for ever for thee to do this and that? Quas sordes
suggerebant? quae dedecora? What filthy, what dishonest things did they
suggest? And being in this bitter conflict, the flesh drawing one way, and the
spirit another, the Devil desirous to deteyne him in error, and God
determining to bring him to the truth, his pleasures past alluring him to look
back, and future penance affrighting him to go forward, being in this trouble
(I say) and wavering of mind, thus he describes the success of the combat.

25. Aperiebatur ab ea part qua intenderam saciem and quo transire trepidabam,
casta dignitas continentiae etc. Loco citat.
There appeared unto me on that side where I did cast my eyes, and was afraid
to go (to wit in the Catholic Church) the chaste excellency of single life,
cheerful and not wantonly pleasant virtuously alluring me to come unto her,
and not A description of chastity.
to doubt at all, and she stretched forth her devout hands full with the
multitude of good examples of others to receive and embrace me: in them were to
be seen so many young boys and girls, there store of others of youthful
years, and elder age, there grave widows, and old virgins, and chastity her
self in all these was not barren, but a plentiful mother of children, the
joys of thee, o Lord, who art her husband, Prosopop^ia.
and she mocked me with a perswasiue scorn, as if she had said: Tu non poteris
quod isti and istae? an vero isti and istae in semetipsis tossunt, ac non in
Domino Deo suo? Dominus Deus eorum me dedit eis etc. Can not thou do that
these young boys and maydnes, widows and old virgins do? or can these do it
of themselves, and not in God their Lord? their Lord God has bestowed me upon
them, why do thou stand, and not stand on thy self? cast thy self on him,
and fear nothing, he will not slip aside, and let thee fall: cast thy self
securely upon him, he will receive thee, and he will cure thee. Thus S.
Augustine: in which words as he shows the proper place of chastity to be in
the Church, so withal does he overthrow M. Halls impossibility confuted by the
very examples of young boys, and maids of all sorts and sexes, who in this
sacred Arc, this house and tabernacle of God do profess and observe
perpetual chastity.

26. And so far was S. Augustine from acknowledging any impossibility of a
continent life in the Church of Christ (albeit whiles he was a Manichean, he
thought it a thing impossible to live chaste) that being himself now made a
Catholic, his own experience without other argument demonstrated the contrary
unto him, and August. l. ^. Confess. cap. 1. S. Augustine being made a member of
the Catholic Church, presently sound it an easy matter for to live chaste.
made him see the thing not only to be possible, but most easy also and facile:
for thus he writes of himself: Quam suaue mihi subito sactum est carer^
suauitatibus nugarum and quas amittere metus suerat, iam dimittere gaudium erat
etc. How sweet a thing did I find it on the sudden to want the sweetness of
former toys, and now it was a comfort to cast away that which before I was
afraid to loose. Thou did cast them out from me, who art the true and supreme
suauity; thou did cast them out, and did enter thy self for them, more
sweet then all pleasure, but not to flesh and blood; more clear then all
light, but more close then any secret; higher then all honor, but not to such
as are highly in their own conceit: now was my mind free from all by^ing cares
of ambition, of covetousness, of wallowing or scratching the itch of ulthy
lusts. So S. Augustine, and heerby (to end this whole matter) M. Hall and his
fellow Ministers may learn, that in case this itch of lust, or rather, as S.
Augustine calls it, scabiem libi^i^um, do so violently possess, and drive
them to this persuasion, that it is a thing impossible to live a continent
life; they must know the cause to be either for that the bru^ish spirit of
heresy being fleshly and sensual, comporteth not this purity, or else that
chastity it self, as neither charity, can be separated from true faith, as the
material cause from the formal, that is, the chastity of the body from the
chastity of the soul: Virginitas carnis (says S. Augustine) August. in psalm.
147.
corpus intactum, virginitas cordis fides inco^rupta. The virginity of the
flesh is the body untouched, the virginity of the soul an undefiled faith: and
Prosper. epig. c. 74.
out of him S. Prosper: Carnis virginitas intacto corpore habetur, virginitas
animae est intemerata fides, and so it cannot be found in her entier
perfection, in terra suauiter viuentium, but where penance is preached, and
truth professed, which is only in the Catholic, and Roman Church: to which S.
Augustine when he left the Manichies did accrue, and I wish M. Hall so much
happynes, as to follow his worthy example: and so much of this impossibility,
wherein for that I have been so long, I will be shorter in the rest. The fifth
untruth refuted.


27. There remains yet one of the five untruths mentioned in the beginning,
in which M. Hall, if you remember, leaves us to scan the rule, in turpi voto
muta decretum: In a filthy vow Turpe votum. A vow if it be true can never be
filthy. See S. Thom* 2. ^. q. 88. artic. 2.
(for so this man will have it Englished) change the determination, in scanning
of which I can skantly explicate, or sufficiently admire his ignorance: for
seeing that a vow is not properly of any indifferent thing, much less of any
ill or filthy thing (for it is a voluntary promise made unto God de meliore
bono) there can be no such vow, no exchang of decree. And the words he cites
do not bear that sense, which he supposes: for the word Votum is taken there
improperly for a promise, and so it would have appeared had he put down the
whole sentence of S. Isidore (if it be his) alleged by Gratian, where
Gratian. causa. 22. ^uaest. 4.
he treats of unlawful oaths and promises, for thus it stands: In malis
promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum, quod incaute vouisti ne
facias, impia est enim promissio quae scelere impletur. Break the pact in ill
promises, in a filthy promise change the determination, do not that which you
have unadvisedly promised, for the promise is wicked which is performed with
mischief. So he. Wherefore from an improper acception of the Latin word, to
infer an argument as if it were taken in the proper sense, is the property of
him who intends to deceive, and to apply that title unto virginity or the
continency which Priests and Religious do vow, is so base, as it better
beseems some Epicure, Turk, and Pagan (if among them any can be found so
beastly) then any Christian or civil man: for if virginity be filthiness, where
will he find purity, unless perhaps in the bed of a harlot? But let us pass on
to some other matter.

28. Having included us (at he supposes) within the labyrinth of an impossible
necessity, he, The freedom of English Ministers.
preaches the freedom of English Ghospellers, and prayseth it as deuoyd of
all such entanglements, having no vow, or necessity in it, nor any more
impossibility then for a stone to tumble downward (for supposing the known
frailty of these men, I think it no great miracle for them to marry) and out
of our own grant, and the clear text thus he would demonstrate the same
against us. Even moderate Papists (says he) will grant us free, because not
bound by vow, no not so far as those old Germans, proposse and nosse. Or what
care we if they grannt it not? While we hold us firm to that sure rule of
Basil the Great: He that forbids what God enioynes, or enioynes what God
forbids, let him be accursed. I pass not what I hear men, or Angels say,
while I hear God say: Let him be the husband of one wife. So he. And who would
not 1. Tim. 3. Answered by Bellarmin c. 20.. argument. 2. English Ministers may
lawfully marry, but they are not lawful Clergy men.
think this controversy at an end, seeing that both we allow the Ministers
their wives, and God himself not only to allow, but also to appoint and
enjoin them to marry?

29. And truly for the first part I freely with other Catholics grant that our
English Ministers according to their calling make no vows: I grant their
marriage to be lawful, I grant that every one of them may be the husband of
one wife: yea further I grant, that he may be the husband of as many wives as
ever was King Henry the eight, if he can rid his hands as fast of them as he
did, that he may be bigamus or trigamus, thrice told if he will: for there is
no vow at all of single chastity, or simple honesty annexed to their order:
this I say we grant and deny not, but we deny them to be truly Clergy men, or
to have any more authority in the Church then their wives, or daughters have,
and this because they want all true calling and ordination: for they entered not
in at the door like true pastors, but stole in at the window like thieves: we
deny their ministry, I say, to be lawful, because they did run before they
were sent, took their places by intrusion, thrusting themselves into the
Churches, as robbers upon the possessions of honest men, expel^ing the true
owners by force and violence, having themselves no better claim, calling,
authority, right, or title to these offices which they now usurp, then had the
Arians, Macedonians, Pelagians, Nestorians, Eutichians, or any other Heretics
in former ages, to teach and preach as they did: Let M. Hall disprove this, and
I will say, Tu Phyllida solus habeto. Let him keep his wife and benefice
together, I will no more contend with him. But till this be proved, the plea
for Ministers wives is both idle and superfluous, and only shows their posse
and nosse to be wholly in carnality, The text of S. Paul willing a Bishop to be
the husband of one wife is discussed.
to savor more of the body then of the soul, of flesh then of the spirit, of
earth then of heaven, of humane infirmity, then Angelical perfection.

30. Now for the other member, because the place of the Apostle concerns true
Bishops, the place of S. Basil nothing at all this purpose, and M. Hall
misunderstandeth the one, and the other, I will a little more discuss,
especially this text of S. Paul. No man I think will deny the rule to be most
true of his being accursed, who forbids what God enioyns, or else enioyns what
God forbids: but what will M. Hall infer hereby? Will he say as he seems
to insinuate that all Clergy men are enjoined by God to marry? then why did S.
Paul himself according to the common opinion of most Fathers (gathered out of
his own words 1. Cor. 7.) never marry? why did not S. Basil himself take a
wife? why did all the ancient Fathers so much commend, so earnestly persuade,
so faithfully practice, and exhort to virginity? was there none among them, who
understood this iniunction? yea supposing this ground S. Paul cannot be excused
1. Cor. 7.
from error in persuading the virginity, and preferring it before matrimony,
seeing this has the iniunction of Christ, and the other as a thing impossible,
the prohibition. But of this iniunction or prohibition for clergy men from the
first of S. Matthew, to the last of the Apocalypse there is no one sentence,
word, or syllable to be found.

31. And it argues little capacity in M. Hall when he says after the former
rule: I pass not what I hear men or Angels say; while I hear God 1. Tim. 3.
say let him be the husband of one wife, for I say that he understands not
the Apostle, who in the judgment of Luther himself, as Bellarmine notes
Bellarm. loco citat.
is to be understood negatiuely, and the sense not to be that every Bishop is
bound to have a wife but that he is bound not to have other women together
with his wife. So he. But to our purpose and agreeable also unto truth, S.
Hierom Hier. l. 1. in Iouin.
says, Vnius vxoris virunt, qui vnam vxorem habuerit, non habeat. The husband
of one wife, who has had one wife, not he that has her: that is, none is to
be made Bishop, who has been twice married, or who yet uses his wife in
matrimony, but he who having been once married, purposes to live in
perpetual continency: Episcopi (says he) Presbyteri, Diaconi, aut Virgins
eliguntur aut vidui, aut certe post sacerdotium Apologia ad Pammach. in fine.
in eternum pudi^i. Bishops, Priests, Deacons are either chosen virgins or
widdowers, or certes after their priesthood such as for ever are continent. So
he.

32. Again he says: Non enim dicit eligatur Episcopus qui vnam ducat vxorem,
sed qui vnam habuerit vxorem. S. Paul says not, let a Bishop be chosen, who
may marry one wife, but who has had one wife, and this for the cleanes
required in the Episcopal and Priestly functions, as else where he declares
saying: Si indigne accipiunt mariti, non mihi irascantur, sed Scripturis
sanctis etc. Apol. ad Pammach.
If married folks take it ill (that I prefer virgins so much before them)
let them not be angry with me, but with the holy Scriptures, yea with the
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with all the priestly and leuiticall quier, who
know that they cannot offer up sacrifices if they attend to the duty of
marriage. So S. Hierome. Hieron. in Vigilant.
And against Vigilantius, as though he had seen as it were in that root, the
progeny of our married Bishops in England, and ordering of Ministers, who
should charge all the parish Churches with their plentiful offspring, he
cries out: Prohnefas! Episcopos sui sceleris dicitur habere consortes etc. O
villainy! Vigilantius is said to have Bishops partakers of his wickedness, if
they be to be named Bishops, who order not their Deacons till they have married
wives, mistrusting the chastity of single men, or rather showing of Note this
M. Hall.
what holiness they are themselves, who suspect ill of all, and minister not the
Sacraments of Christ, till they see the wives of Clergy men great with child,
and young babes crying in their arms. So he speaking in the person of
Vigilantius to all our English Clergy, who suspect that none can live chaste,
and therefore will have all to marry to avoid forsooth this idle impossibility.

33. With S. Hierome agree in this exposition S. Augustine, and S. Epiphanius,
and assign also the same reason, to wit, the purity required De boro coniugali
cap. 18.
in Priests and Clergy men. Non absurd est (says S. Augustine) eum qui
excessit vxorum numerum singularem etc. Not without cause has it been
esteemed that he who has exceeded the singular number of wives, should not
thereby be thought to have committed any sin, but to have lost a certain
d^cency required to the Sacrament, not necessary to the merit of good life, but
to the Epiphan. haeres. 59. It is against the ancient Canons that Priests
should marry.
seal of Ecclesiastical ordination. So he, with more to the same effect. And
S. Epiphanius: non suscipit sancta Dei praedicatio post Christi aduentum eos
etc. The holy doctrine of God after the coming of Christ admits not those,
who after one marriage and death of their wives do marry again, and that for
the excellent honor and dignity of Priesthood: and this the holy Church of God
receaueth with all sincerity, yea she does not receive the once married person,
that yet uses his wife, and begets children, but only such a one she takes
to be a Deacon, Priest, Bishop, or Subdeacon, as abstayneth from his wife or is
a widdower, specially where the holy Canons are sincerely kept. So he, and I
see not how possibly he could have spoken more plainly for us, or we for our
selves.

34. S. Ambrose both in his commentary, and else where is no less clear, and
resolute in this point then the former: quamuis secundam habere vxorem etc.
although (says he) it be not forbidden Ambr. in 2. ad Tim. 3.
to marry the second wife, yet that one may be worthy to be a Bishop, he must
leave his lawful wife, for the excellency of that order: because he must be
better then others who desire that dignity. So he. And in another place
refelling as it were of purpose the opinion of S. Hierome, who held, that
marriage before Baptism Hier. ep. ad Ocean.
did not hinder, but that if a man took another wife after, as Carterius whom
he defends did, he might notwithstanding (his wife married after baptism
being also dead) be made Priest, restrayning bigamy to the second marriage
Ambros. l. 3. ep. 25. edit. Vaticanae ad Ecclesiam Vercellensem. idem habetur
l. 1. officioru^ ^. vltimo.
of the faithful only. S. Ambrose hereunto replyeth: Quisine crimine est, vnius
vxoris vir, teneatur ad legem sacerdotij suscipiendi etc. Let him be preferred
to priesthood, who is without fault, the husband of one wife: he that has
married the second time, has no fault by which he is defiled, but he is
excluded from the prerogative of a Priest. So he, and adds the Fathers in the
Nicen Council to have decreed none to be admitted at al into the Clergy after
the second marriage.

35. And because S. Hierome urged that all faults by the force and virtue of
Baptism were remitted, and so the first marriage by the same either to be
taken away if it were a sin, or cleansed if impure: he answers heereunto:
Culpa lauacro, non lex soluitur etc. The fault is forgiven in baptism, the law
not dissolved; there is no fault in wedlock, but there is a law (for
priesthood) the law is not remitted as a fault, but remains as a law,
therefore the Apostle made a law saying* if any be faults the husband of one
wife. So S Ambrose. demanding in the same place this question, which I likewise
demand of M. Hall, and all his married brethren in England: Quid interesset
inter populum and Sacerdotem The lives of Priests ought to be more pure then
the lives of secular men.
si ijsdem adstringerentur legibus? What difference should there be between
Priest and people, if they should follow the same laws? if both should marry,
and both live a like? truly none at al, and yet as this Father says: Debet
praeponderare vita Sacerdotis sicut praeponderat gratia. The life of the Priest
ought to be more eminent, as his calling is more high: and M. Hall as though he
acknowledged no purity out of wedlock, or as though all that preferred
continency were impure, adds after this testimony of the Apostle, that one
Ibidem.
word alone shall confirm me against all impure mouths, but if S. Ambrose had
been his Bishop, he would have taught him better to have understood the
Apostle, and to have inferred the contrary conclusion: for he says, that this
authority does not persuade us to beget children in priesthood: Habentem enim
dixit filios, non facientem. S. Paul says the Bishop that has children, not
he who begets them, as our English Bishops and Ministers do.

36. With the Fathers now mentioned others conspire, whom I might also if it
were needful allege, who all acknowledge in the 1. Tim. 3. 1. Tit. 1.
Apostles words a permissiue dispensation, not any positive command, and that
also at such a time, when amongst the Heathens converted unto the faith, there
could not be found so many single men as the Clergy required, which both S.
Epiphanius, S. Hierome, and Theodoret do Epiphan. haeres 59. Hier. l. 1. in
louin. cap. 19. Theod. in comment. Chrysosto. comm^n^s. in 1. ad Titum.
observe: and truly if he had meant to have left this matter free, there had
been no need of this restrictiue limitation, to the husband I mean of one
wife, but that as S. Chrysostom well notes: Castigat impudicos dum non eos
permittit post secundas nuptias ad Ecclesiae regimen, dignitaetemque Pastoris
assumi. He checketh the incontinent whiles he permits them not after their
second marriages, to be preferred to the government of the Church, and dignity
of Pastor. So he. And that this was only for that time: and out of the error
thereof he further in another place confirms saying: Voluit orbis Pastores
constituere etc. S. Paul went about to place Pastors over the Chrysostom. ho. 2. in
Job.
world, and for that virtues were rarely found, ordeyning Bishops he says to
Titus, make Bishops as I have disposed, the husband of one wife not to that end
that this should now be obserserued in the Church: for a Priest ought to be
adorned with all chastity. And after: Non quod id legis loco posuerit, sed quod
errori ignoscebat. Not that he made a law that every one should marry, as M.
Hall interprets him, but that he condescended to the error, to wit of those
times.

37. I will only adioyne one more, whom M. Hall cites for himself, and is
very eager in defense of his words, as after you shall see: so as his
authority must needs be without exception on his behalf, to wit; S. Isidore
Bishop of Seuill, who thus conform to the other Fathers and truth also,
expounds the former words Isidor. d^ offici^s Eccles. l. ^. cap. 5.
Vnius vxoris virum, the husband of one wife thus: Sacerdotium quaerit
Ecclesia, aut de Monogamia ordinatum, aut de virginitate sanctum: Digamus autem
haud fertur agere sacerdotium. The Church seeks for priesthood, either decent
from single marriage, or holy from virginity; he that has been twice married
is not to be Priest. So he, so others, so all. And by this any may see who
agree with No disagreement between S. Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom, though one
do grant a law in S. Paul's words and the other deny it, because they do
speak of different laws.
the Fathers, and who leave them, who interpret the Scriptures out of their
own spirit, and who follow the beaten path of the Churches doctrine, who
antiquity, who nouelty, who truth and who error, which point I might further
dilate, if the laws of a letter restrained me not to a more contracted breuity.

38. If M. Hall say, that S. Ambrose by me cited acknowledges in the Apostles
words a law, and S. Chrysostom denies any law to be in them, but only a
dispensation for that time, and occasion, I answer that both of them speak
properly, both truly: S. Ambrose speaks upon supposition, that a married man
is to be made Priest or Bishop, and then says, that there is a law prescribed
by the Apostle, that he have been married but once, so as this law is
negative, to wit, none is to be ordered who has twice been married: but S.
Chrysostom speaks absolutely of a positive law, and affirms that the
Apostle by no such law does bynd every Priest of Bishop to marry, which I call
positive, because it must run in this tenor. Every Priest or Bishop ought at
least once to be married, for neither does S. Ambrose grant this law, or S.
Chrysostom deny the other, but both jointly agree, that none hereby is bound
to marry, and he that Tertull. exhort. ad castitate^ cap. 7. Council. Valentin.
cap. 1. Carthag. 4. cap. 69. Toletan. 1. cap. 4. Council. Aratisican. cap. 25.
Arelat. 3. cap. 3. Roman. sub Hilar. cap. 2. Agath. cap. 1. Epaun. c. 2.
Gerund. cap. 8. Aurel. 3. c. 6. etc. Bezal. de diuortijs.
has been twice married is not to be ordered.

39. With this doctrine concurreth the practice in all ages: for Tertullian
near the Apostles times, thus out of his own knowledge writes: Apud nos
before atque strictius praescribitur etc. Among us it is more fully and
straightly ordained, that such alone be chosen to be made Priests, who have been
but once married, in so much as my self remember certain who were twice
married to have been deposed. So he. And in the 4. Council of Carthage it is
defined, that if any Bishop should wittingly order any who had married a
widow, taken again his wife whom he had left, or taken a second, that he
should be deprived of all authority of ordering any more. And the same was
appointed in diverse other Counsels here by me noted, and their words are
alleged by Coccius in his rich treasure of the Catholic truth. Which
assertion of ours is so clear and evident, as Beza himself could not deny it,
but in his book of Divorces does confess it, as he who reads him will confess
that he is the undoubted scholar of Antichrist: Digamos (says he) id est eos
qui plures successiue vxores vel etiam vnam and eam viduam duxerant etc. So far
did most men in times past esteem those who were Digami, that is those who had
taken more wives one after the other, or else had married but one and she a
widow, to be unworthy of the sacred ministry; that they did not only exclude
them from holy orders, to wit, of being Bishop, Priest Deacon, or Subdeacon,
but once also they excluded them even from the very Clergy: Let this be never
so ancient, notwithstanding I affirm it to be most wicked, and not tolerable
in the Church. So he* Giving at one clap as you see the checke-mate to all
Fathers, Counsels, Churches, antiquity, and whatsoever, yea (if all the
Fathers have not in their commentaryes erred) to the very Apostle himself: so
sharp are these men set to defend their wives, as they affect rather as it
should seem to be kind husbands, then sincere Christians.

40. For M. Hall also even in this very epistle makes his chief plea for his
own and his M. Hall seems to set more by his wife, then by his Religion.
fellow ministers trulls out of the Council of Trullum, which although it
never had in all parts full authority in the Church, as not received for
Oecumeniall or lawful, although against the Protestants it have many articles,
and those in matter fundamental, although it have one Canon denied by all
Protestants, Catholics, and others except Jews, and some few Brownists in
Suffolk, yet because it favors the marryage of Priests (notwithstanding in
this also it neither reach so far home as M. Hall would have it, for it denies
all marriages after their ordination) yet I say for this point alone, it is by
him called a sacred Council, and urged to the confusion of al replyers, with a
bitter exclamation against us, for cutting out this sovereign decree, being as
he says, so flat confirmed by authority of Emperors, and M. Hall. p. 131. 132.
abiding no denial. Again this one authority, says he, is enough to weigh
down a hundred petty conuenticles, and many legions (if there had been many)
of private contradictions. But of this Council shall speak in due place, now
only you may consider that these men seem, as I said, to care more for their
wives then for their Religion: and it seems that if we grant them that
comfort, they will not further contend with us: for if they receive this Synod
as sacred, then we shall have altars, real presence, immaculate sacrifice, and
other things as after we shall see, which they call Antichristian: and if in
these points this Council in their judgments erred, how can it be sacred, and
of so great authority only in the behalf of their wives? Who sees not
whereunto this does tend? but not to digress further from M. Halls method.

41. I have been the longer in examining this place of the Apostle, because it
is the only place on which this man relyeth: and you see in the Fathers
judgments what small relief his cause has thereby, and if therein he find
nothing besides his ignorance and mistaking to Impertinent allegations of
Scripturs.
lean unto, much less would he find in other places, which with this
controversy have no coherence, reference, or dependence at all, as when
immediately after the former authority he adds: He that made marriage says it
is honorable, Heb. 13.
what care we for the dishonor of those who corrupt it? To which I answer
that as he who has made marriage calls it honorable, so in like manner do
they call it, so esteem it, who by vow of higher De fide ad Pet. cap. 3.
perfection have for ever debarred themselves from it: Honorabile connubium in
omnibus, and thorus immaculatus etc. says S. Fulgentius: marriage is
honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, and therefore the servants of God in
that they abstain from wife and flesh, do not refuse them as things unclean,
but follow the rule of a purer life, and when they forbear marriage they do it
not for that they think it a sin to marry, but for that they are certain
continency to be better then good marriages, especially in this time of grace,
when of continency it is said: He that can take it, let him take it; but of
marriages, He that cannot contain, let him marry: in the one is an occasion of
virtue, in the other our weakness is helped with a remedy. So he. And if any in
this more eminent estate have by their incontinency fallen the dishonor is
personal, the state not defiled, the state we defend, we dislike the abuse: as
marriage it not the worse in his own nature, though some as you say dishonor
themselves, and live in aduowtry, no more is chastity, for the faults of the
incontinent.

42. That wedlock is called a chaste work, undefiled bed, and the like, is not
by us denied: for we yield willingly thereunto so many honorable titles, as
the truth will bear, or as may without prejudice of virginal perfection, holy
widdowhood, or ecclesiastical continency Hieron. Apol. ad Pamma^h.
which are of a higher degree, be given thereunto: Ecclesia, says S. Hierome,
matrimonia non damnat sed subijcit, velitis nolitis maritus subijcitur
virginitati and viduitati. The Church condemns not matrimony but maks it
inferior, will you, nill you a married man is inferior to virginity and
widdowhood. So he. And to enter into the praises of marriage, which no man
dispraises, is but to M. Halls trifling.
trifle, unless M. Hall could prove that we either in public schools, general
Councels, or by common consent mainteyne the contrary, which he shall never be
able to do: if he will thus infer, you prefer the one, ergo you condemn
the other, the illation is too childish, and deserves rather contempt then
answer, yet do our Adversaries very often blot their papers with these idle
inferences.

43. Like unto which argument follows another: for he says, If God shallbe
Judge of this controversy it we^e soon at an end, who in the time even A bad
collection.
of that legal strictnes, allowed wedlock to the Ministers of his Sanctuary.
So he. For if he mean that for purity or perfection of life the law of Moses
was more strict then the Gospel of Christ, the untruth is notorious, and
every where contradicted by Christ himself: and if not, why does he add, even
of that legal strictnes? and how does he conclud that because their Priests
mary, ours should also do the same? any one would rather thereof prove the
contrary, seeing the old law to be but a shadow of ours, and their sacrifices
Hier. in c. 1. ad Tit. in illa verba: Sed ^ospi^alem.
to have only figured the sacrifice of the new law, as S. Hierome and other
Fathers do learnedly discourse: for the perfecter the sacrifice is which is
offered, the more perfection is required in him who offers it: and the holier
the sacraments, the greater holiness is exacted of the receauers, and more
strictnes to be used where the abuse offered by unworthiness, both in the
offerer and receauer is judged for damnable: Tantum 1. Cor. 11.
interest inter propositionis panes and corpus Christi, quantum inter vmbram
and corpora etc. There is as great difference between the shew-breads and the
body of Christ, as there is between the shadow and bodies, between the image
and truth, between the paterns of things to come, and those things which were
prefigured by these paterns: therefore as there ought to be in a Bishop
meeknes, patience, so briety etc. so likewise a peculiar chastity, and (as I
may say) a priestly purity, that not only he absteyne from al unclean work,
but that soul which is to consecrate the holy body of Christ, must also be
free from every light look, and bad thought. So S. Hierom, rightly upon the
inequality of the things done, deducing a disproportionable perfection in the
doers: and the permission of wives in the Aaronicall priesthood argues
evidently the imperfection of that Law, as according to the Sea S. Bid in cap.
1. Lucae. Eusebius. l. 1. demonst. Euang. cap. ^.
title of his book, Eusebius does demonstrate saying of the Jewish Priests in
respect of ours: remissiorem atque liberaliorem vitam agebant, they lived a
more easy and free life, and the strictnes was only in the multitude and manner
of their cerimonyes, not in the perfection of their lives, as M. Hall does
seem very fondly to imagine. Chrysostom. 3. d^ sacerdotio and ho. 14. in ep. ad
Hebraeos.


44. To confirm this matter, and to overthrow us by our own Authors, he
brings in the testimonies of a Cardinal, of Gratian, and of Pope Pius 2.
speaking in his behalf: and for the first he magnifyeth him very much, and
craves audience for him: Let Cardinal Panormitan (says he) be heard to
speak. And then having cited a short sentence to no purpose, a little after he
cries out: Hear, o ye Papists, the judgment of your own Much foolish and
impertinent babbling.
Cardinal, and confess your mouths stopped. And having cited the words of
Panormitan, again he braueth and demands: is this a Cardinal think you, or a
Hugonot? but if his red hat be not worthy of respect etc. To answer first unto
his last question, I say that Panormitan was neither Cardinal, nor Hugonot,
but dyed in the schism that was made against Eugenius the fourth: and albeit
Felix the false Pope made him Cardinal, yet did the said Felix renounce his
falsely usurped Popedom, and so as some write would Panormitan have done also
his counterfeit Cardinallship, if he had not been prevented by death before he
could effect it.

45. So as we respect not the red hat, nor will hear him speak as a Cardinal,
much less will we acknowledge him for our Cardinal, unless he had come to that
dignity by better means then he did: and as well may M. Hall tell us that
Panormitan M. Halls Cardinal has nothing against us.
the Protestant Bishops of England be our true Bishops, as that this Abbot was
our true Cardinal: for we believe both the one and other alike, knowing full
well their ordinations to have been either schismatic, or heretical:
notwithstanding seeing M. Hall does request us to favor him so far, we are
content to hear him speak (for that now he stands with his hat of) and to
tell us, that continency is not of the substance of the order, nec deiure
diuino, nor annexed by divine law. And this we will not only hear him speak,
but grant him also, taking the divine law, as he takes it, for that which is
expressly determined in Scriptures, where we also say there is no evident
precept set down of continency in Ecclesiastical men by the Apostles, yet is
the same there so insinuated, and the observance has been so ancient, as
Bellarmine notes, that it may truly be termed Apostolical, which is all that
we require, and is not gain said by Panormitan.

46. And whereas he alleges Gratian in this manner: And Gratian out of S.
Augustine yet more: their marriage, says he, is neither forbidden by legal,
nor Evangelical, nor Apostolical authority: I must A gross untruth.
make bold to tell him, that in these words is a very gross untruth: for
Gratian takes nothing out of S. Augustine, who in the text of Gratian speaks
no more of marriage then of midsomer Moon: for the difficulty in that question
is about lotts, whether the practice of casting them in any matter of moment be
lawful, seeing the same was used in the detection of Achan, and election
Iosue. 7. Act. 1.
of S. Matthias, to which end he quoteth this short sentence of S. Augustine:
Sors non aliquid mali est sed res est in dubitatione humana diuinam indicans
voluntatem. A lot is no ill thing, but it is a thing showing, where men do
doubt, the will or pleasure of God. So much out of him and no more, which as
you see nothing at all concerns the marriage of Ministers: and the words
which follow are of Gratian himself, deciding the controversy thus: His ita
respondetur: antequam claresceret Euange ium multa permittebantur quae tempore
persectionis disciplinae penitus sint eliminata etc. To these thus I answer
that before the manifestation of the Gospel, many things were permitted,
which in the time of more perfect discipline were quite abrogated: for the
carnal copulation of Priests or kinsfolks (permitted in the old law) is not
forbidden by any legal, Evangelical or Apostolical authority; Ecclesiastica
tamen lege penitus interdicitur, sic and sortibus etc. But yet by
Ecclesiastical law it is altogether forbidden, Two faults of M. Hal in one
citation.
so likewise in lots it is clear that there is no harm in them,
notwithstanding they are forbidden to be used of the faithful, least under the
color of this divination, they should fall back again to the old worship of
Idolatry. Thus Gratian, which as you see is no more then Panormitan before
said, and we granted, touching the divine law: but touching M. Hall there are
two foul faults in this citation, the one of commission in auouching both in
the English text, and Latin margent these words to be taken out of S.
Augustine, the other of omission in concealing the marriages of kinsfolks
within the prohibited degrees, which although only forbidden by Ecclesiastical
law, yet dares not M. Hall as I think transgress it, so as this law has
greater force then he supposes it to have.

47. Neither does the demand he makes much move us, unless it be to laughter
for his folly, or compassion of his simplicity, when he asks us saying: God
never imposed this law of continency: An idle demand.
who then? the Church: as if a good spouse would gainesay what her husband
wills? To which idle question I answer, that this Spouse cannot gainesay
what her husband wills, because she has his spirit to lead her into al
truth, his promise that Hell gates shall never prevail against her: Matthew. 16.
his command that all shall obey her, or be held as Heathens and Publicans; she
is espoused to him, who never dies, who will never seek divorce; she is so
beautiful as without spot, so bright as all may see her, so sure as she is the
pillar and foundation of truth, so permanent as she shall endure to the worlds
end: and this minister who would make the one to gainesay the other should
bring some place or sentence to show the same (which he may chance to do the
next morning after the Greek Calends) or else never avouch so vnchrhristian a
paradoxe. I pass over his other passage of Panormitan with which he would have
us confess our mouths stopped, as though this man alone were Apollo
Delphicus, and every thing he says were to be held for an oracle: we tie not
our selves to every man's opinion, for that were to prejudice public
authority: the common is Catholic, private judgments are subject to more then
private exception, and this sentence is censured by Bellarmine as erroneous:
Bellar. l. 1. de Cler. c. 19.. 1. antem.
neither is it otherwise delivered by the author, but as his own proper
opinion, supposing the abuse of some Clergy men, as it should seem in his
days, who living incontinently, he thought it better for them to marry even
after their orders, then to give such scandal: but no law can prevent all
abuses: even in matrimony we find adulterers, and they who in single life so
lewdly follow their lust, would also perhaps not have been restrained in
marriage within the prefixed limits of conjugal chastity; at least for the
errors of some, the law is not to be altered that binds all, especially
being so ancient, so universal, so necessary, as we shall after show this law
to be.

48. The like liberty I might use in pretermitting other of his impertinent
allegations, if I thought the man would not, where he finds no answer,
think that they were unanswerable, and therefore I mean to examine them all,
though this which follows be not worth the taking up, had he not by
misinterpreting the Latin made it more aduantagious to his cause, then ever the
speaker meant it: for thus he writes: But if this red hat be not worthy of
respect, let a Pope himself speak out of Peter's chair, Pius the second, as
learned as has sit in that room this thousand years: marriage, says he,
upon great reason was taken False interpretation of Pius 2. his words.
from the Clergy, but upon greater is to be restored. What need we other
Judge? Thus M. Hall: in which words are two manifest untruths, the one that he
spoke this out of Peter's chair: for he never made any decree thereof, and
Platina who alone is cited to report it, says that in familiar talk only he
was wont so to say, which is far from defyning out of S. Peter's Chair, which
requires a definitive sentence, as from the head of the Church and delivered in
absolute terms, for the affirmative or negative of any assertion: for in like
manner Kings are not said to do out of kingly authority, what they do or say in
familiar discourse or recreation amonst their subjects, but what they do or say
by their public laws, edicts, proclamations, commands, and the like.

49. The other untruth is more malicious: for whereas the Latin words in the
margent are: Sacerdotibus magna ratione sublatas nuptias, maiore restituendas
videri, which truly translated signify no more, but that marriage upon good
reason was taken from Priests, and may seem upon greater to be restored: this
man brings in one lie to confirm another, to show, I say, that the Pope
defined out of S. Peter's chair, he makes him absolutely to say, Marriage upon
great reason was taken from the Clergy, but upon greater is to be restored; and
to make it have a large extent, instead of Priests he translateth Clergy, which
includes also Bishops, who yet are excluded by his own sixth Council, as we
shall after show, and then exclaimeth, What needs other judge? and I say
there needs no other, but some who understand their Grammar, to tell M. Hall
three things, that the word Sacerdotibus signifies Priests, and not the
Clergy, 2. that nuptias restituendas videri, is to be Englished, marriages may
seem to be restored, and not are to be restored: and 3. that every
compassionate speech of dislike in familiar talk, is not a decree from S.
Peter's chair. As for his superlatiue lashing of this Popes learning in M.
Halls honorable terms of such as he cites in favor of the marriage of
Priests and dishonorable of the impugners.
comparison of others, no regard is to be had thereunto: for now this Minister
measures all things by marriage, and sees nothing but through false
spectacles; a schismatic Council is for favoring wives presently become
with him sacred, and the authority irrefragable, Paphnutius for favoring the
same as ^e supposes in the Nicen Council is styled, a Virgin famous for
holiness, famous for miracles. S. Athanasius, holy Athanasius, a witness past
exception, and shall serve for a thousand historyes till his time: if he cite a
Cardinal then must his red cap stop our mouths, and he be termed a learned
Cardinal: if a Pope, then ex tripode he defines him to be as learned as any
has been in that room for a thousand years: But if any speak against this
licentious liberty, as did Gregory the seventh, he is presently a brand of
hell, S. Dunstane no more but plain Dustane, and the like of S. Anselme most
famous for learning and holiness of life. But all sanctity, all learning, all
authority is lost with this man, if you allow not marriage unto Priests,
Bishops, Monks, Nuns and all other votaryes.

50. From the lawfullnes and necessity, he comes to the antiquity of the
marriage of Clergy men, and because he will deduce it from the Apostles times,
yea from their examples he begins with this exordium: How just (says he)
this law is you see; see now how ancient: for some M. Halls contradiction
aabout priority of time.
doctrines have nothing to plead for them but time: Age has been an old
refuge for falsehood: Tertullians rule is true, that which is first is truest.
So he: in which obscure words without any interposition at all of any other,
there is a flat contradiction: for if age have been the refuge of falsehood,
how can the other part be verifyed, the more ancient, the more true? again if
Tertullians rule be true, that which is first is truest, how can prescription
of time be a refuge for falsehood? Do these men wake or sleep, when they write?
do they deal in matters of co^trouersy, or deliver their dreams? if that which
is first is truest, then must priority of time be the guardian of truth, and
not the refuge of falsehood, which does shun and avoid this trial.

51. If this Maxim of trying truth by time, had been observed of King Henry 8.
in England, Martin Luther in Saxony, and Zuinglius in Zuricke, these late
heretical noueltyes, with which Europe is now pestered, had not entered with
such full sail as they did: but then age was a refuge for falsehood, and
Tertullians rule was ouerruled as irregular, which now in the marriage of
Priests is made to be the only square of truth: and truly as M. Hall does
handle the matter, it is M. Hall makes antiquity a Lesbian rule.
made a Lesbian rule, which may be turned, changed, wrested, and applied as you
list: for if you urge the constant, uniform and general consent of all
places, times, pastors, writers for purgatory, real presence, merits,
justification by good works, the Supremacy of the sea of Rome, and the like,
always confessed, never without the brand of heresy denied, then is age the
refuge of falsehood, mother of error, and no certainty can be drawn from the
authority of men: let but a minister have but one seeming place of any Father
near the Apostles times, although but of one among all, and of all others
disproued, as here M. Hall presumes of Clemens Alexandrinus, though he make
indeed nothing for him, and then forthwith Tertullians rule is true, that which
is first is truest, and these men will be the Aduocats of antiquity,

-- Quo teneam vultus mutantem Prothea nodo? Horac. ep. 1.
52. Now that he may for age ouerbeare us he begins with Moses, and says,
that it is clear what he and the Jews did, which is not denied, though yet in
eating their Paschall lamb they had their loins girt, absteyned from their
wives when they did minister in the Tabernacle, or did eat their shew-breads,
had many purifications No argument of equality in perfection can be drawn from
the Priests of the old law, to the Priests of the new.
and cleansings, and in fine he who specially figured the eternal Priesthood
of Christ our Savior in the sacrifice of bread and wine, to wit, Melchisidecke
is not read to have had any wife at all, and the perfection of the new law
being in so excessive a degree above the other of Moses, no argument grounded
in equality or proportion can be made from the one to the other, or if any be,
it must be the quite contrary to this of M. Halls, as before I haued noted.
Wherefore omitting the old law, let us come to the new, in which also this man
would out strip us: for he demands what did the Apostles? I answer that none
after their Apostolical vocation did marry, and they who were married before,
did leave their wives. He asks again: Does not S. Paul tell us, that both
the rest of the Apostles, and the brethren No Apostle after his calling did
marry and such as were married before did after their vocation leave their
wives. See this answered in Bellar. cap. 20. Ad locum igitur. Luc. 8.
of our Lord, and Cephas had wives (and which is more) carried them still along
in their trauells? I answer him, no. For they were not wives, but devout women
who followed them sometimes, and maintained them, as there were some who did
the like to our Savior, as S. Luke recounteth: and it must needs argue great
ignorance in this man, in not understanding the Apostle expounded alike by all
the Fathers, and intol erable pride (as these qualityes commonly go together)
in preferring his judgment before all who ever wrote or commented on this
place, in the Greek or Latin Church, one only excepted, and not only
prefers his own judgment, but with exceeding contempt rejects them,
laughes them to scorn.

53. For besides the omission of the article (...), which should have been
expressed as Bellarmine notes, if the Apostle had meant wives, the other two
words (...) in the judgment of S. Hierome, S. Augustine and others, as we shall
now see, do clean overthrow this fancy, but what says this man heereunto: for
that childish elusion (says he) of (...), who can abide but to laugh at it?
and cites in the margent the translation of the Rhemes Testament, a sister a
woman; which interpretation notwithstanding is approved by themselves in the
margent of the later editions of the English Bible, and therefore we may as
well conclude, that S. Paul saying mulierem sororem did speak of a woman See
the Bible see out Anno 1613. and printed by Robers Barker. Act. 1. Hier. l. 1.
in Iouin. The Apostles carried not their wius up and down the country after
the^*
not a wife, as S. Peter saying, viri fratres, did speak of men, and not of
husbands, for else (...) in the Greek were superfluous: upon which word alone S.
Hierome against Iouinian M. Halls predecessor, does most cleearely euince that
they were not wives, but other virtuous women: Si autemillud nobis opposuerit
etc. If Iouinian (says he) shall object that unto us, to prove all the
Apostples to have had wines: have we not power to carry about women or wives
(because (...) with the Grecians does signisy both) let him join thereunto
what is in the Greek copies: Numquid non habemus potestatem sorores mulieres,
vel vxores circumducendi? Have we not power to carry about sisters women, or
sisters wives? Out of which it appears S. Paul to have spoken of other holy
women, which according to the custom of the Jews, did maintain their
teachers out of their wealth, as we read the like done to our Lord himself:
for the order of the words imports so much: Have we not power to eat and
drink, or to carry about sisters women? where first he speaks of eating and
drinking and maintayning them, and then he inferrs of women sisters, of which
it is evident, not wives but those other women to be understood (as is said)
which mainteyned them of their goods, which also is recounted in the old law of
that Sunamite which was wont to receive Elizaeus, and prepare him a table,
bread, and candlestick, or truly if we take the word (...) for wives, not
women, that which is added sisters takes away wives, and shows that they
were their true sisters inspirit, not their wives. Thus far S. Hierome.

54. The same likewise says S. Augusine, to wit, that they were fideles
mulieres habentes terrenam substantiam, Christian women of wealth, August. de
opere Monach. c. 4. and 5.
who out of their substance maintained the Apostles: and adds (which I with
M. Hall to mark) hoc quidam non intelligentes, non sororem mulierem etc. This
some not understanding, interpret it not a woman sister, when the Apostle
said: have we not power to carry about a woman sister, but a wife, the double
acception of the Greek word deceived them, because in the Greek tongue by the
same word is expressed a woman and a wife, although the Apostle have so
expressed this, as they should not have been deceived, because he said not
only a woman, but s^rorem mulierem, a sister woman, or woman sister, and says
not of marrying, but of carrying them about. Nevertheless this ambiguousnes of
the word deceived not other interpreters, who expounded the word a woman, and
not a wife. So S. Augustine. And now let M. Hall if his beard be thick enough
to hide his face from blushing laugh at S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, for
relying so M. Hall is so light headed as to laugh at the exposition of all the
Fathers*
much upon the word (...), sister, on which alone as you see they do both
learnedly and directly infer that they were not wives, and S. Augustine also
further adds, that they understand not the Apostle who otherwise interpret
him: for the word sister is a clear euiction they were not wives: whereas on
the other side this seely poor soul, against the one and the other, upon his
bare word says, they were wives, but proves it not; and that the word sister
is so far from being an euiction, as it is a childish illusion, and that he
cannot but laugh at it: Vtricreditis auditeres? whom had you rather believe
and follow, these most learned and renowned Doctors, or this ridiculous light
headed Minister?

55. Neither do these two alone (though they alone where nothing is brought to
the contrary might suffice) follow this exposition: for except Clemens
Alexandrinus whose singularity Clem. Alexan. 3. Strom^t ^
in this against the maine multitude of others, we rather seek to excuse then
follow, and perhaps for this amongst other things did Gelasius condemn his
books as Apocriphall: besides him I say, al others, as well Greek as Latin
interpret as we do. So S. Ambrose, Tertullian, S. Cyprian (if he and not Origin
were the author of the work desingularitate Clericorum) Primasius, Haimo, S.
Bid, S. Thomas, and others of the Latin Church; and of the Greek S.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Occumenius, Theophilactus etc. who as I suppose
understood Greek somewhat better then our English Ministers do, and to charge
all these with childish illusions, or to laugh at them, may better beseem the
frantic folly of some lewd Minister, then the judgment or gravity of any
discreet and sober man.

56. Again it is to be noted, that Clement albeit he acknowledged more
Apostles to have Clemens Alexandrinus favors not M. Halls cause.
had wives then other authors will grant, albeit he interpret S. Paul of
carrying them about (a pretty vagary for the Apostles wives, to run up and
down all the world over after their husbands) yet does he deny that they used
them as wives, but only as sisters: so as neither the authority cited out of
him, or S. Ignatius whom he also cites, makes any thing against us at al
supposing all were granted which they say: for touching our co^trouersy as
well may we grant all the Apostles to have had wives as one, and as much
difficulty there is to answer one as all* for it suffiseth us that after their
calling to be Apostles, they used not their wives, which Clement confesses,
though as Baronius proves S. Paul had no wife, for which we may cite S. Paul
Ambros. exh^re. ad v^g^^it. initio.
himself: Non potuisset (says S. Ambrose) ad tantam Apostolatus sui peruentre
gratiam, si fuisset allig^tus coniugij contubernio. He could never have come to
so great honor of his Apostleship if he had been tied to a wife. So he, and
the testimony of S. Ignatius to the contrary is a meet forgery of the ^ther
Grecians, there being no such thing to be found in all the more ancient copyes
that are extant.

57. But says M. Hall, their own Cardinal learned C^ietan does avouch and
euince it. We acknowledge C^ietan to be our Cardinal, we acknowledge Cardinal
Caietan never allow^d that Priests should marry.
him to have been learned, especially in school learning, which far
tra^scends this poor Epistlers capacity, and in interpreting the Scriptures we
no less acknowledge him to have had his errors, among which this may pass
for one of turning S. Paul his companion into his wife, wherein he not only
swarueth from all commentaryes This place of S. Paul is answered by Bellarmin
cap. 20.. ad lo^um ex Philip.
Greek and Latin, but even from Calvin, and Beza M. Halls great Rabbyns, and
yet for the cause in hand makes nothing against us, who rest contented with
either of these two graunts, to wit, that he was not married at all, or if he
were married, that he used not his wife after he was made an Apostle: and this
later our own learned Cardinal does both avouch and euince for us, and that
in this very place by M. Hall in these Caietan. ^om. in c. 4. ad Phil.
words: Constantissime credo, and nullatenus dubito etc: I do most constantly
believe and no ways doubt, that if S. Paul had no wife before his conversion
that he never had any at al: for having committed unto him the charge of
preaching the Gospel over the whole world, he had been the veryest fool
alive, and had gaynsayd the doctrine of Christ, if he had married a wife: and
much comfort must the wife have had of such a husband, still overwhelmed with
iniuryes, stripes, wounds, brands, uncertainty of place, and excessive poverty:
these I say had been dainty M Hal by his own Aut^ours proved to be stubborn.
marriages. Again I would most earnestly defend, yea clearly euince and
persuade one who were not stubborn (for it were most easy) not one of the
Apostls of Christ, who followed him after their calling, not only not to have
married but to have renounced their wives which before they had taken. So our
learned Cardinal: and will M. Hall allow this learning? I think not, and
therefore I may well challenge this Cardinal to be truly ours in this
controversy, and all his auoucbing and euincing to be against the Protestants,
so good choice has he made of an Advocate. But let us proceed.

58. To end this matter of the Apostles he comes from their practice, as he
says to their Constitutions, and bids his Reader look in these The Canon of
the Apostles.
Canons, which the Romish Church fathers upon the Apostle, and Fran. Turrian
their Jesuit sweats to defend it in a whole volume, there you find, Can. 5. See
this answered in Bellarmine c. 21.. ad 1. Respondet Hubertus.
enacted that no Bishop, Presbyter, Deacon, shall forsake his wife ((...)) in
pretense of Religion, upon pain of deposition, it would move laughter to see
how the Jesuits gnaw upon this bone, and suck in nothing but the blood of their
own jaws, while the sixth General Council auers and proclaims this sense
truly Apostolical, in spite of all contradiction. Hitherto M Hall. In which
words if you mark them well, M. Hall. urges the Apostles Canons for proof and
yet will have the^ to be counterfeit.
one part does overthrow the other: for he says of the Canons, that the Romish
Church fathers them upon the Apostles, and that the Jesuits sweat to defend it,
which is as much as if he had said, that they are not indeed theirs, and by
Protestants they are disauowed, neither in other things will M. Hall stand to
their authority. Wherefore this Canon even in his own opinion is not so
Canonical, as now he would make it, and how then does he tell M. VVhiting:
this was their practice, what was their constitution? How is it made such a
hard lone, as he who gnawes it can suck in nothing but blood out of his own
jaws? For granting that it was not made by the Apostles, which Protestants do,
and we may also if we list, there is no hardness or difficulty in it at all.
Wherefore to obtrude it for such, is a mere coosenage of his friend, and
deluding of his Reader, or if he, more then his mates, will admit these Canons,
then let him expound us the 17. in order, wherein it is decreed that none can be
made Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, who has married a widow, or one who was
divorced from her husband, or a serving maid: which if it were practiced
amongst them in our country, and all such deposed as are so married, who sees
not that the English Clergy would be soon reduced to a smaller number.

59. But the truth is, that he makes no more account of this Canon, then of
any counterfeit thing whatsoever, and thereby his Reader, and especially M.
VVhiting, may know whom he trusts: for to prove not only the doctrine and
practice, but Constitutions also of the Apostles to stand for the marriage of
Priests, he produces for the later this Canon, and besides this no another
authority, only for the approuance of the sense which he pretends, the
Trullan Council is cited, or rather misalledged, as presently I shall declare:
and this Canon when he talks with M. VVhiting, is so hard a bone as they who
gnaw thereon can suck nothing but blood out of their own jaws; but
afterward forgetting what he had said to him, he tells his tippling
ridiculous friend Thomas James of Oxford another tale, and makes this proof
out of the Apostles Constitutions, as light as a fether, and with one blast
blows both it and some nine or ten Fathers with it away together, exclayming
against us for relying any authority thereon: What a flourish (says he) do
they make with vsur^ed names? whom would it Decad. 4. page 18^.
not amaze to see the frequent citations of the Apostles own Canons,
Constitutions, Liturgyes, Masses, Clement, Denis the Areopagite, Linus,
Hyppolitus, Martial of Bordeaux, Egesippus, Donations of Constantyne the Great,
and Lewys the godly, of 50. Canons of Niece, of Dorotheus, Damasus his
Pontifical etc. and a little after of all these and others he says, that all
carry in them manifest brands of falsehood and supposition: and consequently
this matter of Priests marriage which he would show to M. VVhiting to be the
Apostles constitution, and that out of one of their own Canons, drawing blood
from the jaws of all Catholics that gnaw thereon, is only a mere cosenage and
deceit; for this Canon, this Constitution is nothing else, but a vain flourish
of usurped names, and amazing of M. VVhiting with the citation of a Canon, and
constitution Apostolical, which by his own confession has nothing in it of
any Apostolical authority, but only of mere falsehood, supposition, and
forgery: this is indeed to incur the Gal. 2.
Apostles check of pulling down that which before he had built, this is to
blow hot and cold with the same breath, to say and unsay, allow and disallow
any testimony or authority at his pleasure.

60. Neither were it a matter of any difficulty to justify the credit of all
the Authors he reproves if I would digress so far, and the thing it self did
so require: but to avoid larger excursions into other matters not incident to
the controversy in hand, I will leave all our proof in this matter, and in one
word deal with M. Hall, as God did with the Egyptians, of whom in the
Prophet Isay he said: Concurrere Isa. 19.
faciam Aegyptios contra Aegyptios. I will set Aegiptians against Aegiptians,
Protestants against Protestants, M. Halls brothers or rather Masters and
Superiors against him, to speak, to defend, to urge the authority of S.
Clement, S. Denis, S. Damasus, S. Dorotheus here denied, and others of no
less uncertain authority with some of our Adversaries, then any that M. Hall
has named: for this is a solemn custom and very current amongst these men,
that in case some Catholic do urge any of these Authors against their heresy,
then presently to discarde them with contempt, to twite them with bastardy, or
(as M. Jewel scornfully was wont to do) to say they are of the black guard:
but when Protestants and Puritans war one against the other, then are these
Authors classical, their works undoubted, their words of weight, their
credit uncontrollable, which point as I said were not hard to show in diverse
particulers if I would stand upon them.

61. M. Doctor Whitgift lately termed of Canterbury, when he wrote against
the Puritans urged the authorityes of the four above named, and for that they
were denied by Cartwright and others, as branded with falsehood and supposition,
the Author of the Survey of the pretended discipline in a long chapter (wherein
the Puritans dealing with the ancient Fathers, Ecclesiastical historyes, and
general Councels are laid open) checketh them for the same: for (to pretermit
Survey page ^29. 330. and dein^eps. Page ^^6. Against the Puritans the
Protestants object Fathers, which they refuse when they are objected against
themselves.
other charges of their contempt and reiection of Fathers) thus in one place he
writes: To prove the antiquity (says he) and lawfullnes of the name of
Archbishop, there being alleged the authorityes of Clement, Anacletus,
Anice^us, Epiphanius, Ambrose, and Sozomenus etc. the Puritans term the
bringing in of these authorityes, the moving and summouing of hell, that those
times were not pure and virginlike but departed from Apostolical simplicity,
and do tread them all under feet with as great facility as may be: Clement,
Anacletus, and Anicetus, are discharged for rogues, and men branded in the
forehead. So there, with more to the same effect: and after to prove S.
Timothy to have been Bishop of Ephesus, are cited among others Dorotheus and
Dionysius Areopagita, with the like disallowance of the the Puritans as the
former: whereas yet Oliver Ormerod in his Picture, toward the end, to prove
the interrogatoryes Page 338.
made in Baptism to be no trifles or joys, as the Puritans termed them, but
used in the Apostles days, cites S. Denis Areopagita* and A. N. in his
Bible-bearer does the like to prove the use of the Cross used in the same
Sacrament saying: Dionysius Areopagita, who lived in the Apostles Dionys. de
Ec^les. hierar l. 7. c. de b^ptis.
time, makes mention of the Cross in Baptism etc. But not to digress
further from the Suru^y* where immediately before the place above cited for the
antiquity of the name of Archdeacon were alleged says this Surueyour, the
testimonies of Damasus, Hierome, Sixtus, Sozomene, and Socrates, to whose
authorityes their answer is: two of them are counterfaits: Damasus spoke in
the dragons voice: among men the best ground bears thistles: those tyms were
corrupt, and yet Sixtus lived Bishop of Rome about the year 265. and was a
godly Martyr. So the Survey, and M. Jewel in his Reply cites also Fabian,
Alexander, Anacletus, and others: so as with the Protestants, S. Clement, S.
Denis, S. Damasus, Anacletus, Anicetus, Sixtus, Alexander, Fabian, Dorotheus,
are good Authors, and if they speak in their behalf their words must be
admitted for true authority in respect of their virtue and venerable
antiquiquity, and the Puritans for denying their testimonies, condemned as
enemies to the ancient Fathers.

62. This is the course held by the Protestants against the Puritans, but when
they write against us, then do they turn their sails, and Iuell. Replyart. 1.
Chark in his Reply to the censure ^. Your last.
then are all these Fathers counterfeit, and not the authors of those works
extant under their names, then will M. Jewel tell us that this S. Denis cannot
be Areopagita S. Paul's disciple, and M. Will. Charke very soberly lets us
know, that he has not been a companion of our bastard Denis in his journey to
heaven. Then again will M. Jewel demand from whence comes M. Hardings
Clement? then Damasus, Anacletus, Anicetus, Sixtus, Alexander, Fabian and all
other Popes decretall epistles do manifestly Artic. 1. diuis. 29.
deprave and abuse the Scriptures, they maintain the state and kingdom of the
Pope, they publish vain and superstitious ceremonies, and proclaim such
things as are known to be open lies: then will he labor to show, that they M.
Iuells dealing with the Fathers.
cannot possibly be theirs whose names they bear. So he says of them all in
general, and after by name he casts of Anacletus, Anterus, and Fabian, but
yet in the same division, forgetting himself to confirm what he would have,
he cites a decree of Anaclete, and in the next division after, another of
Fabian, saying: Fabianus also Bishop of Rome has plainly decreed that the
people should receive the Communion every Sunday. So as if these Decretall
epistles make for him they are forth with authentical, if against him then is
there nothing in them but deprauation of Scripturs, superstitious ceremonies,
known and open lies.

63. And whatsoever M. Hall in words does pretend of the other ancient
Doctors whose works are allowed, and whom in one place he sets forth with
their honorable titles, as sententious Tertullian, grave Cyprian, reso^ute
Decad. 4. ep. 3. to M. Matthew Milward. Loco supra citat. Trial by the Fathers
rejected by the chief Protestant writers. Zuing. in explanat. art. 64.
Hierome, flowing Chrysostom, divine Ambrose, devout ^ernard, and who alone is
all these, heavenly Augustine, adding further their Counsels, verdicts and
resolutions to be wise and holy, and in another place confessing the Court of
the Fathers, as reverend a trial as any under heaven: yet notwithstanding all
this, when this trial shallbe made, this man will stare post principia, play
least in sight, or rather fly far out of the field: for the chiefest champions
of these later Sectaryes have still refused to enter into this combat, and he
by name who gave the first name to the base brat of the Sacramentary heresy,
Zuinglius I mean, in one place thus writes of them all together: Mox incipis
clamare Patres Patres etc. Presently (says he) you begin to cry the Fathers
the Fathers, so forsooth the Fathers have delivered, but I reply unto you that
not the Fathers, nor the mothers, but the word of God it is that I require. So
he. And Musculus so much reverenced every where by M. Whitaker, says Musculus
in lo^is com tit. de Scripturis sacris.
that he is maligna^t to the Church of God, who admits the trial of Fathers.
Doctor Humphreyes in Jewels life says: Quid rei nobis cum Patribus, cum carne
and sanguine? What have we to do with the Fathers, with flesh and blood? and M.
Whitaker Whitaker. ad 6. ratio. Campiani.
makes this Caveat: Cauendum semper est ne nimium Patribus tribuamus cum
Papistis etc. We must still beware not to give too much credit to the Fathers
with the Papists, but that in reading them we maintain our right and liberty,
and examine all their sayings by the rule of the Scripture with which if they
agree, that we receive them, but if they disagree, that then with their good
leave we may freely reject them. So he. And further demands this wise
question, equum ne iudicas etc. do you think it meet, M. Campian, that if the
Fathers erred in interpreting the Scriptures, that we should follow their
steps? and that we should forsake the truth we have found, because they could
not find it? Lo what account these men make of the Fathers whose credit on the
sudden is with M. Hall so great, and trial so reverend.

64. But not to enter further into this matter, Luther alone may suffice to
clear this question, who by name rejects all those whom M. Hall in words
will seem to admire. S. Cyprian he Sermon. conuinialibus tit. de Patribus.
calls a weak divine, S. Chrysostom a babbler, S. Ambrose unlearned,
Tertullian no better then Carolostadius, Luthers co^temptible Antagonist, S.
Bernard a good preacher a bad disputer, in S. Augustine nothing says he is
singular, but especially above al others he raileth at S. Hierom, to whom he
says: Quin te Hieronyme conculcamus, cum tua Bethleem, Ad cap. 22. Genes.
cuculia and deserto. Why do we not tread thee Hierom under our feet with thy
Bethleem, cool and desert. And in another place he says he was an Heretic,
and adds the cause, which somewhat concerns M. Hall: Nihil de Christo
loquitur, S^rm. couiu. cap. de cholaest. Theolog.
duntaxat illius nomen ore fert etc. he says nothing of Christ, only he has
his name in his mouth, I know none to whom I am so great an enemy as unto
Hierom, and why I pray you? what has S. Hierome done to you more then the rest
that may deserve so great hatred? mary says this fat Friar: Tantum scribit de
ieiunio, de delectu ciborum, de virginitate etc. The wrong is evident: for he
only writes of fasting, of choice of meaner meats, of virginity, and the like,
which is a yoke that neithee lewd Luther, nor M. Hall, nor any else of the one
or other sect can support: and had M. Hall found any relief for his cause in
any of No Fathers ever favored the marriage of Priests.
these Fathers for the marriage of Priests, their names, and authorityes had
not been spared in his text or margent, but he cites no one of them al for
this matter, but two or three words of S. Cyprian about Numidicus, and they
most shamfully mistaken, as shallbe showed in the next Paragraffe: and when he
shall read their words by me cyted against him, he will I doubt not deal
with their authorityes as he does here with the Apostles Constitutions,
canonize them when they may seem to make for his purpose, and afterward tell
us they were all men, they had their errors: he will follow them as far as
they follow the Scriptures, and no further, which is just as much, and as a
little as himself lists: for if they interpret the Scriptures against him
(as we see they did the words of the Apostle of carrying about a woman sister)
then their learned Commentaryes shallbe childish illusions, and he cannot hold
but, out of the reverend respect he bears them, must needs laugh them all to
scorn: but to return to the Constitutions.

65. If M. Hall contend that this authority though not approved by him, yet at
least urges us who allow these Canons: I answer that our allowance of the^ is
not so absolute, but may admit restriction: for though some plead for them, yet
others disprove them, and Baronius answering this very objection, says of all
these Canons: Apocryphorum non est tanta authoritas etc. there is not Baron.
tom. 1. anno 53.. Hisigitur.
such authority to be given unto Apocryphal Canons, as to infring things so
certain, so ratifyed, and confirmed as is the single life of Clergy men: at
least M. Hall should not have put down the matter in such peremptory and
undoubted terms, where on all hands he knew to be so much controversy: and it
is an untruth worthy Never lawful for Bishops to marry, or keep their wives.
of himself to say, that the sixth Council proclaims this sense truly
Apostolical in spite of al contradiction: for there we find no such
proclamation, but the contrary especially concerning Bishops: for in the next
precedent Canon the people of Afrike and Lybia exhibited a complaint against
some Bishops for only dwelling with their wives which they had married before
they were Bishops, and the Council decrees, vt nihil eiusmodi deinceps vllo
modo fiat, that no such thing hereafter be in any wise done, with this
thundering conclusion: Si quis autem tale aliquid agere deprehensus fuerit,
deponatur. If any shallbe round to do the like let him be deposed. For which
cause in the next Canon whereon this man most relyeth, no Bishop is named, but
only Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest without any further ascent, and you may
imagine what these would have said and decreed of our Protestant Prelates (who
not only dwell with their wives but use them us much as before) if such a
complaint had been brought and exhibited against them.

66. Furthermore in the same Council, the 48. Canon does both confirm what I
have now said of Bishops wives, and explicateth also this other Canon of the
Apostles: for thus they define: Vxor eius qui ad Episcopalem dignitatem
promotus Council. Trullan. Canon. 48.
est, communi sui viri consensu prius separata etc. Let the wife of him who is
promoted, when he is ordered and consecrated Bishop, being by mutual consent
first separated, enter into some monastery, built far from the dwelling place
of the Bishop, and let her be maintained by him. So this Canon, and so it
seems that these men although incontinent enough, were not yet fully arrived
to the perfection of our English Protestants, The true sense of the
Apostolical Canon.
but came one degree behind them: and it is evident also that when in the
Apostles Canon it is prohibited that no Priest eijciat, or abijciat, turn out
of doors his wife, or shake her off to shift for her self, it is to be
understood not of their separation the one from the other but of their
maintenance, that their husbands should be bound to provide for them: and the
Greek word which M. Hall so often cites, but seems not to understand
confirms this sense: for it signifies as well warines, as Religion, and as
Bellarmine well Greg. l. 7^ ep. ^^. Con. Turon. Can. 8. Distin. 3^. cap.
O(...)nino.
observes, the meaning is, that no Bishop or Priest under pretext of warines,
because he is bound to live continently, put his wife away without further care
of providing for her: and this sense is also auowed by S. Gregory, and the 2.
Council of Towers, and was given long since to this objection, as M. Hall may
find in Gratian, where he has found things of far less moment, but this he
lists not to see.

67. And these are all the proofs he could find out of the Apostles writings,
practice, and constitutions, wherein how little he has gained you have now
seen, or rather how he is cast in them all: for whatsoever Apostolical
authority delivered in writing, what practice soever recounted by antiquity,
all Canons, and Constitutions canonical being taken in the sense they have
always heertofore been taken that is, in their true and proper meaning,
without wresting, mangling, misinterpreting, or other bad demeanor, are so far
from succouring his cause, as they quite overthrow it, and yield invincible
arguments for the Catholic truth: having seen this I say, you may well judge
how well he deserves according to his own proffer to be punished with a
divorce, the greatest punishment as i^ should seem that can be inflicted on
this tender h^rted husband, which yet will be more clear in the ensuing
authorityes taken from the Fathers, which are less liable unto his
commentaryes then the Scriptures, of which many Texts he boldly peruerteth with
his own gloss, or which is all one with the commentaryes of late heretical
writers repugnant to the ancient: but the other testimonies taken from the
Fathers, and historyes recounting only matter of fact, need no commentaryes for
their explication, and so are less subject to his abuse. Let us then see what
he alleges.

Of the testimoryes and examples of the ancient Fathers, Counsels (especially
the Trullan) and Historyes produced by M. Hall for the marriage of Priests and
Clergym^n.. 2.
FROM the Scriptures and Apostolical times M. Hall draws us to the Fathers of
the Primitive Church and succeding ages, and as though in the former he had
given us a deadly blow, he enters into this with more courage, and means as it
should seem to knock on a pace while the iron is hoate: for as if he were
afraid to loose the advantage if he did not closely pursue us, he says: Follow
the times now, what did the ages succeding? search records: whatsoever some
palpable soysted epistles of A vain flourish.
Popes insinuate, they married without scruple of any contrary iniunction: many
of these ancients admired virginity, but imposed it not. So M. Hall: feigning
as you see golden ages of mirth, and marrying under the most grievous yoke of
tyrannical persecution, when as every where innocent blood was shed, and
Christians sought for to the slaughter. That marriage al times without contrary
iniunction was lawful, is not denied, nor will it be proved in have, that
Priests or such as had vowed the contrary, might use that liberty: and we say
not that virginity is violently to be imposed on any, for it comes by free
election, but where the vow is free, the transgression is damnable: for we are
bound to render our vows to him, to whom we have made them. I need not make
my self a soldier, unless the Prince do press me, but if not pressed I put my
self under pay, I am bound to march to the field, to fight, and follow the
camp. The cause is free, the necessity subsequent.

2. And it seems M. Hall to be half afraid M. Halls starting holes when he
shallbe pressed by authority.
notwithstanding his facing, to stand to this trial, in that like a
malefactor he presently seeks for a city of refuge to retire unto when he
shallbe pressed: for if you bring him any record of a Pope, though a Martyr and
Saint, and near the Apostles times (and the same we may imagine of others) he
blots out his authority with one dash of his pen, and says: that they are
palpably soysted epistles, you must not put him to the proof, for that were
too too much to his disreputation: he takes himself for another Pithagoras,
whose word without other warrant must be your best assurance: and for authors
to plead for his marriage, you must think he finds great scarcity, when as
for the first four hundred years, he could only find but three, Origin, S.
Athanasius, and S. Cyprian, of which the first says not word for him, the
second is against him, and Origin falsely alleged by M. Hall.
the third is most shamefully abused, of which abuse the first also wants not
his part.

3. For to begin with Origin, who though himself a wilful Eunuch (says M.
Hall) yet is feign to persuade the Sons of Clergymen not to be proud of their
Origin. tract. 9. in Matthew.
parentage. Grant it be so, what thereof will he infer against us, who will
grant further that the same persuasion might have been made to S. Peter's
daughter (as many are of opinion that he had one) and yet will it not follow,
that he knew his wife after he was an Apostle, as it neither does in this case,
that these parents were Priests when they begot these sons: and that indeed
they were not, we shall need no better interpreter to explicate Origin then
Origin himself, Origin. hom. 23. in Numer.
who tells us: Certum est quia impeditur sacrificium indesinens etc. It is
certain that the continual sacrifice cannot be offered of these who attend to
the works of wedlock. Wherefore in my opinion he alone is to offer the
euerduring sacrifice, who has vowed himself to an euerduring Lib. 7.
and perpetual chastity. So Origin. And in his book against Celsus, showing
the force and efficacy of Christian doctrine, and what chang of life it works
in such as embrace it, he says of them: Tantum absunt ab omni lasciuia,
spurcitia, turpidin^ libidinum, vt in morem persectorum sacerdotum ab omni
coitu abhorrentium etc. They are so far from all wantones, uncleanness, and
filthy lust, that after the manner of perfect Priests abhorring all carnal
knowledge, many of them do altogether live chastely, and purely from all
conversation, yea though otherwise lawful, with women. So he. By which it is
evident, what he thought of single life of Priests, and that in the place cited
by M. Hall he did speak of the children they had before they were either
Bishops, Priests, or Deacons which nothing at all touches our Controversy, as
in the beginning I observed.

4. Though this some what touch M. Halls credit that he untruly delivers the
sense of Origin, M. Hall understands not Origin.
when he makes him to persuade the sons of Clergy men not to be proud of
their parentage: for that is not Origens persuasion, but that they should not
be proud, that they had always been brought Matthew. 19.
up in the Christian faith, and insult over others, who had been converted from
Paganism, seeing our Savior said, Multi erunt nouissimi primi, and primi
nouissimi: Many who were first shallbe last, and many who were last shall be
first: which would have been apparent, had M. Hall permitted him to speak out
of his own mind, and not as though he had been troubled with a chyncough, to
speak some words, and leave others unspoken: were these three words, M. Hall
(in ipsa Christianitate, in the Christian faith) such rough burrs as they must
needs stick in your throat? or so troublesome unto you to write as they must
be cut off with an etc. for whereas Origin has: Qui a Christianis parentibus
enutriti sunt in ipsa Christi anitate, maxim fi fuerint ex Patribus
sacerdotali sede dignificatis etc. Who are brought up of Christian parents in
Christian faith, especially of Fathers dignifyed with priesthood etc. M. Hall
cites all the other sentence at full length, but stumbleth at these three
words, in ipsa Christianitate, saying: Qui a Christianis parentibus enutriti
sunt etc. maxim si fuerint ex patribus sacerdotali sede diguificatis, as
though he had spoken of carnal education, whereas he speaks of their
education in faith and belief: and then falsely tells us. that he had
persuaded them not to be proud of their parentage, whereas the pride he
speaks of, is not of their parentage, but of the priority of their calling to
Christ, for that they had always been Christians, and the other not, but had
first been Pagans, as is evident to any who will read the place.

5. His second author, as I said, is S. Athanasius, before whose words he
makes this Encomiasticall 5. Athanasius made to speak the quite contrary to
that which he inte^deth. Atha. ep. ad Dracontium.
entrance, Holy Athanasius a witness past exception, shall serve for a thousand
histories till his age. So M. Hall, and one would think he had found somewhat
in this worthy Author (for you shall not find him easily to praise, where he is
not beholding) that will directly conclude and supply all histories, or
whatsoever defect of other authority. But as men in their sleep do dream often
of great wealth, and when they wake do find nothing, so M. Hall as it should
seem not in his sleep (though perhaps in some slumber) but in serious study
dreameth of great wealth and advantage, where he does find nothing else but his
own shame, beggary, and confusion.

6. The words he cites of S. Athanasius are these: Many Bishops have not
married, and contrarily Monks have been fathers of children, as contrarily
you see Bishops the fathers of children and Monks that have not sought
posterity. So out of S. Athanasius, which so little serves to our purpose, as
M. Hall might have been ashamed to allege it: for what will he infer of these
words? that Bishops and Monks may lawfully marry? S. Athanasius says it not,
but only recounteth the fact that some married of both sorts, but whether they
did well or ill, or whether himself did approve or condemn the same, there is
no word in this sentence: but if M. Hall had not taken his authorityes by
retayle of some blind note-booke, but had fetched them himself from the
originalls, this witness without exception that must serve for a thousand
histories, had The true sense and meaning of S. Athanasius.
never been alleged to testify any thing in this matter. For so far is S.
Athanasius from allowing Bishops and Monks to have wives, as in this place he
reprehendeth the lewd behavior of some who lived in the one and other state, I
mean Episcopal dignity, and Monastical profession, the occasion whereof was
given him by Dracontius, who at the persuasion as it should seem of the
Monks, would not yield to S. Athanasius to be made Bishop, but objected that
many inco^ueniences followed that state, which draw diverse into danger, and
many to perdition, from which the retired repose of a Religious life was free
and secure. S. Athanasius answers here unto by showing these dangers to be
no less in Monastical, then Episcopal profession, and that as well by the
scandalous examples which had fallen out in both, as eminent virtue which had
been found in either: for thus he discourses: Nec dicas, nec dicentibus
credas Episcopatum esse causam peccati, aut quod inde nascantur occasiones
deliuquendi etc. Tell me not, nor believe them who tell you that Episcopality
is the cause of sin, or that from thence proceed the occasions of offense:
and a little after: Ne igitur talia obijciant tui Consiliarij. Let nor those
who counsel you object these things: for we have known Bishops fasting, and
Monks feeding; we have known Bishops not drinking wine, and Monks drinking;
we have known Bishops working miracles, and Monks working none; many Bishops
not to have married, and Monks to have had children; as likewise you may find
Bishops to have been fathers of children, and Monks not to have sought for
marriage; Clergy men to have tipled, and Monks to have been abstinent. So he.
Showing both the one and the other state, by their bad members, to be subject
to abuse, and concludes: Non enim coroha pro locis, sed pro factis redditur.
The crown of glory is not given for the place, or profession we live in, but
for the good works we do in that profession.

7. By which it is evident that the words so barely brought forth by M. Hall,
were not spoken by way of simple narration, but of mislike Priests were not
married in time of S. Athanasius.
and reprehension: for it was never lawful for Monks or Bishops to beget
children, and that neither Priests might do the like in the time of S.
Athanasius, is demonstrated by the testimony of S. Hierome, who lived in the
same age, and demands of Vigilantius the sworn enemy of virginal chastity,
and ^ho no less then his children our Protestants, would have al Clergy men to
marry: Quid facient Orientis Ecclesiae? quid Aegypti and sedis Apostolicae?
quae aut virgins c^ericos accipiunt, aut Hier. l. 1. in Vigil.
continentes, aut si vxores habuerint, mariti esse desistunt. If all Clergy men
must marry, what shall the Churches of Greece, of Egypt, and the sea
Apostolic do, who receive into the Clergy, either virgins, or such as be
continent, or if they have had wives, do cease to be husbands? So he. Where so
expressly naming the Church of Egypt, of which Alexandria was the chief seat,
and the practice therein, he takes away all doubt or scruple: for if marriage
were there denied to Priests, much more to Monks, and Bishops, whose calling
requires greater perfection, and more singular virtue.

8. Wherefore when S. Athanasius says: that Of what Monks S. Athanasius
speaks.
he has known Monks the fathers of children, he speaks of lewd licentious
Monks, that by loose life fell from the severity of their order, of which even
yet in fresh memory, we have likewise known some, and those married also to
Nuns, and to have been the fathers of many children. For thus the first
Progenitour of your new Gospel Martin Luther speaks of himself: Anno Tom.
2. latin. colloq. tit. de morbis Lutheri.
25 in seditione Rusticorum 12. Iunij vxorem duxi etc. In the year 25. (to wit
after a thousand five hundred) in the sedition of the Boots (when all Germany
was in arms and uproar) the 12. of June (to drive care away) I married a wife:
in the year 26. my eldest son John was borne: in Luthers brood.
the year 27. my daughter Elizabeth: in the year 29. on the eve of the
Ascension Magdalen: in the year 31. the 7. of November Martin: in the year
Augu. de bono viduit. c, 11. and Chrys^. ep. 6. ad Theod. lapsu^.
33. the 28. of January Paul: in the year 34. Margaret. Thus Luther of
Catherine Bore his sow had six pigs: for had he not been a beast, he would
never have gloryed in his sacrilegious marriage (worse in the judgment of S.
Augustine then aduowtry) and his unlawful issue.

9. But for multitude of children we have another Patriarch of a more
plentiful grogeny, who will for number twice ouergo Luther, and contend with
Jacob himself, yea ouerbeare him by one, and that is Martin Bucer another
renega^e Grees^rus com. ^^^getico in Iacobum Regem c. 1.
Apostata, and Apostle of Cambridge, who of one Nun is said to have bad
thirteen children: and yet as though these generations did not multiply fast
enough, he who by the Duke of Somerset Seymour was called into England with
this Martin, to preach in London, was content to allow them Bernardinus Ochinus.
as many wives together, as the former had children, if not more: so as when
these men were sent forth to sow the seed, or tares rather, of these later
heresies, they observed the rule of the Apostle, but in a wrong sense: Non
prius quod spirituale, 1. Cor. 15.
sed quod animale, nature went before grace, the carnal generation before the
spiritual, the first care to satisfy their own lust, and then to instruct
their followers. I omit other of the same stamp as Peter Martyr,
Oecolampadius, Pelican etc. all husbands of one wife at least, but unworthy of
further mention, as being famous for nothing so much as their own infamy.

10. You must think that for the last proof by authority he has kept a sure
card, seeing neither of the former to make for him, and for that end he
seems of purpose to have displaced ^ Cypria^ shamefully abused.
it: for if we respect the time S. Cyprian is more ancient then S. Athanasius,
and yet here he is put after him, and made to say, that Numidicus the Martyr
was a married Presbyter (for Priest he will not name him) and then cites in
the Cypr. l. 4. epist. 10.
margent the words of S. Cyprian thus: Numidicus presbyter qui vxorem
concrematam and adharentem lateri laetus aspexti Numidicus the Priest who
cheerfully saw his wife sticking fast to his side, to be burned. So S.
Cyprian, as M. Hall has made him speak: and this testimony I confess seems
to urge more then the former, because he was a Priest, was married, and his
wife adhaerebat lateri, so as it should seem they lived not asunder. Again
the Author is without exception, the time most ancient, the case clear: and
truly if the matter stand as here it is declared, I will not withstand him
herein, but grant (which is yet more then I need) that he has by this
example euinced his cause, and will never any more mention his divorce.

11. But if in this passage he cog notoriously, if he affirm the quite
contrary to that which is in his author, if as before out of Origin, he cut off
three words with an etc.: so here he do add one word which quite alters the
sense, then I hope his friends will bethink them well how they trust such
iugglers, who with the Egyptians look them in the face, whiles their fingers
be in their purse, and I wish that with his falsehood he did but pick their
purses, and not seduce their souls, bought and ransomed with the dear price
of the precious blood of the son of God. And that there be no mistaking
between What M. Hall does affirm out of S. Cyprian, and I do deny.
us, remember I pray what M. Hall does affirm, to wit, that Numidicus was a
married Priest, and that S. Cyprian avouches so much: I on the other side deny
both the one and the other, and say that he was never a married Priest, and
that S. Cyprian never said any such thing, but the quite contrary, that he was
made priest after his wives death. Let S. Cyprian decide the doubt between us.

12. This Numidicus then being a married man was by the persecutours carried
together with his wife and others to be martyred, the rest When Numidicus was
made Priest.
were put to death before him, and with them he cheerfully saw his wife
burned, making no other account but to drink of the same cup, and to follow
her into the flames: he did so, and was left for dead: Ipse (says S. Cyprian)
semiustulatus, Epist. 35. iuxta Pamelum. alias l. 4. ep. vltim.
and lapidibus obrutus, and pro mortuo derelictus etc. He half burned, covered
with stones, and left for dead: whiles his daughter out of filial duty sought
his body, he was found not to be fully departed, and being taken out, and by
careful attendance somewhat refreshed, he remained against his will after his
companions, whom he had sent before him to heaven: Sed remanendi vt videmus
haec fuit causa, vt eum Clero nostro Dominus adiungeret. But this as we see was
the cause why he remained behind, that God might make him of our Clergy, and
adorn the number of our priesthood, made small by the fall of some, with
glorious Priests. Thus far S. Cyprian, whose words are so plain, as they need
not explication: for he plainly testifyeth that he was made Priest after his
wives death, and for that cause to have been preserved alive, and he says not
as you see: Numidicus presbyter vxorem suam concrematam etc. Numidicus the
Priest saw his wife burned, but only Numidicus saw his wife burned, and A foul
corruption.
the word Priest is added both in the English text and Latin margent by M.
Hall, and that as you see for his advantage clean contrary to the mind of his
author.

13. For without that word what does this testimony avail him? what does it
prove? will he reason thus, Numidicus after his wife was burned was made
Priest, therefore he was a married Pbesbyter, and his example proves the
marriage of all Priests to be lawful? these extremes are too far asunder to
meet in one syllogism, and he shall never be able to find a medius terminus,
that can knit them together: I wish that I were near M. Hall, when some or
other would show him this imposture, to see what face he would make thereon,
whether he would confess his error, or persist in his folly: for I see not,
but turn him which way he list, he must be condemned Protesta^t^ never write
against Catholics, but they corrupt Authors.
for a falsifyer. I know not what fatal destiny follows these men, that
whatsoever they treat of in any controversy between us and them, they cannot
but show legier-du-mayne, fraud, and collusion, and yet notwithstanding pretend
all candor and simplicity: for here on the word Priest stands all the force
of M. Halls argument, and that is foysted in by himself, and not to be found
conjoined with the words he cyteth in S. Cyprian.

14. If M. Hall say, which is all he can say, that in the beginning of the
epistle S. Cyprian has these words: Numidicus presbyter ascribatur
presbyterorum Carthaginensium numero, and nobiscum sedeat in Clero etc. Let
Numidicus the Priest be numbered amongst the Priests of Carthage, and let him
sit with us in the Clergy: and then goes on with the description of his
merits, of the courage he showed in seeing his wife dye etc. this plaster
cannot salve the soar: for this epistle S. Cyprian wrote after he had ordered
him Priest, and his ordination, as there he declares, and you have now heard,
was after his wives death: Numidicus himself giving by his rare constancy, and
his so resolutely offering himself to die for Christ, occasion of his
promotion, yea of further preferment: for in the end of the same letter, S.
Cyprian says, that at his return to Carthage, he meant to make him Bishop, as
Pamelius does rightly interpret him. So as there is no evasion left for M. Hall
to escape.

15. I have purposely transposed the fact of Paphnutius in the Council of
Niece, the authority The fact of Paphnutius in the Nicen Council is discussed.
whereof although it be more ancient then S. Athanasius, who therein albeit
present, was not Bishop, but Deacon, yet are the Authors who recount the same
much more modern, and all the credit lying on their relation, no writer more
ancient so much as mentioning any such matter, the Council if self
disclayming from it, and these Authors in other things being found insincere
and fabulous, I thought it not worth the answering: but seeing that M. Hall
notwithstanding he saw it fully answered in Bellarmine, and others, will needs
bring it in again, as though nothing had ever been said thereunto, Answered
by Bellarmine l. ^ de Clericis cap. 20.. argumentum 5. and vltimum.
and out of his wonted folly and vanity insert here and there his Greek
words, which have no more force and emphasis then the English, with this
conclusion in the end: His arguments wone assent, he spoke and prevailed, so
this liberty was still continued and confirmed I will briefly deliver what has
been answered thereunto, if first I show what legier-du-maine is used by this
Epistler in setting it down with advantage to make it serve his purpose the
better.

16. For whereas Socrates recounteth the fact Socrates l. 1. cap. 8. S zom. l.
1. cap. 22.
of Paphnutius in a particular matter touching the wives of such Priests only,
as were ordered when they were married men, whether such should be debarred
from their wives and bound to continency as the rest, this man from the
particular draws it unto the general, and from only married Priests, to all
Priests whatsoever. When the Fathers of the Nicen Council (says M. Hall) went
about to enact a law of continency, Socrates the historian expresses it thus:
It seems good, says he to the Bishops, to bring in a new law into the
Church: it was then new, and they but would have brought it in: therefore before
it was not. So he. But I must pull him back by the sleeue, and before we go
further ask him what this new law was, that is here mentioned? M. Halls
insincere setting down the narration of Socrates.
of what subject? was it in general for the continency of all Clergy men,
which is the argument of this his letter? so it should seem: for so without
any restriction he reports it, and makes Paphnutius to withstand the same: when
as his Author in this very chapter has the quite contrary, and only speaks
of such as in the state of wedlock were ordered, excluding in plain terms
the other from all marriage, and that according to the ancient tradition of the
Church.

17. And this M. Hall could not but see; seeing after the words he cites vz.
It seems good to the Bishops to bring in a new law into the Church, it
follows immediately: vt qui essent sacris initiati, sicut Episcopi.
Presbyteri, and Diacon^ cum vxoribus quas cum erant laici, in matrimonium
duxissent, minime dormirent. That such as were in holy orders, as Bishops, It
was never lawful for Priests after their ordinatio^ to marry.
Priests, and Deacons should not company with their wives, which they had
married before, when they were lay men. So he. Which words euince the
co^tinency he speaks of only to be in this particular case, and not of all
continency, as here he is made to speak, which yet is more clear in the same
chapter, where he expressly denies that such as took holy orders in single
life (which as we have showed out of S. Hierome, and S. Epiphanius must needs
be the greater part) may marry at all: Vt qui in Clerum (says he) ante
adscripti erant quam duxissent vxores, hi secundum veterem Ecclesiae
traditionem deinceps a nu tijs abstinerent. That such as were made of the
Clergy before they had married wives, should according to the ancient tradition
of the Church abstain from marryage. So Socrates, and we see that besides the
aspersion and touch of falsehood, without which this man delivers nothing, that
the authority cited, reaches not half way home, for proof of that wherefore
it is brought although all were granted which this Author reports.

18. Yea further this testimony duly weighed makes more for us then our
Adversaries: for if we make this first proposition out of Socrates, no Clergy
man after his orders taken can marry: and then out of S. Hierome, and S.
Epiphanius add this other, but in the Churches of Greece, Egypt, and Rome all
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, were chosen virgins, or widdowers, or after their
priesthood for ever continent; the conclusion will follow that for the most
part, as I said, even according to the ancient tradition of the Church, the
Clergy consisted of single men, an the other married who claymed their wives
after their ordination in respect of them, to have been very few, which yet is
more plain by S. Epiphanius, who speaking of such as were made Priests,
saying: Sanctum Sacerdotium ex virginibus Mark^ this M. Hall.
quidem vt plurimum procedens, si vero non ex virginibus, at ex solitariam
vitam agentibus: si vero hi non suffecerint ad ministerium, hi qui continent a
proprijs vxoribus accipiantur. Holy priesthood for the most part proceeding of
Virgins, or if not virgins, yet of such as live a solitary or single life, or
if these suffice not for the Ministry, let those be taken who live continent
from their own wives. So he. And this alone abundantly shows in what rank
and number married men were in the Clergy.

19. And all this have I said as supposing the truth of that history, but there
want not more then seeming conjectures to disprove this The report of Socrates
and Sozomen touching Paphnutius is rejected as fabulous.
narration, and to show it to be false, whereof that may pass for the first,
which I last alleged out of S. Hierome, and S. Epiphanius, both more ancient,
more learned, and of far more credit then Socrates: for they living so soon
after the Council, and writing in so general manner for the single life of
Priests, and continency of such as in wedloke were ordered, without the least
mention of any contrary custom, which if it had been in use and that upon so
famous a plea of so renowned a Saint, they could not but have known, the one
being a Grecian borne, and the other brought up under S. Gregory Nazianzen in
Greece, argues most clearly no such pleading, no such custom ever to have
been: for had it been so notorious as in the open Council by so remarkable a
man as S. Paphnutius, in a cause of this consequence, it could not have been
concealed, but must needs have been most public, most famous, and known to the
whole world: neither could these Saints have durst to gainsay it, and deny that
to have been practiced, which in the Council had been condemned: and great
marvel it were if Socrates living so long after, should better know what the
Nicen Council had determined, then S. Hierome and S. Epiphanius, who lived in
the same age, and that no one Author before of those times (although Ruffinus
write both of that Council and Saint) could be found to register, or at least
to insinuate this counterfeit conquest left only to Socrates and Sozomen both
heretics, as many hold, Bellar. loco ^itato.
to be delivered to posterity, and from them against the credit of all others
to be taken up as an undoubted truth to M Hall, and they by him to be made to
speak far worse then they did.

20. Again S. Gregory takes Sozomen with untruths, and says that in his
history, multa mentitur, and the Reader may see (where M. Hall would not be
seen) in Bellarmine I mean, three gross untruths related by Socrates, even
in one chapter, and in the history of his own time, as Epiph. haeres. 70.
Ambr. l. 10. ep. 83. Athan. de synodis Arimin. and Seleue.
that it was lawful to keep Easter when any one listed, the Church having
determined nothing thereof, Leo sermon. 4. de quadrag. Greg. ho. in Euang.
that in Rome they fasted but 3. weeks before Easter, Aug. ep. 86. and 118.
that in Rome they used not to fast on the Saturdayes: all which are convinced
by S. Athanasius, S. Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Leo, and S.
Gregory to be false: so as in this also of married Priests, seeing he is the
first relatour, and that against the relation of others, we may worthily
suspect him, and without the prejudice of truth reject him also, unless some
other of more fidelity had likewise affirmed the same.

21. Moreover there are in the Council it self two Canons, the first and the
third, made upon one occasion, to wit, for that Leontius a Priest the more
freely to keep a young maid in The Council of Niece allowed not marriage of
Priests, Can. 1. Can. ^.
his house, had made himself an Eunuch, for which he was deposed, and after
became an Arrian: the Council in the first Canon provides that none under
pain of deposition, offer violence to his own body, as Leontius had done: and
then to put the axe under the root of the tree, and remove all occasion of
whotsoeuer disorder hereafter in that kind, the third Canon forbids all
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons to have any woman in their houses, unless it be
their mother, sister, or aunt by the Father, or such only of whom there can be
no suspicion: and where is the wife in this enumeration? truly if Priests may
live freely with their wius, I see not why their wives may not as freely have
what mayds they list to tend their children, and wait on themselus besides
their husbands, aunt, sister, or mother, who I think will not so easily be
drawn to stoop to that attendance. Let our Bishops try, and they will find my
words true: and if the Council had allowed these wives, why does it only
speak of the Priest, his mother, sister, aunt, and nothing of the sister,
Mother, aunt of his wife? Doubles for no other reason, but for that these wives
were unknown, and no The Protestants have none to adhere unto for the marriage
of Priests but condemned heretics.
man then dreamed of the Protestant Heteroclital Clergy, so dislonant from
others, as it is without example, unless it be of such whom though they shame
not to follow, yet may they blush to name, Iouinian Vigilantius, and other
heretics.

22. Last of all S. Leo the Great, living at the same time with Socrates and
writing to the Greek Bishop Anastasius of Thessalonica, shows the practice
then jointly to conspire with this now, and he writes in such manner, as if
the thing were out of question, without contradiction, known, and acknowledged
by all: for speaking of the excellency of Priesthood, he brings this for
proof thereof: Sacerdotum tam excellent est electio, Leo. ep. 84. cap. 4.
vt haec quae in alijs Ecclesiae membris non vocantur ad culpam, in illis tamen
habeantur illicita etc. The calling of Priests is so eminent, that those things
which in other members of the Church, are not reputed for a fault, are yet in
them unlawful: for whereas for such as are not of the Clergy, it is free to
marry and beget children, notwithstanding to show the purity of perfect
continency, carnal wedlock is denied unto Subdeacons, that both those who
have wives may be as if they had them not, and they who have them not, may
remain single: but if this be worthy to be kept in this order, which is the
fourth from the head, how much more is it to be kept in the first, second, and
third, least any should be thought fit for the Leuitical ministry, or Priestly
honor, or Episcopal excellency, who is discovered not yet to have refrained
from conjugal carnality? Hitherto S. Leo.

23. And this not only concludes against the former Historian, the testimony
being so direct, and the writer so grave, but refuteth also the other example,
which M. Hall does produce out of Socrates, concerning Heliodorus Bishop of
Trica (deposed from his Bishopric, as Nicephorus writes for his wanton
verses) and made to be the first author of single life in the Clergy of
Thessulia, because in the same chapter he has the Many mistakings of Socrates
in one Chapter.
other three untruths above rehearsed, and this may be numbered for the fourth;
and we may ad for the fifth his Paradoxe, when like an honest Protestant he
affirms that fasting is free, and to be used only when we list our selves: so
as I meruail not if he were so great a friend to wives that so little favored
abstinency: and all these untruths being found in this chapter cyted, it may
well be termed a lying chaprer, but howsoever, he being an Heretic and
contradicted in this by S. Hierome, S. Epiphanius, S. Leo, and others deserves
no credit at all, or further refutation.

24. Yet before I leave this lying chapter I must needs adioyne one more which
the same Author makes therein, and M. Hall does also allege, that al which
he has of him may pass together under one view: thus then he makes him to
speak concerning the practice of the East Church: Socrates (says he) thus
flatly writs of those Bishops of his time: for many of them in the place and
function of Bishops beget children of their lawful wives. I grant that
Socrates writes the words, but with three other circumstances which M. Hall
should not have concealed, the one that these Bishops were married before their
ordination, the other that the famous Bishops and Priests did the contrary, so
as these seem to have been some infamous obscure Bishops, and of no account
among the rest: lastly that the other custom was more general in the East,
especially in Thessalia, Macedonia, and Greece, and Nicephorus relating the
same thing almost Nicephor. lib 12. c. 34.
verbatim out of Socrates says, that this custom of deposing Priests, who
after their orders taken, did again know their wives: Thessalonicae, atque in
Macedonia and Graecia omni seruata est: Is observed at Thessalonica, and in
Macedonia, and in all Greece, though both take Greece for that special
Province so properly called, and both in this do err, which I marvel M. Hall
did not mention when they avouch this chastity, although usual, yet to have
been mere arbitrary, and not imposed by any law, and Heliodorus as I have said
to have been the first Author thereof in Thessalia, neither of which can stand
with that which S. Hierome, S. Epiphanius, S. Basil, S. Leo and others have
written: neither is it likely that Heliodorus, who rather would loose his
Bishopric, then recall his lascivious book, would be so eager above the
Heliodorus his wanton book entitled Aethiopia.
rest for the continency of his Clergy: and it cannot but move laughter to see
M. Hall term him in his margent, Author of the Aethiopicke historyes, as if
Heliodorus had written some history of Aethiopia, whereas he only entitled his
wanton work Aethiopia, and wrote no more history thereof, then Sir Phillip
Sidney did of Arcadia, or Apuletus of the Arcadian Nightingale, that sings so
sweetly to the Harp.

25. But not to stand on this, but on the main point in question, that there
was no law for the co^tinency of Clergy men, especially Bishops in Greece, is
clearly refuted by the Fathers alleged, and S. Epiphanins expressly
mentions Epiphan. haeres. 59.
Canons here denied, and the continual use and tradition of the Church might
have suffised for a law, had Canons wanted, which yet in this behalf are very
abundant, and M. Halls sacred Council of Trullu^ does yield us two, Council.
Trullan. Can. 10. and 48.
the 10. and 48. and before that the Council of Ancyra, Neocaesaraea, and
Niece have others as I shall afterward show, and as these manyfold authorityes
do much ouerweigh the single credit of Socrates, so the notable case which
happened in his Nicephor. l. 14. c. 55.
time does clearly conclude the prohibition mentioned to have had a larger
extent, then Thessalia, Macedonia, or Helladian Greece: for thus it happened.
Synesius a famous Philosopher being A notable example of Synesius Bishop of
Ptolemais.
made a Christian, and soon after chosen by the Clergy, and sought for by the
people to be made their Bishop, Theophilus then Patriarch of Alexandria
approving the election, went about to ordeyne him Bishop of Ptolemais, which
the other refused in so vehement manner, as that, omni art and robore, by all
art and force he labored to withstand the ordination, saying that he did
rather desire to dye, then to be made Bishop, and Synes. ep. 11. and 57.
that on his knees he had prayed for that exchange, I mean of his Bishopric
with death, to which end he used all the sleights, excuses, stratagems that he
could devise (as S. Ambrose did upon the like occasion at Millane) to divert
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria from approving his election, or proceeding
further to his ordination: but what think you did he object.

26. Truly many excuses he made, and some of them untrue: for he not only
pretended that he was a new Christian, not yet fully instructed Synes. ad
Euopsium ep 105. See Baron. anno 410.
in the doctrine of his belief, but further that as yet he believed not the
resurrection of the flesh, and other points taught, professed, and acknowledged
by all Christians, that his other studyes, and incombrances would not permit
them to be Bishop, that his want of health Synesius very unwilling to be Bishop.
and disposition of mind made him altogether unfit for that calling, and the
like: but most of all he urged the matter of his marriage, as the proper and
special means of his hinderanc or deliverance rather from that burden, and
the manner of his urging well shows the clear incompossibility he conceived
to be between the one and the other state: for in this earnest manner does he
deliver the same: Mihi and Deus ipse (says he) Loco cita^o.
and leges, ipsaque sacra Theophili manus vxorem dedit etc. Both God himself,
and the laws, and the holy hand of Theophilus has given me a wife: wherefore
I fortell all men, and will have it recorded, that I will not forsake her,
neither as an adulterer will I secretly know her; for the one (to wit to leave
her) stands not with piety; the other (to know her after his Episcopal
ordination) is not lawful: but I will and desire rather to have many honest
children borne of her, and of this the Author and chief dealer in this
election ought not to be ignorant: let our friends Paulus and Dionysius whom I
understand to be chosen by the people for Ambassadors in this matter know so
much. So Synesius, and how can this plea made by so famous a man upon this
occasion at the very time when Socrates lived, and that even in Greece, stand
with the arbitrary chastity here surmized? How can it be that there was no
law, nor Canon of the continent life of Bishops, and yet that this renowned
Philosopher, and most learned man should urge his marriage, and the not
dissolution thereof as an essential impediment utterly vnabling him to be
Bishop? and the thing it self to be unlawful in one of that calling?

27. And in case the matter had been, as Socrates in that lying chapter does
relate it, then had the folly, or rather stupidity of this reason been very
singular, which will the better appear if we apply it to some domestical
example Socrates proved to be insincere.
of our English Superintendents, among whom that is taught for true doctrine,
which Socrates here delivers, and these lewd Bishops (if there were any such)
are said to have practiced: and to single out one amongst many to exemplify in,
let us suppose that M. John King, now by an Equivocal M. King with my Lady his
wife of London.
title surnamed of London, had been unwilling to be made Bishop, and to hinder
his election should have exhibited to his Metropolitan of Canterbury a memorial
concerning the reasons of his refusal, and among the rest he should have stood
stiff on this point, that forsooth he was a married man, that he meant not to
leave his wife, that he intended to have more children by her, and that it
imports much that M. Abbots should not be ignorant of this his resolution,
least perhaps he should unadvisedly by making him Bishop, go about to separate
the poor effeminate man from his wives company, whom he would in no case (for
that he loved her much better then his Bishodricke) forsake,

-- Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Could any forbear laughing to
hear this ridiculous reason, that sees so many married Bishops in the land,
and no prohibition to the contrary? Whereas therefore Synesius so eagerly urged
this point, and our adversaries are ashamed to mention it, we may well discover
a presupposed prohibition to have been extant, and that Socrates, attent Lib.
5. c. 23.
only to the matters of Constantinople, where he was borne, and brought up,
either to have been very ignorant of the customs of other places, if not also
of his own city, where in all the row of these Patriarchs this could not be
specifyed Nicephor. lib. 6. c. vlt.
by any one example, or else, as a Nouatian heretic, for which Nicephorus
taxes him, out of the known lascivious spirit of such men, to have
dissembled, and wilfully contradicted the truth.

28. And these being all the testimonies, that M. Hall brings for the first
four hundred years, and all wide of the mark, whiles we expect that he
should according to promise follow the times and show in all ages succeeding
the marriage of Priests to have been lawful, he makes a foul skip from
Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Athanasius, and the Nicen Council, unto Gratian the
Canonist, and leapeth over well near eight hundred years together, though
after leaving three or four hundred years untouched, he recoile a little
back to the Trullan Council, S. Vdalricke, and others, but with what effect
we shall after see: and in this place instead of the testimonies M. Hall
mistaketh the state of the question and in saying much proves nothing.
of writers, he brings us in an idle bedrole of names, to wit, of such Bishops
as had been once married, which being all granted as they lie, prove nothing
against us, because he shows not that then they used their wives, when they
were Bishops, which is our controversy, and we both say and prove that for ever
they were divorced from them, and lived in perpetual continency apart: this M.
Hall should infringe, and not produce some few married Bishops of the Primitive
Church, few in number, and ordered for the most part after the death of their
wives; or if before, yet were these Bishops dead to them because touching al
coniugal duties they ceased to be their husbands.

29. And this was so known, so confessed, so uncontrolled a truth, that the
first enemy and impugner of Clericall continency, could not deny it, and
therefore S. Hierome boldly said unto him ( Iouinian I mean) Certe confiter is
non posse Hier. l. 1. in Iouin.
esse Episcopum, qui in Episcopatu filios faciat, alioquin si deprehensus
fuerit, non quasi vir tenebitur, sed quasi adulter damnabitur. Doubtless thou
do confess that he cannot be a Bishop who begets children in that state: for
if he be taken in the manner, he shall not be reputed as a husband, but
condemned for an adulterer. So S. Hierome, and so plainly Baro. tom. 1. ann.
58. Basil. ep. 17 in addit.
as you see he pleads for us, that his words refuse all commentary, and
refute M. Halls contradiction and practice. S. Basil writing to one Peragorius
an old Priest rebukes him sharply for taking his Presbiteram, she-priest, or
wife into his house, upon persuasion that his great age would take away all
suspicion of incontinency, and threatens excommunication, unless forthwith he
dismissed her, urging the observance of the Nicen Canon: and if this were not
permitted unto a Priest, much less unto a Bishop.

30. But what need we stand upon threats, where exampls are not wanting of
sharp punishments inflicted on Bishops, either by themselves The penance which
Vrbicus Bishop of Claramo^t did for knowing his wife after that he was made
Bishop.
or others for transgressed continency, and that even with their wives: of
either kind I will allege one, and for the former of a Bishop, who lived with
S. Basil, or soon after called Vrbicus. The story is related by Gregorius
Turonensis, who writes how this man of a Senator before was made of the
Clergy, and after the death of Stremonius (whom he succeeded) Bishop of
Claramont, his wife all this while being alive, but after the Canonical
custom separated from him: Vxorem habens (says the Author) quae iuxta
consuetudinem Ecclesiasticam remota a consortio sacerdotis religiose Greg.
Turonen. l. 1. Histor. Fran. cap. 44.
viuebat: Having a wife which according to the Ecclesiastical custom
religiously lived apart from the company of the Priest: whom as the weaker
vessel the Devil tempting to return to her husband again, so far prevailed,
as she also tempted the Bishop, but not without a Text of Scripture of the
Devils prompting, reuertimini ad alterutrum ne tentet vos Satanas: return to
each other, least Satan tempt you, and with often and importunate recourse,
made him rele^t from that Ecclesiastical vigor, which should have been in
one of his rank and calling, and yield to her desire. But what? did he think
it lawful? did he plead M. Halls impossible necessity? or the posse and nosse
of the old Germans? No such matter: But ad se reuersus, and de perpetrato
scelere condo^ens, acturus poenitentiam Diecaesis suae Monasterium expetit,
ibique cum gemitu and lachrimis quae commiserat diluens ad vrbem propriam est
reuersus: Entering into himself and repenting for the wicked fact he had done,
went to a Monastry of his diocese to do penance, and there with sighs and
tears blotting out the offenses he had committed, returned to his own town.
So this Author.

31. And in this one example two things are very remarkable, and clearly
conclude for us Ecclesiastical men lived apart from their wius and vowed
chastity.
in this behalf: first that the Ecclesiastical custom was, that when any was
made Bishop if he were a married man, his wife was to live apart from him: and
secondly that both were bound to keep perpetual chastity, and never to claim
any more matrimonial duties one of the other: and this later is gathered by
necessary and inevitable deduction: for else why does he call it a wicked fact?
why did he do penance for it? if no prohibition entered, no sin was
committed, they remaining lawful wife and husband as before: which example
alone is so hard a bone for M. Hall to gnaw upon, as he shall never be able to
rid himself handsomely thereof, and being so ancient, shows what wives the
Bishops had and what liberty in using them was allowed in those days: if our
Superintendents and Ministers of England had no more, this controversy had
never been raised, but then were other tims, other laws, other Bishops, other
belief.

32. And least M. Hall object that this penance was voluntary, and proceeded
of the too much scrupulosity of this Prelate: let us see another A notable
example of the penance Canonically imposed on Genebaldus, for knowing his wife
after that he was made Bishop of Laudun.
wherein by Canonical sentence and judicial severity it was enjoined:
Genebaldus Bishop of Laudune, as Hinckmarus Archbishop of Rhemes in the life of
S. Remigius reports, being married unto the Niece of the said Saint, betaking
himself to a religious life left her to whom he was married, and not long
after was made Bishop of Laudune, and consecrated by S. Remigius himself, but
by the frequent recourse of his wife to him, was tempted in the end, yielded,
and knew her carnally again, whom for the attaining of spiritual perfection
he had forsaken: but Gods calls were not wanting to reclaim him, nor he to Gods
calls to return back from his error, wherefore sending for S. Remigius,
casting himself at his feet, with many tears deplored his offense, and that
with such vehemence, as he was checked for his so deep distrust, which seemed
to draw to despair, or to diminish that confidence which all sinners though
never so great ought to have in the abundant mercy of our most loving Redeemer,
if they be truly repentant.

33. Notwithstanding this his grief so excessive, yet did this his
Metropolitan put him to S. Remigius dyed anno 545.
seue repennance, made him a little lodge to lie in, with a bed in manner of a
sepulcher, with very narrow winddowes, a little Oratory or praying place, and
therein shut him up, sealing fast the door for seven years together, in which
obscure den he did lead a most strict and penitential life: in so much as the
same Author who is both grave and ancient relates, that at the end of the
seventh year, when on the Wednesday in the holy week before Easter, he had
watched all the night in Prayer, and with tears bewailed his offense, he was
comforted by an Angel, and advertised that his prayers were heard, his
penance was accepted, and the sin forgiven, and so was delivered from that
prison, and restored again to his Bishopric, living all the residew of his
life, as the Author says, insanctitate and iustitia, in holiness and virtue,
always preaching the mercyes of God, which to himself in such abundant
measure had been showed.

34. What think you of this M. Hall? Was Sanderus l. 1. de Scis. mat. Aug.
it free in these times for Bishops to use their wives as you pretend? If in
these days had been found a lascivious Cra^mer with his Dutch Fraw, whom when
he had used for his harlot a while in his old age, after for his comfort (poor
man) he must needs marry being then Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of
England, or else (not to rake further into the infamous ashes of our first
parents) as Thorneborough of Bristow, with two wives at once, what think you
would they have said? what pe^nance would they have enjoined? with what vigor
and rigor also would they have chastized such Ministers, or rather monsters of
the Clergy? And truly these two examples being so directly against the use of
wives, and M. Hall being not able to bring one to the contrary, wherein it was
allowed as lawful for any Bishop or Priest after holy Orders taken to have
any, let the Reader judge which doctrine and practice best agrees, or
disagreeth most, with the former times, and purer ages (as our Adversaries
sometimes will call them of the first six hundred years) ours or theirs: for
here you have nothing brought for them, but that some Bishops had been married
men, others made Bishops in that state, which is not denied: but that then they
might use their wives M. Hall proves not, and these examples do euince that
they did not, which point out of diverse Counsels, we shall a little after
further declare.

35. And for the catalogue he here makes of married Bishops, it has no more
truth, and Many gross mistakings.
sincerity in it, then the rest: for besides that he cites Authors at random
as Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 29. when as there be there but 26. chapters, and for
things which are not to be found in him, which I pass over as petty faults,
besides this I say to increase the number of his Bishops, he makes S. Basils
Father a Bishop, who was never such, and further says the same of Gabinius
brother of Eutichianus Bishop (says he) of Rome, whereas Gabinius was neither
brother of Eutichianus, nor Bishop of Rome, or of any place else: but having
been once married, and by his wife having had one daughter, to wit S. Susanna
the virgin and Martyr, after the death of his said wife was made Priest, and in
the persecution of Diocletian, the same year with Caius the Pope his brother,
but not the same day, was also martyred. So as here is nothing but mistaking,
and whether I will or not, I see M. Hall must have a sentence of Divorce given
against him out of the Court of Arches, for pleading no better for the marriage
of Clergy men, which he promised in the beginning either to free, or else to
undergo the law, there is no remedy I say, if justice prevail, but that he
must part from his wife, or which I sooner think he will do, must break his
promse with M. VVhiting: for hither to besides untruths, abusing of Authors,
mistaking the question and other impertine^cies nothing has been brought to
free this matter.

36. Now if as I have showed the practice of the Primitive Church, so I would
also set Bellar. l. 1* de Cler* cap. 19. Coccius tom. 2. Thesaur l. 8. art. 6.
down particular testimonies of all the Fathers, both Greek and Latin* I
should ouerwhelme him with multitude; I will remit him only to the places cyted
in the margent, where he shall find store, and that so great, as M. Jewel
confesses in this cause our advantage notorious, saying: Here I grant M.
Harding is like to find some good advantage, as having undoubtedly a great
number of Jewel defense page 164.
Fathers on his side. So he. But my intention is to disprove only what M. Hall
does bring, and not to urge against him: to answer I mean, and not to
dispute: wherefore he having spent all the small store of his authorityes, as
little boys who M. Hall plays small game.
when they have in play lost their money will stake their points, and when all
his gone fall to play at pick straw: even so this man after the Fathers words,
after the examples of their practice, in which both as you see he is foiled,
and has lost all, he comes now to play at pickstraw indeed, and to urge the
palea, or chasse which is in Gratian, as though it were good corn, and out of
that will prove, that as one man begets another, so Popes to have begotten
other Popes, who succeeded them in the Episcopal Sea: and albeit this fond
fiction have been long since refuted for a fable by D. Harding, as it might
have Harding in his detection fol. 237.
ashamed any man ever to have mentioned it any more, yet seeing it is again
brought on the stage, let us see a little what it is. Thus M. Hall delivers it.

37. To omit others (says he) what should I speak of many Bishops of Rome,
whose sons not spurious as now a days, but as Gratian himself Many untruths
in one passage.
witnesses lawfully begot in wedlock, followed their Fathers in the
Pontifical Chair? the reason whereof that Author himself ingenuously
renders: for that marriage was every where lawful to the Clergy before the
prohibition (which must needs be late) and in the Eastern Church to this day
is allowed. What need we more testimonies, or more examples? So M. Hall. In
which words that is the first untruth, that Gratian himself witnesses these
to have been lawfully begotten in wedlock: for he witnesses no such matter:
the witness for this thing is the Palea, or Chasse, the Author whereof is
different from Gratian, and a more modern writer, Baronius in anno 1152. in
fine.
as Baronius truly avouches, and so his credit the less, and in this
particular fancy nothing at all, as now we shall see.

38. The second, that the sons of Popes now adays are spurious, which with
the lie conteynes an injurious slander: for what sons does this man know of
Popes of our days? I fear me in An injurious calumniation.
our days these men will change our old Grammar, and make mentiri of a
Deponent to become a verb Common: for no man can pass the impure tongues and
lying lips of these men without misreporting or villainy. We know what Nicetas
Nietas in vitalgnat. Constant*
writes: Nihil ita capit animos inuidia odieque imbutos quam sinistra de, eo
quem oderis narratio. Nothing so much draws the minds of such as are
possessed with envy and hatred, as a false report of him whom you hate: and so
knowing M. Hall your hatred, we wonder less at this slanderous and shameless
reproach: yea following the rule of S. Bernard, we draw from your wicked words
flowing out of the malignant rancour which abounds in your heart, the contrary
persuasion to that which you pretend: for as he very truly observes: Non
potest bonus non esse qui bonis placet, nec Bernard. epist. 24^.
minus validum argumentum mihi videtur quod bonus sit, si malis e regione
despliceat. He cannot but be good, who contenteth the good, and it is with me
no less forcible an argument, that he is likewise good, if on the other side
he displease those who be bad. So S. Bernard. Wherefore when you charge Popes
with incontinency, all Priests with treasons, and the like, we find that good
men love them the better for your hatred, and in many things we say of you and
yours, as S. Augustine of Herod in respect of the infants he slew in and about
Bethleem: Plus prosuit odio, quam prosuisset obsequio: He did them more good by
his hatred then he could have done by his favor: so in the later accounting
day, these rank breaths patiently endured, will not want their ever enduring
rewards, as he has promised who cannot deceive us, and your persecutions in
the end will crown the sufferers with the stole of immortality.

39. And by this occasion to speak of this present Pope Paulus the fifth, and
that not for received courtesies (for I never in respect of my The singular
continency of this present Pope.
self have had farthing of him) or expected hops (for I pretend nothing) much
less for flattery, (which I abhor, and where I never seek to be beholding,
why should I flatter) but only and merely for truth, and love of the virtue of
purity which I admire, and which in all the course of his life has been in
him most resplendent: We see Princes faults to be more conspicuous then other
men's, by reason of their place, whereby they are made the continual object of
curious eyes, and ordinary subject of licentious tongues, because men soon
espy and easily speak of what Princes do: but such is the integrity of this
worthy Pastor, and has ever been in the whole course of his life, as even
those who yet in other things little affect him, never speak but with
admiration of his chastity, which none more commend then those who most know
the man, and my self have heard diverse marvel at the uniform, constant, and
singular opinion which all men have of his purity of life, and how that even
from his infancy, he never has yet had the least stayne or touch of contrary
imputation, and therefore this malicious aspersion might well have been spared
of spurious sons of the Bishops of Rome in these days, which only concerns
your Superintendents of England, of whose impurity we want nor certain
records, which upon these injurious slanders, we may perhaps be moved to set
forth, which else even for very shame, and credit of our nation, we could have
been contented to conceal.

40. The third untruth, and that a very gross one is, that many Bishops of
Rome lawfully begot in wedlock followed their Fathers in the Pontifical
chair. For in this Chafe in Gratian we find but one named, A notorious lie.
and that in these words: Siluerius Papa filius Silueri^^ piscopi Romae
Siluerius the Pope son of Siluerius the Bishop of Rome: and how then does this
man tell us out of Gratian of many Bishops of Rome following their Fathers in
the Pontifical chair? What Hyperbolicall manner of speech is this to make one
only man, and his son to be many fathers and many sons? does this man heed
what he writes? Nothing less: for such is his stupidity, as looking with
bleare eyes, he not only takes one man for many, but is mistaken also in that
very one, and thinks that to be which is not all: for who ever heard of a
second Siluerius Pope of Rome? What record, or mention is there thereof? Truly
non at all: and suppose there had been, yet would it not have followed, I
trow, that he had begot that child whiles he was either Pope or Priest, which
as I must often tell him is our only question.

41. And the weakness of this citation would have appeared the better, if M.
H^ll had but alleged the Canon it self, and the first Pope named in that
Catalogue, which had been enough to have shamed all: for thus it begins Osius
Papa fuit filius Stephani Subdiaconi, Osius the Pope was son M. Halls strange
Steven the Subdeacon.
of Steven the Subdeacon. But who ever heard of a Pope Osius? let M. Hall read
over all the row of Popes from S. Peter to Paul who now siteth in the chair,
and he shall find no such name, and his Father seems to be some indiuiduum
vagum, Steven a Subdeacon in the air: for of what place, or whose Subdeacon he
was, he says nothing: and it should seem this Subdeacon Steven was a very
charitable man, a friend to orphans, and father of the fatherles: for Deusdedit
the Pope wanting as is should seem a Father, this Steven steppeth in again,
and stands for his Father also. Doubtless he was husband to Pope Joan, that
could beget Popes so fast, and I wish that when any of your frinds ( M. Hall)
print that table again, to put down this particular, which will much grace
the whole tale, and you may if you list the better to please fools, follow
your Father Fox in giving her a picture between her two sons Popes, Osius,
and Deusdedit: but to leave these toys, and to end this matter.

42. Only the Reader must further note, that this Palea to make up a full
number, being as it M. Halls Chasse of small memory.
seems of a short memory tells the same men over twice: for so he deals
with Felix, whom he puts in the third place, who is brought in again under
the name of Felix the third, which addition of number might have been put as
well in the first place, because the thing only agrees unto the third Felix,
and none of the rest: for the Father of the first was Constantius, of the
second Anastasius: and likewise Agapitus named in the fourth place, is numbered
and named again in the last to make up the score: and the Father of Gelasius
the first of that name made Bishop of a lay man, such grave Authors does M.
Hall produce against us: and supposing all were true, yea and that they had
been many, yet he might have had the answer unto them all, where he borrowed
the objection: for the gloss explicateth the Text saying: Omnia ista exempla
intellige de ij etc. Understand al these examples of them, who were borne of
their parents being in the state of lay men, or the lesser Orders, when they
might lawfully use their wives. And what is this to M. Halls purpose? what does
this prove against us?

43. You will say that this Author ingenuously as M. Hall says, does render a
reason heero^, because that marriage was every where lawful to the Clergy
before the prohibition (which must needs be late) and in the Eastern Church to
this day is allowed: and I answer that the gloss as ingenuously altogether,
and much more truly rejects this opinion with an, id vero minime ita esse:
there was no such matter, and in another distinction excuses Gratian The name
of Priest extended by Canon lawyers to all that are in holy orders.
as taking the word Priest in a larger signification, as including all in holy
Orders, and meaning thereby Subdeacons only and not Priests, which acception is
familiar with Canon Lawyers, and founded even in the Canon it self, where it
is said: Si quispiam Sacerdotum, id est Presbyter, Diaconus, vel Subdiaconus
etc. If any of the Priests, that is to say a Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon etc.
in Did. 31. ini^. can. 1. q. 1. Si quispiam. in glossa did. 33. cap. 1. did
81. c. si quispiam Did. 31. Greg. l. 1. epist. 42.
which sense we may grant that the time was when some who were married were
made Subdeacons, which is further confirmed because in another distinction
before, Gratian putting down the title: Nondum erat institutum vt Sacerdotes
continentiam seruarent: It was not yet ordained that Priests should conteyne
from their wives, he presently cyteth a place of S. Gregory, touching
Subdeacons, of which we shall speak in the next Paragraffe.

44. But whatsoever he meant we are not Bellar. l. de script. Eccles. in
Gratian. Baron. in annis 341, 774. 865. 876 964. Posseuin. in apparatu. de
Gratiano id sciendu^ is it eum saepe errasse etc.
bound to follow him as an infallible writer, but may with free liberty reject,
whom so many grave Writers upon diverse occasions have so sharply censured:
that he gathered so many laws decrees, and Canons together, argues great
learning, great labor, in so large a matter and co^ used heap of different
authorities to be mistaken is no marvel: wherein he did well we praise him,
where otherwise we pity the errors, but follow them not: if therefore he were
of opinion as is words seem to sound, that Priests were first permitted to
marry, and were after restayned from that liberty, we follow the gloss and not
the Text, because al Authors of credit mainteyne the contrary: and as for the
commentary Gratian of no infallible authority.
of M. Hall, that this prohibition must needs be very late, I must needs tell
him that it is another untruth, and that also refuted by Gratian himself
throughout all his 31. Distinction, which falsity because I shall touch after
again in due place, I here forbear further to stand upon, and from Gratian
come to the main bull warke and fortress of M. Halls defense: I mean the
sixth Council, as he calls it of Constantinople, in answering of which The
authority of the I rulla^ Synod cyted and most insisted in by M. Hall at large
refuted.
because he relyeth so much thereon, I will be more particular.

45. And for that M. Hall in urging this Council is no less eager in charging
us, then resolute in affirming, that marriage of al Clergy men to be decreed
therein, and the testimony not to be liable to any exception, as of a general
Council as he styles it, I will first touch the authority of this Council,
then what he says for himself against us out of the same, and last of al what
as well by general as prouincial Councels has been defined against the
marriage of Clergy men, by which I hope it shall appear what little cause
there was of triumph before the conquest, and how much our poor adversaries
make of a little, who like petty Pedlars lay open their pynnes and points,
obtruding copper for gold, and pieces of glass for precious stones.

46. This Council then here cyted, is not See Baron. in ann. 692.
the sixth Council, which made no Canons at ^^, but another Conuenticle made
some ten years after the sixth was ended, and that at the procurement of
Justinian the younger, none of the best Emperors, The Council of Trullu^ not
the 6. Council.
God wot, who calling together certain Greek Bishops, made them sit in a
place of his palace called Trullu^, because it was made round and vaulted, and
there to gather Canons out of the fifth and sixth Synodes, which indeed they
pretended to do, but with many erroneous additions of their own, and because it
made the collection out of these two Councels it was called Quinisextum, as
much to say as of the fifth and sixth: the chief suggester of this seditious
meeting was Callinicus Patriarch of Constantinople, and that for extreme hatred
of the Western Church, by which we see, which in many historyes we observe,
that it is easy for a Prince who intends to be naught, to find some one or
other Clergy man of the same disposition to second him. Justinian had his
Callinicus, the fourth Henry Emperor his Benno, and our King Henry the 8. his
Crammer, and others the like.

47. And further we see all the circumstances occurring in this Council, to
demonstrate it rather to have been a seditious conspiracy then The Trullan
Synod no lawful Council but a seditious conspiracy.
any lawful sinod: for i^ had no form of a Council, no legates of the Pope, no
inuiting of the Latin Bishops, no authority but imperial, no lawful
convocation, and in fine did out of arrogant presumption that which appertayned
not unto it to do: for if in the Council of Chalcedon after the last session
was ended, when presently Anatolius to further the better without contradiction
his ambitious claim over the other Patriarchs (the Patriarch of Alexandria
Dioscorus who should have withstood him being then newly deposed) gathered the
Greek Bishops to make another Decree, the same, as not done in Council, was
annulled: what is to be thought of this meeting, when not one day, but ten
years after a general Council was ended, these men who were but one part, and
that the least and less sincere, without calling the rest, or being lawfully
called themselves, laid hands on two general Counsels at once, cut out
Canons, chopped, changed, added and altered at their pleasures?

48. And how general this Council was and how generally accepted even in the
Greek Church where it was held, Anastasius Bibliothecarius Anastasius
Bibliothecarius.
will testify in his dedicatory epistle unto John the eight before the seventh
Council which he translated into Latin, where after he had said that all these
Canons were unknown in the Latin Church, he adds: Sed nec in caeterarum
Patriarchalium sedium (licet Graeca vtantur lingua) reperiuntur archtuis etc.
Nor yet are they found in the treasuries, or places where public charters or
records are kept of the other Patriarchall Seas: The Trullan Synod not admitted
by the other Patriarks.
because none of these Patriarks did promulgate, consent, or was present when
they were set forth, notwithstanding the Grecians report those patriarchs to
have promulgated them, but this they cannot prove by any certain arguments. So
Anastasius. So as the credit and authority of this Council was confined like
our Catholics in England to their five miles, I mean within very narrow
bounds, and was even in the very birth like a base brat branded in the forehead
with shame, both of the matter and makers.

49. And this is further euicted by two grave Authors of that age, whereof one,
to wit Venerable Bede was then living, and Paulus Diaconus the other, not long
after, who both write of it as of It was presently condemned by Pope Sergius.
a scismaticall and no true Council, and that Sergius the Pope condemned it,
for which cause the furious Emperor sent Zacharias his Ambassador to Rome, to
bring the Pope prisoner to Constantinople, which had been effected if the
soldiers of Rauenna had not resisted and forced the Ambassador not without
shame, and fear also of his life to return back without him: Hic beatae Beda
l. de sex aetat. in lustin. iuniore.
memoriae Pontificem Romanae Ecclesia Sergium etc. Justinian the younger (says
Bid) commanded Sergius Bishop of Rome of blessed memory, to be carried to
Constantinople, because he would not favor and subcribe unto his erring
Council ( erraticae Synodo) which he had caused there to be made, sending for
that purpose Zacharias his chief captain; but the garryson of the City of
Rauenna, and soldiers of the places adjoining, rejected the wicked command of
the Prince, and made the said Zachary not without reproach and injuries to
recoyle. So S. Bid. And the same in the same words Paulus Diaconus: and so far
was Sergius from approving it, as he says of him that Justinian The rare
constancy of Pope Sergius.
in another embassage before that now recounted had sent unto the Pope, as to
the head of all Priests the said Council written out in six tomes to be
subscribed unto: Qui beatissimus Pontifex penitus eidem Iustiniano Augusto non
acquieuit etc. Which most holy Pope yielded not a jot to the Emperor
Justinian, neither would he vouchsafe to take or read them Moreover he rejected
them as of no force, and cast them away, choosing rather to dye, then to yield
to the errors of these noueltyes. So Paulus Diaconus, who also recounteth how
the same Emperor taking afterward a contrary resolution, sent two of his
Metropolitans to Rome to Pope John to confirm or correct these Canons, but
neither the one or other was done.

50. In fine after much wrestling in this matter, for Constantin the Pope, with
Gregory who succeeded him (then a private man) went to Constantinople,
disputed, answered, refelled the errors, Gods just revenge upon Iustinia^ the
Emperor and Callinicus the Patriarch.
declared the truth, when notwithstanding the Emperor still persisted, God
showed at last which part pleased him best: for the first Author or instigatour
Callinicus had both his eyes pulled out by the Emperors command, and was
banished to Rome where he knew full well what his intertainement would be, and
the Emperor himself having first lost his nose, then his Empire, last of all
lost also his life, having first his son Tiberius butchered, and then his own
head cut off by one of his rebel soldiers, and sent to Philippus his mortal
enemy and successor in the Empire: so as we see just revenge sooner or later
ouertakes them who are to busy in laying their hands on the sacred Arc of
Ecclesiastical affairs, and out of their arrogance will teach and direct
those of whom they are themselves to be taught and directed: for in matters of
this nature Bishops or Pastors have always taught Kings, and no Christian
Kings in the Primitive Church have prescribed unto Bishops, unless such alone as
with their scepters have violently over swayde all reason and Religion
together.

51. This is the true narration of this bastard Council, which of purpose I
have exactly promised, and that both for the better perspicuity of the thing it
self, and my answers which depend thereon, as also for that you may the better
know the vain humors of our Adversaries, and how they can face out a matter
when they intend to deceive, or are not able to show what they would pretend to
prove: for here M. Hall tells us what this Counsel says: To the confusion of
all replyers, in spite of all contradiction, that Singular impudency in facing
out matters upon so small proof.
the Catholics seeing themselves pressed with so flat a decree, confirmed by
authority of Emperors, as would abide no denial etc. And again: that this
one authority is enough to weigh down an hundred petty Conuenticles, and many
legions (if there had been many) of private contradictions. And what will you
say to this pedlar, who thus pratleth of his small wares? If he had any
argument against us as he has none, how would he vaunt? do these men speak
out of conscience or knowledge, trow you, or else ad populum phaleras, to
entertain time, and deceive their Readers? in my judgment this is impudency in
the superlatiue degree, and for this alone he deserves for ever to be
discredited; seeing he could not but know what we had answered to this Synod,
and and that himself was not able thereunto to make any reply, but this his
tallent of shameless dealing will better appear in all the other particulers,
which I will now in order discuss.

52. First then he says that this was a general Council, and so he still
terms it the sixth general Council, but this we have now showed The Trullan
Conuenticle no general Council.
to be false: for it was neither the sixth, nor yet general, as not called by
the Bishop of Rome, but by him who had no authority, no Bishop, Priest, or
Deacon sent from the Sea Apostolic was there, which in no general Council
lawfully assembled was ever wanting, none of the rest of the Patriarchs of the
East were present, none of the West invited, and the Canons by supreme
authority at their first appearance condemned, which things cannot agree to a
true general Council: and if it were Provincial (as M. Hall shall never make
more of it if he make so much) then can it not make laws to bind the whole
Church, but that particular province wherein it was made, and if these also by
higher power be condemned, as in this case it happens, then does it not bind
that neither, or any place else, but is to be refused of all, as was the
Council of Carthage called by S. Cyprian, which allowed the rebaptizing of
infa^ts which had been christened by heretics, which M. Hall might as well
have urged against us, as this of Constantinople, and better also for that S.
Cyprian is of a greater authority, more antiquity, sanctity and learning, then
Callinicus was: for he dyed a renowned Martyr, and the other neither Martyr,
nor Confessor, nor scant an honest man.

53. Nor is M. Hall contented with that title of general falsely and unjustly
as Binnius notes usurped by these schismatic Bishops, but further will have
it to be a sacred Council* for so he The Trullan Synod no sacred Council but
a profane assembly.
says: But this sacred Council does not only universally approve this
practice etc. which point before upon another occasion I have spoken of, when I
showed these men more to care for their wives, then for any conscience or
Religion at all, which there I did only insinuate, and here as in the proper
place I mean more fully to prosecute, and to show that in this Council
nothing is directly decreed for M. Hall and his, but that Priests may sometimes
use their wives, all other Canons being either of things indifferent, or for us
against him, or else for some error against us both, which if I show it will
take away al doubt in this matter, and prove that in this man's opinion the only
granting of a wise is sufficient to make a Council, that has defined never so
many Canon. 4. Carnal knowledge of Religious women punished by the Trullan
Council.
other things against him to be both general and sacred.

54. First then in the fourth Canon it is defined, that if any Clergy man, have
carnally known a Religious woman (as Luther, Bucer, and others did) that he be
deposed: which article if M. Hall will insist on his own grounds he cannot
defend, because he calls the vows of Religious filthy vows, and will have
their observance to inuolue an impossible necessity: and no doubt should he be
permitted to preach in any Monastery of Nuns, his first Sermon should be to
persuade them to set open the doors, run their ways, and take husbands: so as
in this the sacred Council stands more I trow for us then him, yea quite
condemns his first parents, who allowed no virgins, but deflowred them: and
how in our Country this new Gospel favors Monasteryes here mentioned
appears by this, that the first corner stone thereof was laid by King Henry
in the overthrow of all Monasteryes of England, and the same spirit still
remains in all the children and posterity of these parents.

55. In the 32. Canon it is commanded that Canon 32.
water be mingled with the wine in the sacrifice and that in this form of
words: Quoniam ad nostram Mingling of wine and water in the sacrifice.
cognitionem peruenit etc. because we are given to understand that in the
country of the Armenians they offer only wine on the holy table, not mingling
water therewith who celebrate the unbloody sacrifice, alleging the Doctor of
the Church John Chrysostom, saying thus in his commentary upon S. Matthew:
Where Christ after his Resurrection drank not water but wine, pulling up by
the root another wicked heresy, because there were many who used water alone
in the mysteries etc. And a little after* Wherefore because the wicked heresy of
water defenders was ancient, who for wine used only water in the proper
sacrifice, this divine man refelling this wicked succession of that heresy, and
showing it to be directly contrary to the Apostolical tradition, he confirmed
that which is now said, and because in his own Church where he was Bishop, he
appointed, when the unbloody sacrifice was offered, water to be mingled with
the wine, proving this doctrine out of the precious sovereign blood, and water
which issued from our Saviors side, and was shed for the life of the world,
and redemption of sinners.

56. And then further showing the same out of the practice and ordination of S.
James, the Apostle in Jerusalem, of S. Basil in Caesarea, and express mention
thereof in the 3. Council of Carthage (in which was S. Augustine) all these I
say mentioning the sacrifice and mingling of water with the wine in the same,
this sacred Council makes this cautelous, resolute, and full decree: Si quis
ergo Episcopus vel Presbyter non secundu^ traditum ab Apostolis ordinem facit
etc. If therefore any Bishop or Priest observe not the order delivered by the
Apostles, and mingling water with wine so offer the undefiled sacrifice, let
him be deposed, as proposing the Mystery imperfectly and foolishly, and
innouating those things which An unbloody sacrifice mingling of water with wine
at Mass, Apostollcall traditions granted by the Council of Trullum.
have been delivered to the Church. So there. Which words I have cyted more
at large, for that they make so directly for us against our Adversaries, and
that in three special points in Controversy.

57. For here we have an unbloody sacrifice, not Metaphorical, which only the
Protestants allow, of prayers and praising God, but real and that in bread and
wine: that there is water to be mingled with the wine, which they also both in
doctrine and practice deny, and both the one and the other are proved by
Apostolical tradition, which with M. Hall makes no proof and for all this we
have the authority of another Council of S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, so as
this one Canon of this sacred Synod allows us as I said three Catholic
truths, and has nothing for Ministers, but that they are not defenders of
water alone without wine in their communions, with which heresy no man who
knows well their natures will ever charge them: for they are so far from that
error, as they will taste as little water as they may, and drink nothing but
of the pure grape without any other mixture to allay the heat: but let us see
some few more Canons.

58. I omit the very next Canon which To^^ura Cl^ricalis.
warns all Priests to have their hair cut, and that none unless he be cut
after the Priestly manner, nisi is Sacerdotali tonsura vsus sit, be suffered to
preach: so that what authority soever M. Hall M. Halls modesty.
give unto the decrees, and make them sacred, yet the decreers must needs in
his judgment be all sh^u^linges, as it pleases the modest man to term all
Catholic Priests and Religious persons: but for that this more concerns
manners and Ecclesiastical policy or government then faith, I will no further
mention it, as neither the 49. Canon, wherein it is decreed, that no
Monasteryes be ever made secular houses, or given over to be inhabited by
secular men, which if it were in use in England, would overthrow many gentlemen
who are in possession (but by what right will be seen at the last day) of Abbey
lands and houses: for to omit other reasons, here they have a severe decree of
a sacred Council, if M. Hall may be credited against them, which puts them all
under the penal laws of the Canons made in that behalf.

59. In the 73. Canon the worship of the Can. 73.
Cross is delivered, and we are taught to ad^^^ the same, the words are
perspicuous and effectual, and The worship of the Cross acknowledged
bear this sense, that by reason it is the banner of our salvation, and
instrument whereby we were delivered from the sal we had in our first parents
that therefore, and mente, and sermon, and sensu adorationem ci tribuentes
etc. in mind, speech, and affection adoring the same etc. and for this cause al
crosses be forbidden to be made on the ground, or pauement, least by the
passengers feet walking thereon, victoriae tropheam iniuria assiciatur, the
trophey of our victory be abused. Is this observed in England? do you ministers
teach the people for reverence of our Saviors passion to make the Cross in no
place, but where it may be worshipped? and not on the ground, least it be
trodden under foot? or else do you pull them down from the Churches where they
were worshipped, and tread them under your feet? you shall not need to answer,
for your facts do speak, and show you to be as perfect Iconoclasts as ever
lived, and enemies of these Crosses, whereof these Bishops were so great
friends: and further where you hold the worship of the Cross Idolatry, how can
that Counsel be sacred with you which so plainly commands it? I see the love
you bear your wife, M. Hall, is a potent passion and far transports you;
seeing it forces you to call that Synod sacred which defends Idolatry.

60. And as in this Canon they reverence Can. 30
the Cross, so with no less respect do they speak of all other holy images in
the 82. calling them The use of holy images approved.
venerabilium imaginum picturas, the pictures of venerable images: and
forbidding the painting of Christ according to the shadows of the old law,
they give order how he is to be described; which care never troubles your
thoughts who as much reverence the picture of the Devil, as of Jesus Christ:
for you deny all reverence to either, and although in shops or chambers you
permit them both to be painted, yet within your Churches Christ his picture is
as much excluded as the image of Beelzebub, and sometimes it happens that in
walls and windows we see our Saviors and his Saints pictures defaced, razed,
and broken in pieces, whiles the picture of the other stands entire and
untouched, which practice in those times were unknown when images were
worshipped by Christians, and image breakers condemned for heretics, which
happened in the very next general Council held after this Trullan co^uenticle,
as all the world does know.

61. Of the use of holy chrisme, what better testimony can be required then the
95. Canon? Can. 9^. and 101.
and of the real presence in the 101. where in the Communion the faithful are
said to receive immaculatum corpus, the immaculate body, Holy chrisme, and
real presence.
and before in the 28. where a Priest entangled with unlawful marriage is
forbidden ne Christi corpus alijs distribuat, that he distribute not the body
of Christ to others by communicating them, and the power of remitting and
retayning sins in the last, where the Priest is said to have received power of
binding and loosing, and is willed to consider the quality of the sin, and
sinner, that thereby he may be the better able to help him: all which points in
our English Synagogue are paradoxes, and either repugnant to the Word, or
wanting sufficient warrant of truth, but in this Council they were not doubted
of, but are all and each of them acknowledged and approved as Catholic and
sincere.

62. Besides these Canons which by us are acknowledged, and impugned by our
Ministers, there is one Canon which we do both condemn, Can. 76. Forbidding of
meats which have blood in them.
to wit the 76. where al meat that has blood in it is forbidden, according to
the old decree in the first Council that ever was called in the Apostles
times, wherein it was defined that Christians should absteyne a suffocato and
sanguine, from strangled things and blood, which being but a temporal law made
to exercise the obedience of the Gentiles, and support the weakness of the Jews
for a time, until they were fully united, and the law of Moses had yielded to
the Gospel of Christ, and all legal ceremonies ceased, these men as if we
were still under that yoke, forbid the eating of blood, which yet the
Protestants do eat, and feed also their servants with black puddings, though
in Suffolk some are found to be more scrupulous, as is reported in the Book of
the profane schism of the Brownists.

63. I may seem to want compassion thus to crush one so far under, as that he
can neither go, stand, nor creep, and indeed I could be contented with these
Canons alleged, which show the sanctity of this Trullan Synod so much
magnifyed and extolled, as you have heard, to show some pity to this poor
man, but that ere I end, I must perforce cope closer with him, and that in the
very matter controuerted: which combat requirs the better attention, for that
M. Hall adventures far, and offers if he be cast to be esteemed as faythles:
and I offer no less if I ouerbeare him not therein to undergo the same
in^^my, so as now we both must stand to our tackling, or else loose all our
credit. M. Hall as a M. Hall (...) at his word.
champion casting up his Gantlet, with more courage then wit, makes this
challenge. If any Protestant Church (says he) in Christendom can make a more
peremptory, more full and absolute, more cautelous de^rce for the marriage of
Ecclesiastical persons, let me be condemned as faithles. So he: a bold
proffer, and I take him at his word, and will prove him faithles by this very
Council, yea this very Canon which he does cite, or else I give him leave to
bestow that infamous title on my self.

64. And to the end there be no mistaking in the terms: I understand by a
full and absolute What is to be proved against M. Hall to prove him faithles.
decree, such a decree as comprizeth whatsoever belongs to all the things in
controversy in that matter wherein it is made: for if it should touch one only
part, and not another, it were neither full nor absolute, but rather defective
and limited: so as when M. Hall says, that this decree of Vrullum is full and
absolute for the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons, and that no Protestant
Church in Christendom can make one more full, it must necessarily follow that
it absolutely and fully concludes all this matter of the marriage of Clergy men
in most ample manner, and that if it be defective in any one point, it is not
so full and absolute, but that a fuller and more absolute may be made by
Protestants if they should meet together to make one, as in King Edwards days
they did: this he must understand, or else he understands not himself, and
this if I disprove, I prove him faythles: I mean if I show this Canon not to
be so full, but a more full and cautelous may be made, as supplying that
wherein this is wanting, which is very much of that which this man pretends
as now you shall see.

65. And for the better decision of this point and understanding of this Canon,
it will be necessary What in general i^ decreed in the Trullan Council
touching the marriage of Priests and Clergy men.
to know what touching the marriage of Clergy men has been delivered in this
Council, all which may be reduced to four heads, whereof the first concerns
their wives, the rest themselves. Touching the first in the 4. Canon one
restrictio^ is made, that if any Bishop, Priest, Deacon, Subdeacon etc. shall
have carnal copulation with a Religious woman, that he be deposed: if any lay
man, that he be separated, and the reason is, vt qui Christi sponsae vitium
attulerit: because he has deflowred the spouse of Christ. And in the next
precedent Canon is made another, wherein it is defyned, that whosoever has
twice been married, or has had a concubine, can neither be Bishop, Priest, or
Deacon, and likewise that none can be Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, who have
married a widow, or one put from her husband: and truly if marriages be free
for Clergy men without all restraint, and the Council have made so full a
decree, as none can make a fuller, why may they not have as much liberty
herein as other men have, and marry toties quoties their wives shall dye and
they have list to take others? And if Ecclesiastical men by this Council have
an express prohibition to the contrary, then I infer that they are restrained:
for if this prohibition were not, the decree of their marriage were more full,
more peremptory, more absolute, as he has more full peremptory and absolute
liberty who is free to go where he will, then he who is forbidden many places
where else willingly he would go: this needs no more proof, then this other:
here it is midnight, ergo here it is not noone day.

66. The second point defyned is in the 6. Canon, where according to the
constitutions of the Apostles it is determined: Vt deinceps nulli penitus None
permitted to marry after ordination.
hypodiacono, vel Diacono, vel Presbytero post sui ordinationem contrahere
liceat etc. That hereafter it be not lawful for any Subdeacon, Deacon, or
Priest to marry after his ordination, and if he presume to do it, let him be
deposed: but if any who are to be Clergy men will by the law of matrimony have
a wife, let him marry before he be eitheir Subdeacon, Deaco^, or Priest. So
there, which particulerly touches M. Hall if he have any orders: for I
understand that he was Minister first and married after, which here to such as
be in holy orders is absolutely forbidden, and thereupon it follows that such
as were made Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons of married men after the death of
their wives, were for eeuer debarred from marrying again.

67. The third thing decreed is, that which Bishops forbidden to use their wiue
which they had before their ordination.
before I mentioned out of the 10. and 48. Canons, in both which Bishops are
forbidden not only to use their wives, but also to dwell with them, yea their
wives are commanded to live in a Monastery, which must be procul ab Episcopi
habitatione exstructum, built far off from the house of the Bishop, where the
said Bishops are commanded to provide for them: and that if any do the contrary
he be deposed.

68. The 4. and last thing is, that which M. Hall has painted out in his
margent, setting it The Counsel allowed married men to be made Priests, but
with some restriction.
down at full length, and it is only the main proof of his epistle, of which
he so much braggeth and vaunteth as you have heard, and says that it is as
full and absolute a decree as any Protestant Church can make, or else he will be
condemned as faithles: and to the end he may not complain that I extenuate or
diminish the force of his argument by following another translation, as less
favoring him, although in the thing it self I find no difference in any
edition: I will take the Text out of his own book, truly turned out of Greek
into Latin (as he says) by Kemnitius, though I need not to take all for truth,
which M. Hall (whom presently by his own testimony I shall condemn for
faithles) proposes for such. Thus then it runs.

69. Quoniam in Romana Ecclesia loco Canonis, seu Can. 13.
decreti traditum esse cognouimus etc. For that we have known it delivered in
the Roman Church by way of Canon, or decree, that such Deacons or Priests as
are to be esteemed worthy of ordering profess for the time to come never to
know their wives, we following the old Canon of the Apostolical, sincere,
exquisite, and orderly constitution, will have the lawful coniugal cohabitation
of holy men (or men in holy Orders) even from this day hereafter to be valid
and firm no ways dissoluing their conjunction or copulation with their own
wives: therefore if any one be found worthy etc. he is not to be prohibited to
ascend to this degree, for that he dwells with his lawful wife, neither let
it be demanded of him in the time of his ordering, or be compelled that he
would or ought to abstayn from the lawful use of his own wife. So he out of
the Council. And this is that rare jewel he has found in scraping the
dunghill of this condemned Synod.

70. All these things then being defyned in this Council, let us now see
whether this one decree be so full, absolute, peremptory, and cautelous, No
Bishop named in the Trullan Counsels Canon cyted by M. Hall.
as that no Protestant Church in Christendom can make a more full, for the
marriage of Ecclesiastical persons: for first no Bishop is here named, and by
other Canons they are by name excluded. Again here is no grant for Priests
to marry after their ordination, nor yet is that recalled of having but one
wife, or debarring such as have married widows etc. and cannot this in your
opinion M. Hall be more full, more absolute? I hope you will grant Bishops to
be Ecclesiastical men, and likewise Priests, who are ordered out of wedlock,
as you were your self, if that disorderly promotion of yours may have that
title, and then upon that concession I make this argument, or demonstration
rather to conclude you faithles: No Canon is so full and absolute for the
marriage of Ecclesiastical persons as a fuller cannot be made which allows not
all Bishops (the chiefest of the Clergy) and all single Priests leave to marry,
and such as may marry, not to take what wives they last: but the Canon cyted by
M. Hall is such a one, ergo it may be more Two most evident demo^strations.
full and absolute. And then further: If that Canon may be more full and
absolute, then is M. Hall proved faythles with his own consent, but it may be
more full and absolute: for it may grant marriage as well to Bishops, as single
Priests, and liberty to take what wives they list, ergo M. Hall is faythles. I
see not what other answer he can give heereunto, then concedo totum: for it is
in perfect form and figure.

71. And in my judgment none can sufficiently admire the rare impudency of
these men who use so much boasting where they find so little occasion: for
whereas of four things determined in this Trullan Council touching these
marriages, three of them make directly for us; he as though all stood full on
his side, offers very desperately to be condemned as faithles, if any
Protestant Church can make a fuller decree then that which he cyteth, when as
not only they can make, but de facto have made in England, as now I will show,
where Bishops and Ministers, even in their ministry marry and remarry, and
toti in hoc sunt, which dealing of his, is as much as if some ridiculous
soldier should vantingly brag of his horse, to be the best and swiftest in the
land, and offer to pawn his life on any race he should run, and yet that
horse of his should be found to have but one leg, and that also lame, Bedlam
bragging.
on which he could neither go, nor stand; who would not think such a one more
fit for bedlam then any sober company? and truly so it fares here with M.
Hall, who pawneth all his credit (which to an honest man is more dear then his
life) if any Protestant Church can make a more full decree for Ecclesiastical
men's marriages, when as yet in four points decreed by the Counsel touching
that matter, three are flat against him, and the fourth also does want of full
measure as is evident.

72. For after the words cyted before by M. Hall, it follows in the same
Canon, Scimus and qui The use of wives forbidden to Priests whiles they did
serve in the Church.
Carthagine conuenerunt etc. we know, as the Fathers also who assembled at
Carthage, having care of the gravity and honesty of the Clergy have said that
Subdeacons who touch the holy mysteryes, as also Deacons, and Priests in their
turns, abstain from their wives, and to the end that we may likewise observe
the custom delivered by the Apostles, and observed in all antiquity (knowing
the time for every thing) let this especially be kept in fasting and prayer:
for they who ^ssist the divine altar in the time they touch these sacred
things, must altogether be continent (or abstain from their wives) that they
may obtain that of God, which they humbly demand. So in this Canon, at the
making whereof it seems these married Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests to have
been ordered for the want that was of others in supplying the offices of the
Church, and so were not bound always, but at certain time and by course to
yield their attendance, at which time they were as you see debarred from their
wives: and if they had always been employed, their wives had for ever been
forbidden, and so the grant here given is not so full as it should be for M
Hall, and his, who will endure no such restrictiue limitation.

73. But when it pleased God whose judgments are unsearchable to permit our
country to make a revolt from the known Catholic Church, and to submit the
same to the malediction Isa. 3.
mentioned in the Prophet: Dabopueros Prin cipes, and esseminati dominabuntur
eis. I will give them children for their princes, and effeminate companions The
decree for the marriage of Clergy men under King Edward the 6. far more full
absolute, and peremptory then tha which was made in the Trullan Synod.
shall rule over them: then I say under a young child, an effeminate
Metropolitan, and a seely simple Protector the fullnes of this lewd liberty
did enter, and the reins were let loose to all licentious life: I mean in the
time of K. Edward the sixth, when Only faith covered all sins, satisfied for
all villainy, and supplied all good works, and when there was no mirth among
Ministers but in marriage; then I say in the first parliament (albeit King Henry
the 8. by the same authority some 7. years before had made it to be enacted,
that Priests after the order of priesthood by the law of God might not marry)
it was decreed that whosoever should be afterward, or were already of the
Clergy, that the same person or persons should be from thence forth admitted,
and allowed to have his or their Anno 1. Eduard. cap. 12.
Clergy, although they or any of them had been diverse or sundry times married
to any single woman, or to any widow or widows, or to two wives or more, any
law, statute, or usage to the contrary whatsouer. So the Parliament. And this is
more full, absolute, and peremptory, then the Canon of Trullum as you see: for
here that is granted, which is there denied: there was a limitation to one
wife, a prohibition from a widow; here hell gate it set wide open, and leave
given to the Clergy to take more wives, or widows, no less then for any
other men, without any limitation or prohibition at all.

74. But the statute albeit fuller then the Canon, yet comes short of another
made in the 2. and 3. years of the same King, when at one blow they chopped
off all these points together which either in the Trullan, or other Counsels
whatsoever had been defined against them: for in despite of all the world
besides, contrary to to the whole course of the Christian Church, General
Counsels, and continual practice of all times and places, especially of our
own country thus it was determined, and set down for a law. Be it eneacted by
our Soueraign Lord the King with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal etc. that all and every law and laws, Canons, constitutions, and
ordinances heertofor made by authority of man only which does prohibit, or
forbid marriage to any Ecclesiastical A most full, peremptory and absolute
decree.
or spiritual person, or persons of what estate, condition, or degree they be,
or by what name or names soever they be called, which by Gods law may lawfully
marry in all and every article, branch, and sentence concerning only the
prohibition for the marriage of the persons aforesaid, shallbe utterly void,
and of none effect. And that all manner of forfeatures, payns, penaltyes,
crimes, or actions which were in the said laws contained, and of the same did
follow concerning the prohibition for the marriage of the persons aforesaid, be
clearly and utterly void, and of none effect, to all intents, constructions,
and purposes, as well concerning marriages heretofore made by any
Ecclesiastical or spiritual persons aforesaid, as also such which shallbe
duly and lawfully had, celebrated, and made betwixt the persons which by the
law of God may lawfully marry. So there.

75. And now who so will parallel this parliament with M. Halls sacred Council
of Trullum, The decrees of the Counsel and parlame^t paralelled.
shall soon see how short the one comes of the other, the Synod I mean of
the Statute: for that in the former is only leave given to Priests to keep
their wives which they had married before their ordination, and in the
Parliament is an absolute leave given to all, and that whether they were married
before or after. In that Council Bishops were to put their wives far from
them, here they are permitted to keep them at home, or if they had none, to
seek and marry them: there the second marriage, or else the taking of a widow
made men incapable of holy orders: here no multitude of wives or widows do
hinder at all: there to have known a Nun was sacrilege, here if she list to
marry, there is open freedom and no prohibition: there (even in M. Halls
Canon) Subdeacons, Deacons, and Priests that did serve by course in the Church,
where to forbear their wives for the time of their attendance: here is no
more restraint for that time then for any other: there it was a constitution of
the Apostles not to marry after they were in holy orders; here where all things
went out of order, Gods law is to the contrary: in fine this reuerseth all that
was ordained in that Council against the Protestants, and therefore in the
behalf of the marriage of their Clergy men, this is without comparison far
more full, and absolute then that.

76. And as for peremptorines, that was here very singular: for what could be
more peremptory The Parliament in K. Edwards days very peremptory and resolute.
then for a few Sectaryes of a little Island, to sit upon all Counsels, Canons,
Constitutions, and all Ecclesiastical laws made and allowed by the whole
Christian Church (a few loose Grecians excepted) and without all control
practiced for so many ages together, and to proclaim them all inualide and of
none effect? and further to call them, though defyned again and again in
never so many Counsels, General, Provincial, National as after shallbe
showed, to be the Laws, Canons, Constitutions, and ordinances made by
authority of man only, as if the authority of the whole Church were but the
authority of man which is subject to error, and had not the warrant of Christ
for her direction and infalibility: and as though that Parliament had had more
authority then of a man only, to wit, either Angelical or Divine, when as many
therein assembled were not Angels, God wot, and the chief dealers in this
broken matter were scant honest men: and as for divine authority it was enough
for them to name the law of God, which righly understood made as much for them,
as the laws or our land do for thieves, murderers, and other malefactors.

77. Which desperate attempt was somewhat Jack Straw in the time of K. Richard
the second.
like the proceeding of Jack Straw, VVat Tiler, John Bull etc. in the time of
Richard the 2. when without authority they sat in Council to suppress all the
nobility, Bishops, Canons etc to kill all the lawyers, and burn the laws of
the realm, and of the Clergy to leave none alive but only begging Friars: for
as that attempt of subjects was seditious and treasonable, because done against
the authority, dignity, person of the King, and laws of the land, so was this
of ^ few schismatic Bishops, and other lay men, who still have been striving
to meddle in Ecclesiastical affairs* ^o less rebellious, schismatical and
heretical against the Church of Christ: for they who sat in this Council, had
no authority over the Church, but were subject to her laws as members thereof,
and such Pastors as were present in the same, were subordinate to others of
higher calling, without whose consent, authority, and approbation they could
not conclude any Ecclesiastical new law prejudicial to the former, more then
Jack Straw and his consorts against the Civil: much less could they
overthrow a law by diverse Synods so often confirmed and still in use from the
first planting of the The Parliament only a civil Court.
faith in the Island; that also being no tribunal to decide Ecclesiastical,
but temporal and Civil, for which only all national Parlaments are summoned:
a Parliament may confirm by decree what the Bishops in Synod have defyned for
the better execution of Ecclesiastical laws, but make laws, or define matters
of that nature, being only a Civil Court, it cannot.

78. Wherefore to end this matter, having showed the large difference that is
between these two different decrees, which is as much as I did undertake to do
against M. Hall, or else to be cast in this cause, it rests now that out of
these premises and his own grant I conclud against him, and say as our
Savior said to the wicked servant in the Gospel, ex ore tuo te iudico serve
nequam: I judge thee wicked servant out of thine own mouth: for thus if you
remember he said. If any Protestant Church in Christendom can make a more M.
Hall concluded to be faithles.
peremptory, more full, and absolute, more cautelous decree (then the 13. of
the Trullan Synod) for the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons, let me be
cond(...)ed as saythles: to which mayor, or first proposition set down in his
own words, I add this minor: bue the statutes of Edward sixth are more
peremptory, more full, more absolute, more cautelous (for they take away all
scruple and remorse) then that decree: the conclusion w^ll necessarily follow,
ergo he is to be condemned as faythles, or else he must show wherein this
syllogism, either for matter, form, or figure does fail, which he shall never
be able to do.

79. The Apostle amongst other notes of an heretic puts this for one, that
he is proprio iudicio Tit. 3.
condemnatus, condemned by his own judgment, or a S. Cyprian in diverse places
conform Heretics condemned by themselves.
to the Greek reads a semetipso, is condemned by himself, which may very
fitly be applied to M. H^ll, who is taken as you see in his own turn, and
condemned by himself, and that either to want honesty, if King Edwards laws
be more full, absolute etc. then the other which he alleges, or else to be
deuoyd of all shame, if he stand in denial of that which every one perceaueth
to be so manifest, and notorious. He shall never be able so to direct his bark,
though he were never so skillfull a Pilot, as to pass between this Scylla and
Carybdis without falling into the gulf and perishing in the froth of his own
precipitate folly: and in case this of King Edward were not full enough (as it
is too full and runs over) yet may the Protestant Churches devise a fuller,
and so he no less then now remain faithles, witles, and shameless.

80. And as though he meant to be faithles, witles, and shameless indeed,
presently after the words of his rash and rechles promise, he faceth out so
palpable an untruth, as in all the writing^ I have read of Protestants, or all
the lies they have made, which are both gross and many, I never to my
knowledge have seen any de^(...)ered with such bravery or lusty bragging as
this: so as if any list to know the man's special talle^t, or the lively
character of a shameless writer, he shall not need to seek for any other
example: A slaunting lie conjoined with singular impudency.
for speaking of this his sacred Canon which sanctified in his opinion the
whole Council thus he ruffleth. A place I grant (says he) miserably handled
by our adversaries, and because they cannot blemish it enough, indignely turn
it out of the Counsels: what dare not impudency do? against all evidences of
Greek copyes, against their own Gratian, against pleas of antiquity? this is
the readiest way, whom they cannot answer to burn, what they cannot shift
off to blot out, and to cut the knot which they cannot untie. So M. Hall. And
who would not think that it were impossible, that one so earnest, in such riot
of words, with an exclamation of what dares not impudency do? in so direct,
so eager, so confident, so resolute a charge, to use such villainy (pardon me if
I be earnest for this his behavior is so base, as I know not what other title
to give) as to report a mere untruth, and charge us with a lie?

81. For let this man tell us if he can, how we have blemished, how terne, how
burnt, how cut off, how blotted out, against Greek copyes, Gratian, and All
editions of the Trullan Council have M. Halls Canon.
pleas of antiquity, this Canon? when the same as it is cyted by Gratian, as it
is in Greek copyes, as alleged by authority, is as full, as entier, yea as
aduantagiously set down for our Adversaries in our Counsels, as is the
translation of Kemnitius which he has given us in his own marge^t? and of my
denial, because it is not set down with such bravery of words, be not a
sufficient answer to his affirmative slanderous charge, let the Reader but see
these editions which are all that at this present I have by me, to wit of
Seuerinus Binnius, which of all the rest is most ample, in his third ^ome set
forth in the year 1606. the edition of Venice printed by Dominicus Nicolinus,
in the year 1585. the Roman edition printed in the Popes Vatican 1612. and
before all these, the edition of Paris printed by Audoenus Paruus in the year
1555* and if all these editions have it (and I suppose the like of others which
have printed that Synod) how do we cut it out? how do we tear, burn, or
blemish it? and why does this man so tragically exclaim and declaime against
us for that which we neither do nor pretend?

82. And so far we are from burning, or tearing out this Canon, that in case
all the Cou^cells that are extant in the world were burnt and torn, yet this
Canon would be found both in Gratian, Baronius, Bellarmine, and others: and for
pleas of antiquity it is set down by wicked Photius in his epistle to Pope
Nicolas at large, which is extant in Baronius: and for the Greek copye, that
he shall also find printed in the Vatican Baron. to. 10. anno 863. Nicolai 6.
edition, where every page having two columns, one is the Greek, and the
other is the Latin: and to go about to cut, burn, blemish, tear, or deface a
Canon cyted, urged, answered by so many Authors were ridiculous, and
impossible: and this man should have proved that we tear, and burn as he
says this Canon indignely, and not instead of proving which he What dares not
M. Halls impudency do?
could not do, cry out like a Bedlam: what dare not impudency do? For we know
that impudency will do any thing, if it meet with one that will be as impudent
as M. Hall: for then it will even charge us, as he does, most vauntingly with
doing that which we do not, but the contrary, as in this particular instance I
have clearly declared.

83. I am sorry to use this sharpnes, were it not that I lance such a festred
so are, as lenitiues would but hurt, and corrasiues must cure: let M. Hall be
less impudent, and he shall find me more respective: I love his person, but
hate his heresies, and will not see my cause, which is common with all
Catholics betrayed, or Heretics not to be spared where their dealing is to
impudent.
truth by painted falsehood to be misprized: and if he forget all modesty so
far, as upon a false and injurious charge to tax us also with impudency, and
that even when he shows it himself in the highest degree, he must have
patience if we use so vehement a reiection. Catulus the Roman Orator earnestly
pleading, was demanded by his Adversary, cur latras Catule? why do thou bark
Catulus? and he answered, quia lupum video, because I see a wolf. And if I for
the same cause bark more then I would for such intolerable dealing, where
truth is trampled under foot, and insolency advanced, I deem it better to be
too earnest, then with too much mildnes to incur the check of the Prophet,
Canes muti non valentes Isa. 56.
latrare: be like dumb dogs not able to bark, or encounter with the wolf,
where his behavior is so unmasked and open, as here it is. I hope this
warning will make him more wary, and if he write any more to see that it be
with such characters, as need not make the writer to blush, his friends to
shame, and adversaries to disgrace him: but to draw to an end of this Council.

84. After this charge (which now to his shame we have discharged) it follows
in his epistle. The Romanists in the next age (says he) were somewhat more
equal, who seeing themselves pressed with so flat a decree, confirmed by
authority of Emperors, as would abide no denial, began to distinguish upon
the point, limiting this liberty only to the Eastern Church and granting that
all the Clergy of the East might marry, not theirs. So Pope Steven the second
freely confesses. The tradition, says he, of Answered by Bellarmine cap. 21..
ad 5. dico.
the Eastern Church is otherwise then that of the Roman Church: for their
Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons are married, but in this Church or the Western
no one of the Clergy from the Subdeacon to the Bishop has leave to marry. So
M. Hall. And then after his manner vauntingly says: Liberally, but not enough:
if he yield this why not more? with other such interrogatories as I shall after
set down, when I have refuted the former passage.

85. Where first to pretermit the false interpretation of Deacons or
Subdeacons, as if they were not different orders, because now in England there
are no Subdeacons, and the Latin word atque does not signify or, but and, and
so he should have said Deacons, and Subdeacons, and not have confounded them
together as he does: besides this peccadillo, there are three other main
untruths in these words, and all the ground whereon it relyeth is false. For
where he says: that Catholics saw themselves pressed with so flat a decree
The first untruth in M. Hals words.
confirmed by authority of Emperors, as would abide no denial, we have before
made it abide a denial, and to be so far from a flat decree of any Council
which binds all to embrace it, as that hitherto it has never been received
in that kind for flat or round, and that by authority of such as then lived, as
S. Bid, or not long after, as Paulus Diaconus, and Anastasius: and for the
confirmation of Emperors, the matter is small, unless it had first had another
confirmation which could not be gotten, but was flatly denied. Counsels take
not their authority from Emperors, but Emperors second Councels with their
power, that all under them may obey what they who are in spiritual authority
over them have decreed: and M. Halls Emperors in particular, to wit Justinian
the younger, Philippicus etc. being such as they were, we will not much envy (
M. Hall) their confirmations, whose lives and actions were such, as they were
staynes to Christianity, and their deaths so disasterous, as well shows by
whose heavy hand and indignation they were chastized.

86. And if M. Hall will have all Counsels confirmed by Emperors to be
lawful, and their decrees Canonical, the^ let him embrace another Council of
Constantinople, called soon after the Touching the confirmation of Counsels
by Emperors.
former by Philippicus Bardanes the Emperor, wherein the heresy of the
Monothelites (who will have our Savior not to have had any humane will) was
defyned, and the true sixth Synod of Constantinople condemned: and as well may
M. Hall plead for himself out of this Council as of the former: for in this
was the authority of the Emperor who called, who confirmed it, there was John
Patriarch of Constantinople, and far more Bishops then in the Trullan
Conuenticle: wherefore in the doctrine of this man, the decree is flat,
confirmed by the authority of the Emperors, admits no denial. The Monothelite
heretics will thank you, M. Hall, and remain your debtour. How much the
Church has gotten by Imperial Synods, too lamentable experience has taught
us as well in these, as in diverse others, whereof one was within few years
after this of Philippicus, called by Leo the Iconoclast, who with our
Protestants condemned, defaced, razed, pulled down, abused and burned all
sacred images of our Savior, and his Saints: and (to omit others in the later
times as the Conuenticles of Henry the fourth against Gregory the seventh
etc.) it is not the authority of Emperors when we speak of Counsels which
makes them so firm as they can abide no denial, but the promise and
assistance of the holy Ghost with the Pastors of the Church, without any
reference to the civil magistrate, or else the first Apostolical Council had
been void and of none effect, when notwithstanding they said, visum est
Spiritui sancto and Act. 15.
nobis: it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us: the scepter in this must yield
to the myter, the sheep to the Pastors, the civil Magistrate to the
Ecclesiastical, Kings and Princes unto Bishops and Prelates. The causes are
different, and the Courts diverse. The second untruth is that Pope Steven
granted that the Clergy of the East might marry, which after shall in due place
be refuted.

87. The last untruth is touching Steven the seconds decree: for whereas in
Gratian there is The untruth of M. Halls touching Pope Steven.
no number of second, or third, or any else, M. Hall (as none are more bold then
such as know least) without more ado resolutly affirms it to be the second
Steven, but truth so reclaimes against it, or rather ouerbeareth it so
violently, as it cannot subsist: for the second Steven living but three
Gratian. distin. 31. can. aliter.
days Pope, or four at the most, had no leisure to call a Council or make
decrees: and that this was done in Council, Gratian witnesses, who says that
he made the decree in a Council held in the Lateran Church, and three days
being too short a time even for the very intimation, the falsehood of this
charge does refute it self, and demonstratiuely show this decree not to have
been made by this Steven.

88. If M. Hall to help himself will take the third for the second as some do,
who by reason of the short life of the second Steven, do not number him among
the Popes, that will also as little avail him: for in all his time there was
no Council held in the Lateran Church, or any where else: for such were the
troubles of those tempestuous times, Aistulphui raging in the West, and the
furious firebrands of the Iconoclasts or image-breakers, being in perpetual
care and travel from one place to another, to compose all seditious tumults,
and to cancel the decree of another Council gathered by the Emperors What
manner of Councels heretics do bring for confirmation of their heresies.
authority, to wit Constantinus (your friend M. Hall though scant sweet) for
suppressing of images, and called the seventh Oecumenicall, but with as good
reason as your Trulla^ was called the sixth, for no other Patriarch was
present, none of the West invited, no Legate of the Popes, or authority
required, no law or form of a true Counsel observed, al went by force, fury,
and faction, and such commonly ^re the Counsels you bring for confirmation of
your heresy.

89. I confess that Steven the 4. held there a Council, but that was only
called for the deposing of the false Pope Constantine, and deposing of such as
were ordered by him in that schism, and preventing the like inconvenience of
chosing a lay man to be Pope again: for such was this Constantine chosen by
popular tumult, without all order or form of Canonical election, by the
seditious and tyrannical procurement of his brother Toto then in Rome, whose
power and violence at that time none could withstand; and last of all it
disannulled the decree of the false Synod of Constantinople against holy
images: but of Priests wives, either in the East or West, there is no mention,
nor yet in any Author of these tymesym. When M. Hall is more particular in his
charge, he shall have a more particular answer: in the mean time I say with
Bellarmin, that Canon perhaps to be of no authority, but an error of the
collectours, and that for the reasons alleged, and the cause is poorly
defended that is grounded on the errors or mistakings of others.

90. And in case we granted all the words which M. Hall brings out of this
Canon, nothing Gratians Canon nothing makes for M. Hall.
would follow thereof against us, but that the Greek Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons were married, which is to be understood before their ordination, as
the Gloss expounds, and the Council as before you have heard did define:
and it is ridiculous to say, as M. Hall does, that then they began to
distinguish: for whereas the Grecians de sacto had in this separated themselves
from the Latin Church, had made Counsels, or rather Conuenticles of their
own, and were borne out in all by the sword of their Emperors, where the fact
and practice was so different, as all might see it with their eyes, little need
there was that any should invent a distinction or limitation of liberty, as
this man dreameth: and the Canon he cyteth out of Gratian (if it be a Canon) is
but a declaration of the fact (which was so conspicuous as could not be denied)
showing only what was don in the East Church what not permitted in the West.

91. And whereas M. Hall auerreth, that this Canon granted that all the Clergy
of the East M. Halls want of Logic.
might marry, but not of the West, his gloss foully corrupts the Text, and
conteyneth an evident untruth: for neither all the Clergy, nor any of the
Clergy could marry in the Eastern Church: and this man seems to be of very
gross capacity that will have these two propositions to be equipollent, or to
bear the same sense; Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons in the Greek Church are
married, and this; all the Clergy of the East may marry: for first Priests,
Deacons, and Subdeacons make not all the Clergy, or else Bishops, Archbishops,
Patriarchs, Metropolitans shall not be Clergy men, which yet are the chiefest
of that rank, and to whom all the other as inferiors to their betters are
subordinate and depend, which yet are debarred from marriage. Again, that
Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons in Greece were then married is clear, but it
is no less clear that they were not married when they were Priests, Deacons,
It was lawful for married men in Greece to be made Priests, but never lawful
for Priests to marry.
and Subdeacons, but before, as the Council declared: for although it were
permitted that married men might be made Priests, yet was it forbidden that
Priests should be made married men, and the same of Deacons, and Subdeacons:
and so I conclude with M Hall, that not only all the Clergy of Greece might not
marry, but that no Clergy man in holy orders (for such only are specially so
termed) might marry at all. I hope M. Hall that your brayns are not so far
spent, but that if you pause a while, and scratch your head where it does not
itch, you will conceive this difference, that married men may be preferred to
the Clergy, but not Clergy men permitted to marry: the first by the Trullan
Council was granted, the other never allowed: and therefore these words of
yours, all the Clergy of the East might marry, may be crowned with a silver
whet-stone.

92. By that which I have said unto this objection of Pope Steuens Canon, that
it is of no authority, as having no certain Author, that it makes not
against us, in case it were true that M. Halls collections thereon are false,
you may well of your self without any further discourse be able to judge what
regard is to be had to his vaunting demands and interrogations, multiplied
without cause: for after the words of Pope Steven, thus he writes: Liberally,
but not enough: and if he yield this, why not more? shall it be lawful in the
East, which in the West is not? do the Ghospells or laws of equity Many idle
words.
alter according to the four corners of the world? does God make difference
between Greece and England? if it be lawful, why not every where? if
unlawful, why is it done any where? so then you see we differ not from the
Church in this, but from the Romish. So M. Hall. And by this you may perceive
the vein of the man, and his Thrasonical boasting: he would feign be crowing,
and if he had but any advantage, there should need no other trump to sound out
his praises, conquests, and triumphs then his own pen: but all this noise will
prove but the sound of anempty tubb, and powder shot without bullet, a froth I
mean of idle words, and childish clamours as full of vanity, as deuoyd of wit.

93. If he yield this, says this wise man, why not more? but of what yielding
does he dream? in the words cyted in Steven the seconds name* I find no
yielding nor resisting, no fighting nor vanquishing, no battle nor conquest,
there it is only related what the Grecians did upon their false Council, what
liberty they usurped, in so much as their Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons were
married, but that it was not permitted in the Latin Church: and what is that
more which this Epistler would have him to yield? he answers very wisely by
another demand: shall it be lawful in the ^ast, which in the West is not? I
answer him yes: and further to gratify the man, do add that one and the self
same thing at one time may be unlawful, and yet lawful at another. And if he
know not this his parishioners are troubled with a seely Minister, who have him
for their Curate: though this in the mean time I must tell him, that Steven
says nothing of this fact of the Grecians, whether it be lawful or unlawful:
and therefore M. Hall frames collectio^s out of his fingers ends, without any
ground or grant of his authors: I know he stretches far and makes him to
say, that they might marry, but he says not so much, but only that they were
married, whether well or il, he defyneth not. But to come to our case.

94. He cannot be ignorant what our Savior answered the Pharisees touching the
question propounded about putting away their Matt. 29.
wives in S. Matthews Gospel, which they urged to show that it was lawful to
marry another, even during the life of the former, so there had been a bill of
divorce made between them, our Savior replied: Moses ad duritiam cordis
vestri permisit vobis dimittere vxores vestras, ab initio autem non fuitsic.
Moses permitted you for the hardness of Even the law of God did bind at one
time and not at another.
your heart to dismiss your wives, but from the beginning it was not so: as if
he had said: in the beginning every one was bound to one wife, and so long it
was not lawful to have more, but in the end Moses permitted divorces, and
then upon his permission it was lawful: if here some light head should dally,
as M. Hall does, and ask, what, is Gods law changed by times? shall that be
lawful to day, which yesterday was unlawful? if it be Gods law, it endures
for ever, if it be abrogated by a contrary permission, it cannot be the law of
God, and so forth, all were idle babbling, because God being the Author of his
own law may alter, change, dispose, and abrogate the same at his pleasure.

95. So in this present question the single life of Priests being an
ecclesiastical law, though Marriage of the Greek Priests why permitted.
Apostolical and still in use from their times, to save the Greek Church from
further revolt, being so carnally given, and so forward to embrace all
heresies, as the Arrian, Macedonian, Nestorian, Iutichian, Iconoclasts,
Monothelites, and diverse others begun and nourished amongst them, the Church to
stay them in the rest, permitted them with the former restrictions to take
wives before their ordination: for in Ecclesiastical laws the Church can
dispense if they contain matter of fact and not of faith or belief, as this
does, and that only ad duritiam cordis little, for the hardness of their heart:
for here no other reason entered, because as now we shall show, ab initio non
suit sic, it was not so from the beginning, even in the Greek Church, and
therefore the collection of this man is fond and ridiculous, when after these
brags he says: that until the time of that Council the marriage of Clergy
men was free, he might as well have concluded thus: in King Edward the sixth his
time it was enacted by Parliament that all Clergy men and Religious might marry,
ergo before that time there was never any prohibition to the contrary: a noble
argument and worthy of the maker.

96. And of this it does proceed, that this thing is lawful in the East, and
not in the West, because that the permission is granted to that Church and not
to the other: and every man living under the laws of one certain Church, A
thing may be lawful in one place which is not in another.
some permission by the whole may be granted to that part, which is not
granted to the rest, as in France for some Saturdayes after Christmas it is
permitted to eat flesh, which permission is not in other Countries: and
therefore in that Country I may lawfully eat, and in others I should sin
mortally by eating, because I do violate the contrary precept which forbids me
to eat and there does bind, unless sickness or some other like necessityes do
excuse me. But says this seely man: Do the Ghospells or laws of equity alter
according to the four corners of the world? No, gentle Sir, nor is your
marriage, God be praised, yet become the Gospel: for not one of the four
Evangelists, or any other give testimony for your wives; neither have you
brought any one place out of any one of them to that purpose, which in such
penury of yours had not been Omitted, if any could have been sound to favor
you, as I suppose.

97. And for laws of equity, who sees not The law of the marriage of Clergy
men was no law of equity but of great iniquity.
that different Kingdoms have also their different statuts and manner of
proceeding, either in criminal or civil causes? And if under that title you
include the law of marriage of Priests, it was so far from all equity, as I
never knew any made with more iniquity, or wherein one Parliament did more fight
with another, and both so tossed the law of God as a tennis ball, now banding
it to one part, now beating it back again to the other, as in this; and the
other five articles decreed by Kin^ Henry the eight together with this in the
year 1540. though repealed by his son King Edward in the very first year of
his reign.

98. For in King Henryes Statute it is said that the King in his own person
came into the Court of Parliament, and there like a Prince of most high
prudence, and no less learning, opened and declared many things of high
learning and great knowledge touching six articles, for which godly study,
pain, and travel the whole Parliament, that is the Lords spiritual, temporal,
and commons, thought themselves bound to thank the King, and entreat that they
might be enacted by authority of the Parliament, as they were: the first was the
real presence by transubstantiation: The stature of si^ Articles anno 1540.
the second that the Communion under both kinds by the law of God was not
necessary. 3. that Priests after their orders taken might not marry by the same
law. 4. that vows of chastity ought to be observed by the same law. 5. that
private Masses by the same law also were to be allowed. 6. that auriculer
confession was to be retained. These were then out of the high learning and
great knowledge of K. Henry determined, and severe penaltyes imposed upon the
transgressors.

99. There had passed but six whole years, when the same Metropolitan,
Prelates, and noble men, in the same place under a King, who by reason of his
young age, and feeble constitution, A notable example of our Parlame^tal
inconstancy.
could not be of high prudence or learning, and his uncle the Protector, who
also for want of both prudence and learning, could declare nothing of any great
judgment or knowledge, the same was reuersed, and made voy^, and of no effect,
with this similitude premised to the decree which well suited the matter in
hand: that as in a tempest or winter one course, or ^arment is convenient, in
calm or warm weather a more liberal race, or lighter Fine similitudes.
garment, both may and ought to be used etc. So these good Taylers could shape
out new fashions of says for all times, in the rough winter of K. Henryes
reign one form was cut out; in the calm summer of King Edward another: in
King Henryes time the best course was to go fair and soft, -- Velut qui Iunonis
sacra ferrent, Horace.
To flatter the King, to admire every thing he said, as proceeding from high
learning, and great knowledge, to thank him for his godly study, pain and
travel, to desire that all might be enacted which he had devised: but under
his son having gotten the reins into their own hands, the times were
altered, and they meant to run a more liberal race, to give the bridle to al
loose liberty, and heretical nouelty, and therefore they began to laugh at
Kings Henryes pains, and learning, and to esteem him not only a very fool,
but the wickedest man alive, in forcing them, and in them all the land to
subscribe, embrace, acknowledge, and reverence that to be according to the law
of God, which in their judgments they thought to be quite opposite, contrary,
and repugnant to that law, and so by that Parliament were declared to be
repealed, utterly deuoyd, and of none effect.

100. And not to digress from this particular controversy, some six years
after the former Parliament, notwithstanding that K. Henry had declared many
things of high learning and great knowledge, touching the marriages of Priests,
and had delivered in plain terms that Priests after the order of Priesthood
received might not marry by Gods law: yet did his son by another act declare,
that all Priests or Ecclesiastical Gods law in two parlame^ts made to affirm
two contradictoryes.
persons by the law of God might lawfully marry: and all contrary decrees are
repealed and made void. And what will you say to such Parlame^ts? one says
that by the law of God Priests may not marry; another, that by the law of God
it is lawful for them to marry: and yet this law of God is but one law, and
cannot be repugnant to it self: and it may be noted how far Cranmer dispensed
with his own conscience, dissembled Cra^mers deep dissimulation.
in Religion, and preuaricated in this K. Henryes Parliament, who having his own
Trull, and desiring openly to enjoy her, yet for fear of the King, not only
kept her close, but so also collogued with the rest, or rather above the rest,
being the chiefest in place and authority in that Court under the King, as he
not only commended his high learning and knowledge, but did also crouch and
creep to have that confirmed which in his heart he did abhor, and upon the
first occasion offered did utterly condemn. I see he could make his garment to
serve the time indeed, his horse to travel according to the weather. O
constant Prelate, and worthy founder of our new English Gospel!

101. These then, M. Hall, being the first Taylers that framed this wedding
garment of yours, and tanke riders who taught you to run this liberal race,
to let loose the reins to all carnal delights, and yet still to keep the name
of spiritual Pastors, you have little cause to call it the law of equity,
which in the first making condemned the makers of so great inconstancy, and
faythles leuity, as you have heard: but let us follow you further in your
demands. Does God, say you, make difference between Greece and England?
Ecclesiastical and civil laws may be altered by such as are in suprem
authority in the one and other causes.
I answer you that he does, and if they make an ill law in Greece, you are not
bound to follow it in England, but to eschew and avoid it: or in case they be
dispensed in some Ecclesiastical law by supreme Ecclesiastical authority,
propter duritiam cordis eorum, and to avoid a further inconvenience, it will
not presently follow that you or yours in England may do the same: as our
Sovereign in England can exempt a man from any law in particular, and it will
not I hope presently follow, that all other subjects may claim the same
priuiledg: again if his Majesty make some favorable and beneficial law for
all his subjects in general, which the Emperor in Bohemia would not allow;
were it not a wise question to demand: Does God make difference between King
James and the Emperor Matthias? between Prage and London* England England and
Bohemia? These things M. Hall which depend on Ecclesiastical or Civil laws,
may be dispensed or altered when the occasions are very urgent, by them who
have supreme authority in the one and other Courts.

102. Your last demand well bewrays your ignoaance, and shows that you want
the first grounds or principles of Philosophy, or else you would never have
framed so impertinent a M. Hall ignorant demand.
question: If it be lawful say you, why not every where? if unlawful, why is
it done any where? I see now that we must take heed, for this argument cornu
ferit, yet shall I with your leave show it to be much weaker then you take it
for, yea to be altogether loose and impertinent, and it may be answered in one
word, that such things as of their own nature are intrinsecally evil, as to
kill, steal, lie, slander and the like, are unlawful in all times, places and
persons: but this is not so in other things, which being of their own nature
and intrinsecall essence indifferent, are made unlawful by some positive law
to the contrary: and that either divine, as is working on the Saboth day in the
old law, marriag of more wives at once, and the like, which therefore are
unlawful because they are prohibited, but yet so as that they may by God the
maker of them be dispensed in, as not ill of their own intrinsecall nature,
but as they have annexed his prohibition and restraint: or Ecclesiastical, as
of breaking of fasts commanded, of neglecting feasts, or omitting the ordinary
ceremonies, rites, or ordinances of the Church: for as all men are children of
this Mother, so they ought to obey her precepts, and no private authority can
infringe which by so general and public is imposed: or else finally Civil,
for if the King command that none bear arms in the night time, that they
carry not corn to other Countries, that they transpose no cloth, or the
like; these things of their own nature free, are now made necessary by the
civil command of the Prince: and as he may dispense in the one, so may the
supreme spiritual Pastor in the other: the one as chiefest in civil, the
other in Ecclesiastical causes.

103. This difference M. Hall not observing (as he is dull in distinguishing)
confounds and M. Halls confuse hudling of things together.
huddleth up things together, and supposes either all things to be of their
own nature good or evil, or commanded a like by God for all to observe, which
is not so: for some things are left to the temporal Magistrate, others to the
spiritual to dispose: and as Kings are to be obeyed according to S. Peter, so
also the Church according to our Savior: and as to disobey the King in civil
Matt. 28.
matters is capital, so it is schismatic not to obey the Church: and as he
is held a traitor who rebelleth against the King, so he an Heathen or Publican
who will not hear the Church: and hence it comes, that as one King is of
equal authority with another, and so may recall any edict, proclamation,
decree, or iniunction made by his predecessors, so likewise may one supreme
Pastor, when urging necessity shall so require revoke, or repeal any
Ecclesiastical law made before his time, and that either in all, or in part as
the nature of the thing shall require, or a General Council determine, or he
and his Council shall think expedient: and this prohibition of the marriage
of Priests being of this nature, I mean Ecclesiastical, it may be dispensed
for one place, and not for another, and so it may also be lawful or unlawful
in one place, and not in the other, as the prohibition or dispensation in
different places does either bind or excuse. The title which M. Hall gives us
of Romish Church I pass over as not worthy of reflection, this poor man must
needs show his nature and be contemptuous in all things.

104. At length he comes to the conclusion of this his objection out of the
Trullan Counsel, which is that it gives leave to all to marry: This sacred
Council (says he) does not only universally approve this practice (with pain
of deposition to the gainesayers) but ^uouches it for a decree Apostolical.
Judge now whether this one authority be not enough to weigh* down a hundred
petty Conuenticles, and many legions (if there had been many) of private
contradictions: thus for seven hundred years you find nothing but open
freedom. So he. Which words and others the like, when I read in this man, it
seems to me that a problematicall question may be made, whether he be able to
speak the truth or not, for hitherto he has The cause why M. Hall does
multiply so many untruths.
still been taken tardy: and here in these words are two or three untruths
and these radiant: but not to bring that into dispute (for perhaps if he had a
better cause he would be able by better means to defend it) I rather do
interpret these his frailtyes to proceed from the necessity of the matter,
then from any impossibility in the man himself.

105. We have before showed this Council not to be sacred, and the approuance
not so universal as M. Hall makes it: for whereas in the very beginning they
oppose themselves to the Latin Church, and make decrees only for the Church of
Greece, it cannot be said to be universal for all, which only includes but one
part with the exception mentioned of the other: neither could a particular
Patriarch make a law in a National Synod to repeal another in use under his
equal, over whom he had no jurisdiction, much less to recall the laws of
his Superior, and disallow their practice: for if par in parem non habet
potestatem, much less had the Patriarcke of Constantinople over the Bishops of
Rome, who (I mean the Patriarcke) was always his inferior, and subordinate
unto him, and so in the very Canon it is said: Nos antiquum Canonem etc. we
observing the ancient Canon etc. So as they restrain this liberty to that
Church and themselves alone, without any determination prejudicial to the
other, which had not been if they had universally without distinction of
places or persons allowed this freedom. The Trullan Council never permitted
that all the Clergy of the East mig^t marry.


106. But when you talk of universally approving this practice, which practice
do you mean M. Hall? is it that you mentioned a little before, that all the
Clergy of the East might marry? if so (and so you must take it, or else you
talk at random) then again I must tell you that this your Synod wholly
disalloweth that custom, and permits no Clergy man to marry: for although
it permitted some married men to ascend so high as to be made Priest, yet it
never permitted any Clergy man to stoop so low, as to be made a husband,
neither did it ever avouch that baseness in any Clergy man to be a decree
Apostolical, and therefore if with better attention you read that Council, you
shall find it to be as I say, and moreover the pain of deposition to the
gainsayers to be only against such as denied the use of their wives to Priests
married before their ordinatio^* and out of the time excepted by the Synod.

107. Neither does the name of an Apostolical decree, where there is nothing
else but the name only, much trouble us: for if the decree mentioned be taken in
the right sense, it makes not against us: if in the sense which M. Hall
pretends it overthrows the Council, and so he pulls down with one hand,
what he had built up with the other: for if for any decree the Counsel grant
the carnal knowledge of wives to be Apostolical, it is for that which M. Hall
cyted before, that no Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, shall put The Counsel of
Trullum gainsayth the Apostles constitutions even in that thing on which it
would seem to rely.
away his wife upon pretense of Religion, upon pain of deposition: if this be
the decree, then I demand why the Council decrees against the same? For here
Bishops are allowed their wives, which in the Trullan Synod by two decrees are
debarred from them: either M. Hall will allow the decree, and then he
condemns his sacred Council that desines against it, or will stick to the
Council, and then he must condemn the decree not to be Apostolical, as
containing in it an evident error condemned by so sacred, so general a
Council.

108. Moreover if he follow the Council, whereas the Bishops assembled
therefore allowed The Trullan Council overthrown by it self in the matter
Priests marriage.
married Priests to enjoy their wives because of the Apostolical decree, and
yet condemn that very decree in the first branch of Bishops, and decree
against it, what ground was this to build upon, and to contradict the Roman
Church? and what drowsy decree was this which is grounded on that which is by
the very Council it self contradicted? can one and the self same Canon of the
Apostles be a warrant for the wives of Priests, and not Canonical for the
wives of Bishops, when as in your opinion the one no less the^ the other is
alike to be allowed without any distinction, limitation, or exception at all? O
how feeble is falsehood that thus falls of it self, and is overthrown by the
same grounds on which it would seem to stand. M. Halls chief ground is this
Synod, the warrant for the Synods definition is the Apostles Canon, and the
Apostles Canon overthrows the Synod: this is the maze or labyrinth of error,
and heerunto all M. Halls florishes, brags, and assurances of the weight of
this authority ouerbearing a hundred Conuenticles, and many legions of private
contradictions are brought: for this heavy weight is as light as a fether,
contradicts it self, was condemned by the Church, and more hurts then
helps the cause for the which it is brought.

109. And truly the triumphant conclusion of the authority of this seditious
assembly that it weighs down a hundred petty conuenticles, and many legions
of private contradictions, is worthy of M. Halls wit and learning, and
resembles that Poets praise of Epicurus the Philosopher in Lactantius, Lactant.
l. 3. divine. Instit. cap. 17.


-- Hic ille est
Qui genus humanum ingenio superauit, and omnes
Restinxit stellas, exortus vt aetherius sol.
This is he who for wit surpassed all other men and obscured the stars, rising
like the heavenly sun: by reason of which immoderate and undeserved
Immoderate praises where there was no desert or cause.
praise that author says that he could never read the verses without laughter:
Non de Socrate aut Platone hoc dicebat qui velut Reges habentur Philosophorum,
sed de homine quo sano and vigente nullus aeger ineptius delirauit: itaque
Poeta inanissimus leonis laudibus murem non ornauit, sed obruit and obtriuit.
He said not this of Socrates or Plato, who are esteemed the Princes or chiefest
of the Philosophers, but of a man then whom being sound and in health, no
sick man ever more foolishly doted: therefore the sottish Poet did not so much
set forth a mouse with a lions praise, as ouerwhelme and crush him in pieces.
So he, and so say I no less fittly of M. Hall then he of Lucretius, that he
commends not the Council of Niece, Constantinople the first, Ephesine, or of
Chalcedon, or such like general Councels, but a bastard Conuenticle not worth
the naming, and with the false titles of universal, sacred, authority weighing
down a hundred conuenticles, and legions of private contradictions, with the
like, he covers but a mouse under a lions skin, and a a skar-crow of clouts
with Achilles armor.

110. But the man if I mistake him not has a further fetch in this matter, and
will I fear me show us a trick of legier-du-maine, and by crafty conueyance
cast that off by contempt, The reason why M. Hall gives so great undeserved
praise unto the Trullan Conuenticle.
which he saw that by learning he could not answer: for having perused in
Bellarmine so many Counsels cyted of all kingdoms, so many authorityes in him
and Coccius, for clearing this controversy, as euinced the Catholic truth,
refelled his nouelty, and faithfully delivered the practice of all times,
places, authors, Churches, Synods; this man says of his bastard Council
alone: Judge now whether this one authority be not enough to weigh down a
hundred petty conuenticles, and many legions (if there had been many) of
private contradictions, so as with this Ge^tleman al Councels you shall cite
against him, though never so ancient, al Fathers though never so grave, all
historyes though never so authentical shallbe but petty conuenticles and
private contradictions: and this counterfeit Trullan Council shallbe general,
sacred, and of authority to weigh them all down whatsoever.

111. This is a short maistery, and easy conquest by giving more authority then
it deserves unto one to make riddance of all the rest, and to accept nothing
for proof, but that your self list to allow. M. Hall in this saw the Fathers
and Counsels to be against him, and that for one broken M. Hall only praises
them who can pleasure him, and dispraiseth the rest.
allegation of the Trullan Conuenticle, we could bring a whole army of more
ancient, more authentical records, and for three Fathers of the four first
hundred years, though not one of all the three make for him, the testimonies
of all the Fathers of these ages, which he saw at length laid down in Coccius
and Bellarmine, but durst not behold them, nor yet the answers to his own
arguments in the Cardinal; only he prayseth such as himself produces, and
sets them out with honorable titles, as Paphnutius a virgin, famous for
holiness, famous for miracles: S. Athanasius a witness past exception, who may
serve for a thousand historyes till his age: S. Huldericus B. of Auspurge both
learned and vehement etc. but for all the rest that be against him, they make
but private contradictions, and so if they bring his cause no help, he casts
the^ all off with a Writ of,

-- Nil tecum attuleris ibis Homere for as. 112. Neither is M. Hall the first
author of this invention, but scholar rather and follower of M. John Jewel,
who made and unmade Fathers M. Jewels making and vnmaking of the Fathers.
at his pleasure, as they stood for or against him: in citing once the
schismatic Council of Basil for himself, he says the Fathers of the
Council of Basil say etc. but when a far more ancient Council was cyted
against him by D. Harding, then were all these Fathers ignorant men, and lead
away with See the Return of untruths of D. Stapleton art. 4.
the blindness of that age: when S. Bernard in his books of Consideration to
Eugenius, declaimeth against the vices of the Court of Rome, then is he holy
Saint Bernard: but when he says in the same work, that the Pope is for power
Peter, for his anointing Christ, the supreme Pastor of al Pastors, then is
he but bare Bernard the Abbot: when S. Gregory the Great rebukes the proud
title of John of Constantinople stiling himself universal Bishop, then he is
holy S. Gregory, but when he writes of the miracles of Saints, of purgatory,
and other the like Catholic articles, then he is Father Gregory the dreamer:
Origin if he speak against M. Jewel has presently many errors and heresies,
but when he speaks for him, then he is old Father Origin, and M. Jewel will
be his white son.

113. So if one Father speak for M. H^ll, he is past exception, and shall
serve for a thousand, if another M. Hall submits all authority taken from
antiquity to his own tribunal.
though of later times, he must answer all cauills, satisfy all readers, and
convince all not will full adversaries: if a schismatic Council though
never so base, never so much branded favor his marriage, it is general,
sacred, and shall proclaim in spite of all contradiction: but if we for one or
two Fathers misunderstood, as I have showed, bring the whole torrent and
uniform conspiring agreement of them all, it shall make against him but
private contradiction: if we allege the Counsels gathered in all the coasts
and corners of Europe, Asia, and Affricke, they are all but petty Conuenticles,
because M. Joseph Hall as an arbiter chosen not by man, or of man, but by some
greater power, defines all to be so, and will have all Counsels, Fathers,
historyes, records to be allowed or disallowed, accepted or refused, good or
bad, authentical or counterfeit, as it shall like himself, which supereminent
authority and independence if you grant him not, all his arguments fall to
ground: and if you grant him, who will not pity your folly, and think you
worthily deceived, who leave the brazen pillars of truth, sanctity, antiquity,
to lean on the broken and rotten reed of this seely simple Minister, in
learning very little, less in sanctity, and only in his own opinion and
imagination great?

114. He who will not be deceived in judgment, must not weigh the matters
controuerted by the scales of partial affection toward either part: for that
were to make truth subject to private fancy: where two are in suit at law
Private affections do hinder upright judgment.
the one against the other, if the Judge be byazed by one party, and will
pronounce sentence for him without so much as hearing the adversary speak, as
Seneca in Medea well notes, the sentence may fall out to be right, but the
judgment was wrong. He that will judge uprightly must bear an upright mind,
not inclining to the right or the left: for truth is compared by Cassian
Cassian collat. 23. cap. 9.
to a straight line, and as he who walks on a rope cannot stand or go, if he
lean to one side or other, so neither he find the truth who has tied his
affection to any particular, as without further discussion will take all for
good, which he on the warrant of his word shall suggest: in this question if
you draw your opinion from M. Hall and me, and that so far as neither of us
both may be believed, but according to the proof we shall bring, the truth
soon will show herself in her native colors, and you shall know where to
find and follow her: but then you must not let M. Halls bare word make white
black, nor black white, nor his sayings be an (...), and able to make a
Conuenticle a Synod, a seditious Assembly a general Council, or his reiection
bring disparagement to any true Council, unless it be seconded by better
authority of more ancient and sincere writers. And the like of mine to him
which indifferency is so equal, as more cannot be desired, or let M. Hall if
he can propose it, and I bind my self to embrace it.

115. To know then whether Counsels be true and lawful to be admitted or
refused, depends upon all the circumstances of their calling, and determining
according to the analogy of faith believed and delivered by the Church: such A
necessary rule.
Counsels as have not swarued from this rule, nor have been noted of error,
schism, or faction, nor contradicted by the writers of that time, and
succeeding Counsels, are to be held for good and lawful, because they are
known to agree with the common, universal and Catholic belief, and that
spirit which knitteth all the members of this mystical body together, and if
in any thing they had swarued, they had not past without due check and
reprehension, which is much in this matter to be po^dered: for whereas M. Hall
brings but one poor petty conuenticle, and painteth it out like Esops Daw
with many stolen feathers to make it seem a fair bird, I have by the authors
of that time disproued the same as schismatic, and of no credit: let M. Hall
show the same in the Counsels produced by us to the contrary, and he shall do
somewhat, let him name the author that condemned, the histories that mention
them to be schismatic, other Counsels that rejected them and the like: but
if he cannot do this, then must our Counsels be allowed, their authority
sacred, their testimonies irrefragable, and the least of them able to ouerbeare
millions of the Trullan, or such like exorbitant conspiracyes.

116. And this supposed which by the laws of equity cannot be denied, we bring
for this truth, I mean against the marriage of Clergy men, Councels gathered
in all the parts of Christendom, all called and kept within the first seven
hundred years after Christ, that M. Hall if yet any spark of grace be in him,
may with blushing recall his words with which he concludes this matter
saying: for seven hundred years A shameless assertion.
you find nothing but open freedom, to wit for all Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons to take wives, which is so gross an untruth, as it may serve for
seven hundred together: for all the Fathers he has brought, are either
against him, or corrupted shamefully by him, and this Council is of no proof,
or if it were, it makes far more for us, then for him: and whence then comes
this freedom? in what places and persons? in what Church or Province? for I am
sure that neither in Asia Europe, and Afric has it had this continuance and
freedom. I fear M. Hall in the end will run to Terra Virginea, Guiana,
Chyna, Mexico, or some other regions under the Antarticke Pole to find it out.

117. For to begin with Asia under which I Asia.
include all the Greek Church, that has yielded us against M. Hall three
Counsels, two provincial, one general: the first held at Ancyra in Corcil.
Ancyra^. Can. 10.
Galatia, wherein it is defined: Quicumque Diaconi constituti, in ipsa
constitutione testificati sunt etc. What Deacons soever that are ordered, if in
their ordination they did testify and say, that they must marry wives, because
they could not remain in single life, if such shall afterward marry, let them
remain in the Ministry, because it is granted them by the Bishop, but if any
say nothing and in their ordination they are received with condition so to
remain, if they afterward do marry, let them cease, or be deposed from their
Deaconish. So the Council: and by Deacons to marry as Binius well notes, are to
be understood such The vow of chastity where no exception is made annexed unto
orders.
as were perforce made Deacons, as some were also in the same manner made
Priests (though they never had this permission) as before I have showed out of
S. Augustine: and if such Deacons did not express this exception, by force of
the order they were held incapable of marriage, a^ having annexed unto it
tacitum votum, an employed vow, of perpetual chastity. And if in Deacons, much
more in Priests, Bishops etc.

118. M. Francis Godwin in his Catalogue of English Bishops, amongst other his
mistakings, Francis Godwin in his Catalogue page 136. and 137.
attributes this Canon to the second Council of Arles in France, in the year
326. but in that Council it is not extant, nor was it ever lawful in the
Latin Church especially of Europe, as far as I can find, after the taking of
holy orders to marry: and the note he adds, that Restitutus Bishop of London
was married, needs more proof then his bare affirmation, unless perhaps he
lived apart from his wife, as the Trullan Council after ordained, and S.
Gregory of Towers shows to have been the Ecclesiastic^ll custom before: for
no Church either Greek or Latin ever permitted Bishops to accompany with their
wives, but commanded them to live apart from them in perpetual continency, and
the very first Canon of this Council is: Assumi aliquem ad Sacerdotium non
posse in vinculo coniugij constitutum, Can. 1.
nisi fuerit promissa conuersio. One cannot be made Priest in the band of
wedlock, unless he promise conversion, that is, to abstain from his wife, live
apart from her, and vow chastity. Which explication of the sense and meaning of
the word conversion is warranted by two other Counsels, to wit, the first of
Arausica, where of Arausic^. 1. an^^ 4410 c. ^^^
Deacons it is said: Non ordinentur coniugati, nisi quiprius conuersionis
proposito professi suerint castitatem. Let none be ordered Deacons, but such as
have first of purpose or intention of conversion professed or vowed chastity:
and again in the Council of Agatha: Si coniugati inuenes consenserint
Agath^^. Council. anno. 5^^. c. 16.
ordinari, etiam vxorum voluntas ita requirenda est, vt sequestrato mansionis
cubiculo, religions promissa, postea qui pariter conuersi fuerint ordinentur.
If any married young men (so they be not under the age of 25. years, for such
are excluded by the same Canon) shall agree together to take orders, the
intention of their wives is so first to be required that they separate
themselus from the chamber of their husbands, promise to live chaste, and then
let such as have made their conversion together be ordered. So these
Counsels, and so little freedom did they allow in this matter.

119. The second Council is of Neocasarea in Cappadocia, which no less then
the former was held before the Council of Nice, and in the very first Canon it
is decreed: Presbiter si Council. Neocaes^^* Can. 1.
vxorem duxerit ordino suo moneatur. Let a Priest if he marry a wife be
deposed. Is this the open freedom you mean M. Hall, that possessed the world
for seven hundred years? have Ecclesiastical men no more liberty now in
England? and indeed this decree is renewed in the Trullan Council: so little
help can you find of the Greek Church which yet in this seems most to favor
you. The third Council is the first of Nice celebrated in Bithynia, the third
Canon whereof I have before in answering the objection of Paphnutius alleged,
and urged to this purpose.

120. From Asia let us come to Afric, where this continency was exactly kept,
and Afrike.
there we have also four Councels: the second, third, fourth, and fifth of
Carthage, defyning for us: in the second it is said: Gradus isti tres
conscriptione Ann. 396. Council. Carthag. 2. cap. 2. vide Council. African. sub
Caelestino Can. 37.
quadam castitatis per consecrationes annexi sunt etc. Those three degrees are
linked within the band of chastity by holy orders (Bishops I mean Priests, and
Deacons) for it is expedient that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or those who
are employed about the divine Sacraments be chaste in all things etc. And to
this of the Council is added: Placet, vt in omnibus, and ab omnibus pudicitia
custodiatur, qui altari deseruiunt. It pleases the whole Council, that
chastity be kept in all, and of all who serve the altar: so there, and beer is
chastity annexed to Orders, here are Altars, here is consecration by
imposition of hands: and in the third Council the Nicen Canon is Ann. 397.
Carthag. 3. cap. 17.
confirmed, and such women assigned, as may dwell with Priests, as their
mothers, aunts, sisters, and the like. In the fourth to Bishops Priests,
Deacons, are added Subdeacons.

121. In the fifth is this concluding Canon: Cum de quorumdam Clericorum,
quamuis erga vxores Ann. 398. Carthag. 5. cap. 3.
proprias incontinentia reserretur etc. Whereas relation was made of the
incontinency of Clergy men, although with their own wives, it was decreed
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons according to the former decrees to live
continently from their wives, which unless they perform let them be removed
from all Ecclesiastical function: other Clergy men are not to be forced
heereunto, but the custom of every particular M. Halls freedom for all Clergy
men to marry never dreamed of by the Fathers.
Church is to be observed. So the Council. So as here we have an express
restraint from the use of wives, and this freedom dreamed of by our English
Clergy, whiles they are a-awake, was never so much as dreamed of by them in
their sleep, or else let M. Hall tell us what now we say more for our selves,
then these in the purer times of the primitive Church, as M. Jewel calls the
Fathers of the first six hundred years, have said for us.

122. In Europe we have many more: where Europe.
as the Christian faith has still continued, so has it in all points by many
Counsels been 14 French Councell^ for the single life of Clergy men.
most confirmed: and to leave our Nation, of which I shall speak in the end of
this letter, in our neighbor Church of France, we have no less then fourteen
Counsels within the compass of 700. hundred years to confitme this point,
one of Arles, one of Arausica, one of Angiers, two of Towers, four of
Orleance, one of Agatha, Coccius loco citato.
one of Aruerne, one of Masson, one of Lions, and one of Challon. The words of
all which were to long for my intended breuity to set down: the learned may
read them in Coccius at large, only I will abridge the sum of that they have
determined: The sum of the Decrees of the French Councels.
for by that you will be able to decerne whether this chymericall liberty were
ever in practice in that Country.

123. The sum of their decrees is: 1. That no married man can be made Priest,
unless he leave his wife, so the Counsels of Cap. 16.
Agatha, and Arel^. 2. c. 2.
Orleance: he must take her for ever after as his sister, so of Cap. 12.
Aru^rus, Turon. ^. cap. 1;*
Towers, and Cap. 11.
M^sson: if ever any Priest know his wife again, he can neither offer
sacrifice, or minister Sacraments, so of Turon. ^. cap. 2. Turon. 2. cap 20.
Towers: he is to be deposed, so of Aurelian. 4. c. 4.
Orleans, and Cap. 21.
Arau^ica: by carnal knowledge of his wife he commits incest, is to be
deposed, so of Cap. 11.
Aruerus. Moreover not only Priests, but Deacons also are not to be ordered,
unless they vow chastity, so the Council of Cap. 22.
Arau^ica: if after they do marry they are to be Aurel. 3. cap. 7.
excommunicated, Aurel. 2. cap. 8. Aurel. 3. cap. 2. Cap. 3.
to be deposed, so of Orleance: and the same in the third Council of the same
place i^ extended to Subdeacons, who if they know their wives are likewise to
be deposed, and the Bishops dissembling their faults are also to be punished:
lastly the 3. Canon of the Nicen Counsel is renewed, that none have other
women about them, but their mothers, aunts, sisters, and the like, so the
Council of Angiers in Baronius Anno 453. and the second of Orleance: that
their wives who have vowed chastity living in the house with them, have their
beds and chambers apart, under pain of excommunication, so the Council of
Aurel. 4. cap. 17.
Orleance, Turon. ^. cap. 10. and 11.
Towers, Lugdu^. 2. cap. 2.
Lions, and Cabilouen. cap. ^.
Shallan: other Counsels of this country I might produce, but for that they
are after seven hundred years of M. Halls pretended free liberty, I do
pretermit them.

124. In Spain there are nine Councels that ^. Spanish Counsels for the
single life of Clergy man.
have decreed the single life of the Clergy, one and that most ancient of
^liberis, one of Se^ill, one of Gerunda, and six of Toledo, which being the
Metropolis or chief City of all that kingdom, the Archbishops have still
endeououred to make it more famous by the frequent calling of Counsels
thither, and these Counsels so agree with the French, as they may seem to
speak with one mouth, as they were indeed guyded by one spirit, who directed
them all, and they do specially insist on this, that no women do dwell with men
in holy orders, but such as have been often mentioned in other Counsels, so
of Toleta^. 2. c. 3.
Toledo the second, the first of Hispal. 2. cap. 3.
Seuill: that they vow chastity, so the 4. of Toleta^. 4. cap. 26.
Toledo, and the eight Tolet. 8. cap. 5.
of the same place, where the Canon says: Quosdam Sacerdotes and Ministr^s
obliuiscentes mai^rum ac veterum constitutorum, aut vxorum aut quarumcumque
feminarum immunda societate, and execrabili contagion^ turpari etc. They had
understood certain Priests, and other Clergy men forgetting their ancestors,
and old decrees to be defiled with the impure company, and execrable Where was
M. Hals open freedom when this Canon was made*
contagion of their own wives, and other women. So there. And this savors
little of open freedom for all Ecclesiastical persons to marry, or enjoy
their wives as you see, and these Fathers were so far from thinking any
impossible necessity to be in the vows of Priests, as our impure Ministers do
teach, as they held the return to their former wives to be a defiling
impurity, and execrable contagion.

123. Furthermore in the 9. Council of Toledo, there is a Canon, which if it
were in practice Toletan. ^. cap. 10.
in England, would much cool this fervent lust of our wanton Ministers: for it
is determined that from the Bishop to the Subdeacon, if any by detestable
wedlock being in that degree should beget children, that the Fathers of these
children should be put under Canonical Censures, A cooling Canon of the ninth
Council of Toledo.
and the children borne of that polluted copulation should inherit nothing of
their Fathers goods, but for term of life be servants of that Church, or
Churches whereof their Fathers were Priests, and never to enjoy more freedom.
So as the Father was deposed, the child was a slave, such was the liberty which
even within the seven hundred years possessed these parts.

126. I may not pretermit the Council of Eliberis, the first that was ever
held in Spain, in The decree of the Council of Eliberis.
the year 313. in which ancient Synod is this decree, which may seem rather
to be made in the Council of Trent, such unity and uniformity there is in
doctrine, manner of speech, and practice of the primitive Church with this of
our time, of that Council with ours, and no less repugnance and contradiction
with that of our adversaries: for thus they decree: Placuit in totum prohibere
Episcopis, Presbyteris, Diaconis, and Council. Elibert. cap. 33.
Subdiaconis positis in ministerio abstinere se a coniugibus suis, and non
generare filios: quod quicumque fecerit ab honor Clericatus exterminetur. It
seemed good to the Council, altogether to forbid Bishops, Priests, Deacons and
Subdeacons appointed for the mynistery of the Church, to abstain from their
wives, and not to beget children: which whosoever begets, let him be deposed
from the honor of the Clergy. So these Fathers. And this testimony in the
judgment of any that has any judgment left him, is able to ouerweigh ten
thousand Trullan Conuenticles, being for time far before it, not made in
schism, never controled, never condemned in this point: nor shall M. Hall ever
be able to show me that ever in Spain his imaginary freedom was tolerated,
much less permitted in that Clergy.

127. In Germany within the prescript of this time were no Councels kept, that
people being not wholly reclaymed to the Christian faith, until some years
after by the worthy endeauours of S. Boniface a most renowned Martyr, and by
birth an English man, after whose death which happened in the year 754. there was
a Council kept in that City whereof he had been Archbishop, and to show that
new Church to agree Council. Mogunt. Can. 10.
with the old: they defyned that Priests should study to preserve perpetual
chastity, and in the same forbid them to have any women in their houses, but
such as were allowed by the Canons. So this new Church lately converted to
Christ togeaiher with her Christianity embraced this purity; and in alleging
the license granted by the Canons, confirmed what we have produced of all the
former Counsels.

128. To conclude with Italy, where this practice even by the confession of our
Adversaries Single life of Clergy men always in use in Italy.
has ever inuiolably been observed, and none can show at what time, in what
part, under what Pope, or Emperor, the contrary custom was ever in use, much
less allowed: in the Roman Council called soon after the first appearance of
peace in the Christian Church, to wit, the same year with the Nicen in Greece,
it is defined, that no Subdeacon do marry, or presume to violate that decree,
and if in this of all sacred orders the lowest and least, perpetual chastity
be required, much more in the other which being of themselves higher, require
more eminent purity, chastity, and if it were Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerd^^^^ i^it.
possible, as S. Chrysostom well observes, more cleanes then is in Cherubim
or Seraphim, or any other Angelical nature: and the same for Deacons and
Priests, as Baronius notes, was expressly confirmed in another Council of
Rome, held in the thirtenth year of the Emperor Mauritius, and ninth of S.
Gregory the Great, in which is this Canon: Si quis Presbyter, aut Diaconus
vxorem duxerit, anathemasit. If any Priest, or Deacon marry a wife, let him be
accursed. So as still curses and not blessings have followed the marriage of
Clergy men, even in this time of M. Halls prescription.

129. Wherefore now to end this matter, having against the Co^uenticle of
Trullu^ brought A collection upon the premito.
one and thirty Counsels, all more sacred, all more approved, all without any
contradiction of these times, and ensuing ages more accepted then the Council
of Trullum, it will need no great deliberation to resolve, or discourse to
judge, or learning to decide this Controversy in hand, whether for the space of
seven hundred years, there is nothing to be found, but open freedom for all
Clergy men to marry, or whether this freedom were debarred: when as all these
Councels were held within the compass of that time, which condemn it, and
this Trullan false Synod, not until some years after: for all is resolved to
this, that for seven hundred years M. H^ll finds not one Council, or ancient
Father (unless perhaps some lying Heretic) to make for him, and we have all the
Fathers with one and thirty Counsels against him, so as this poor soul like
a naked child without any thing in his hand, comes forth to fight with a
whole army well appointed, and although he be not able to strike a strocke, but
must needs be beaten to the ground, and crushed in pieces, yet does he crake
that the victory is his, and that all the main army has defended him, and his
cause: what will you say to such madness?

130. And truly to me he seems not to be M. Hall overthrown by his own
grounds*
more mad then blind: for otherwise he would never have proclaimed this
freedom of 700. years, seeing the very form of words used by his own sacred
Synod, does so strongly withstand his fond collection: for there it is decreed
in these words: Qui sunt in sacris coniugia deinceps ex Council. Trullan. cap.
13.
hoc temporis momento firma and stabilia esse volumus. We will that the
marriages of such as be in holy orders from this time forward, be firm and
valid: for in case this freedom had been before common, never doubted of, but
acknowledged by all, why did they use this form of words ^ why did they say
from this time forward? for why did they name the time forward, which in all the
time backward had been still in use, never in question? were it not a
ridiculous decree, if it should now by act of Parliament be enacted; and that
from this time forward the King of England should be reputed to have title to
the Crown of France, which for almost three hundred years he has taken and
possessed? If he say that the Roman Church withstood this pretended custom,
and against that this decree was made, I grant both the one and the other, and
thereof infer this freedom to be counterfeit, as never in use in the Latin
Church, and as then the Roman use contradicted the Grecian so does the French
King now contradict our Sovereign about this title, not permitting any book
to be printed there, wherein he is styled King of France, and yet does not this
opposition hinder, but that such a decree in England were foolish: and so is
this in Greece, if still they had been in free possession of their wives, as
they were never before that time, when by too much flattering the Emperors
they laid the first foundation of their future schism, which has brought them
to that most miserable thraldom in which now they live, and may both be an
example and terror of Gods just revenge to all others that make the like
attempts.

131. It is pity M. Hall, that when you got the Rethoricke lesson in Cambrige,
you had not got the Logic: for in case you had taught Logic, you would have
seen the folly and feeblenes of your inference, and rather have made the
contrary illation to that which you have here made: for I appeal to all puny
Sophisters in Cambrige, whether it be not a better inference to say: this thing
is decreed from this instant, for the time forwards to be observed, Ergo before
it was not in use, then to dispute as you do thus: from this instant forward
this shall be allowed, Ergo always before it was approved. All the walls and
windows from the Hall to the Kitchen, may mourn to see an University man to
have so little wit, as to conclude so fondly: and yet you do much worse, when
you argue, that the Trullan false Council allowed married men to be made
Priests, Ergo before it was lawful for Ecclesiastical men to marry; when as
before that time it was always unlawful, and in that very Council it is not
permitted, but in plain terms prohibited for any Clergy men to marry.

132. This then being so, that this Council makes not for you, that it
contradicts it self, that it brought in a new law in despite of the Roman
Church, that it was not only a provincial, but a false and schismatic
meeting, that it was never allowed, that the Authors were severely punished by
God, as well the Patriarcke as the Emperor, that the chief Pastor condemned
it, that your self do not understand it; and on the other side, that all the
other Synods are beyond exception, sincere, Catholic, lawful, and
authentical: I may say to M. Hall as S. August. in Julian. l. 2. cap. vltim.
Augustine did to Julian the Pelagian: Vsque adeo permiscuit imis summa longus
dies? vsque adeo tenebrae lux, and lux tenebrae esse dicuntur, vt videant
Pelagius, Celestius, Iulianus, and caeci sint Hilarious, Gregorius, Ambrosius?
Has tract of time so confounded all things together, and turned them vpside
down? is darkness so far forth become light, and light darkness that the Trullan
Council alone could see, and the others of all Asia, Europe, and Affricke were
blinded? And in the precedent book having alleged some few Fathers of
special note, he turns his speech unto Julian, and says as I now Lib. 1. in
Julian. c. 4.
say unto M. Hall, and therefore put his name and errors instead of Iulians:
Introduxi te in sanctorum Patrum pacificum honor andumque conuentum* sit op^rae
pretiu^ obsecro te, aspice illos quomodo aspicientes te etc. I have brought you
into the peacable and honorable assembly of the holy Fathers: I pray you let
me not leese my labor, behold them as it were beholding you, and meekely and
gently saying unto you, is it so indeed M. Hall? are we mainteyners of the
marriage of Clergy men? I pray you, what will you answer them? how will you
look upon them? what arguments will you devise? what predicaments of Aristotle
with which as a sharp disputer that you may assail us, you desire to be
esteemed cunning? what edge of gloss of your feeble arguments, or leade^
daggers will dare to appear in their sight? what weapons of yours will not fly
out of your hands, and leave you naked? will you say perchance that you have
accused none of them by name? But what will you do, when they all shall say
unto you, that it had been better you had railed at our names, then at our
Religion, by the merit of which our names are written in heaven? And a little
after: Iterum te admoneo iterum rogo, aspice tot ac tales Ecclesiae Catholicae
desensoret, Ibid.
atque rectores: vide quibus tam grauem tam nesariam irrogaueris iniuriam.
Again I warn you, again I entreat you, behold so many and so worthy
defenders, and Governors of the Catholic Church: see to whom you have
offered this grievous and wicked injury. So S. Augustine.

133. And here to end: if so many lawful Counsels against one schismatic,
so ancient against so modern, so express decrees against one so intricate, as
that it makes more against our Adversaries then for them, so many holy The
conclusion of all this Trullan Controsy.
Bishops against a few seditious and turbulent Prelates, so many Countries
against one Province, yea all Asia, Europe, and Affrike against one corner of
the world, if the purer ages and Apostolical times against the later, when
through the pride of those Princes, Patriarchs and people they began to kindle
the coals of that whereof now we see the flames, and execrable combustion, be
not sufficient to move M. Hall to look back, but that copper if he list shall
still be pure good, light darkness, and darcknes light, there will be no
disputing against such wilful and precipitate pride, and heretical
arrogance. But others I hope are of a more upright judgment. and will not
disesteeme so sacred, so constant, so generally received authority: to which I
might add our own national Synods, but M. Halls method causes me to put them
over to another place, and therefore here I end this Controversy of the
Trullan Synod, and there with all this whole Paragraffe.

The later Part of M. Halls Letter is examined. The fiction of S. Vdalricus his
Epistle to Pope Nicholas the first is refuted. Gregory the VII. defended: and
withal is declared the practice of our own Country, even from the Conversion
under S. Gregory.. 3.
AS men in their dreams do often conceive great wealth, and golden mountains
with many prosperous and fortunate events, that are befallen them, which
afterward prove nothing else, but idle motions of their unsettled fancy, which
being to be directed by reason, is then left to her own operation, and having
no determinate object or end, produces strange Chimeras and monsters against
nature, to which like John Dunns Pse-domartyr, nec pes, nec caput vni Dunns
Pseudomartyr a mere bundle of rotten rags ill fauouredly bound together.
reddatur formae (as being a disioynted gall-ma-frey of many things hudled up
together, whereof no one part or patch agrees with another) so it seems to
have fared with M. Hall, who (like him of Athens, that persuaded himself that
all the ships which came into the haven were fraught with his goods, and so
still fed his mind with joy of imaginary riches, although neither ships, nor
any thing in them appertayned unto him) not out of reason, but strong
fantastical imagination thinks all Authors to stand for him, and still
beats on this string that for the first seven hundred years all Priests
were in possession of their wives, and all the world went for him, in full
liberty and freedom; when as the quite contrary is so evident, as nothing can
be more, so many Fathers, Historyes, Councels, giving testimony for the truth,
as you have heard: and M. Hall himself if yet his reason be returned home
after his sleep, and be able to over bear his fancy must needs acknowledge,
seeing himself so destitute of all authority but his own, or such as is to be
regarded no better then his own, that none at all stand for him in this plea
against us.

2. And truly in respect of M. Hall, little help is needful to refute him,
because he so refuteth M. Hall overthrown by his own Authors.
himself, as his adversary shall need no better weapons to overthrow him, then
his own words: for even here he tells us: That all the scuffling arose in
the eight age, wherein yet this violent imposition sound many and learned
Adversaries, and durst not be obtruded at once. So he, and al in his dream:
for in case he had been waking, he could not but have known, what himself
wrote before out of the Trullan Synod, where the very first words of his sacred
Canon are: Quoniam in Romana Ecclesia loco Canonis seu Decreti traditum esse
Council. Trul^an. Can. Can. 23.
cognouimus etc. For that we have known it desired in the Roman Church by way
of Canon, or Decree, that such Deacons or Priests, as are to be esteemed worthy
of ordering, profess for the time to come never to know their wives etc. Which
words alluding no doubt to the former Canons, cyted out of the Latin Counsels,
show the continency of Clergy men, to have been long in use before that Synod.

3. Wherefore the scuffling if there were any, was not as he fancyeth to take
away wives, and bring in single life, but the contrary by preserving single
life, to debar from marriage, or use of wives such, as of married men, were
made Ecclesiastical. And whereas the Trullan Synod contradicted this custom,
and in their decree against it said: that from that day forward such as were
married before, might keep and know their wives, they brought in a new law, and
began to scuffle and ruffle for the grant of that which was before forbidden,
though yet they did shoot short of M. Halls buts, and not yield the half of
what he would have: so as in his aforesaid words, are three untruths. The one
that Three untruths in one short sentence.
this scuffling was to bring in the continency of Clergy men, which was brought
in before, and was never out of use, and this was only to preserve it, being
already in possession, against the violent opposition of incontinent Grecians,
and others, who claimed marriage. The second that this found many and learned
adversaries: for against this long and laudable custom of the single life of
Clergy men, none but Heretics, or Schismatikes opposed themselves, of whose
wickedness we read much, of their learning nothing. The third that it was not
obtruded al at once, but by degrees. Where M. Hall? and when? in the Latin
Church? So you insinuate by that you add out of Pope Gregory the third, and
that also in his time: but fie on this impudency, which affirms that to be
begone by Gregory the third, which by more then thirty Counsels was defyned
before his time: I cannot but here say with S. Augustine: Miror si in sacie
hominis tantum August. lib 1. in Julian. c. ^. in fine.
interuallum est inter frontem and linguam, vt in hac causa srons non comprimat
linguam. I wonder if there be so great distance between the forhead and the
tongue, that in this matter the forehead does not keep the tongue back from
such over lashing.

4. And this the more for that in all the testimonies, which he has raked
together to prove this liberty, and freedom in the first seven hundred years,
he has not brought one out of the Latin Church but S. Cyprian of Asricke,
whom he makes to speak that of Numidicus, which he never thought nor said:
all other his M. Hall could find no Latin Fathers of the primitive Church for
the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons.
allegations are of the Greek Fathers of the Greek Church, and for defect of
Latin Fathers, he stuffeth his paper with the names, and authorityes of
Panormitan, Caietan, Gratian, Pius secundus, and other late writers: and yet
here, as though all the Latin Fathers and Church, no less then the Greeks
had jointly conspired in this controversy, he speaks o^ the violent
imposition, and obtrusion of this law, as though that Gregory the third first
of all by little and little would have brought it into the Church, but was
afraid to be too bold in the beginning, and therefore is feigned to give a
disiunct charge; which is a mere dream, falsehood and foolery, and has not so
much as the least shadow of any probability: but let us hear his words.

5. Lo even then (says he) Gregory the 3. A mere forgery*
writing to the Bishops of Bauaria, gives this disiunct charge: let none keep a
harlot or concubine, but either let him live chastely, or marry a wife, whom it
shall nor be lawful for him to forsake. So M. Hall. Putting the words down in
latin in his margent, but without further reference where to find them, and I
think he must seek long that can find any such words: for there is extant
but one epistle in Baronius, Binnius, Serarius, Surius, and others, of this
Gregory unto the Bishops of Bauaria, and in that there is no such clause, or
any thing tending to this purpose, so as until M. Hall show us his Author
from whence he has taken it, we will urge against him the Cornelian law, which
so severely punishes impostors, who to get credit to their leasings, obtrude
their own forgeryes, under the name and title of the uncontrolled authority of
other men.

6. But let us suppose some such words be extant, as I think verily there are
none, yet doubtless the Pope meant them of such lay man M. Halls citation proved
to be counterfeit.
as kept concubines, and not of Clergy men: for otherwise this testimony had
appeared long before this time in other men's books, and not first have peeped
out of M. Halls Epistles, being so urgent as it is for this matter, and yet I
have not seen it objected by any: which negative if it suffice not, at least
this affirmative with me will conclude, that Zacharias Pope, and immediate
successor unto this Gregory, in the very Zacharias Papa ep. 1. ad Bonifacium.
first epistle he wrote unto S. Boniface the Apostle of Germany, having
occasion to speak of this matter, so writes as though the thing were
undoubted of* and says: Apostolus vnius vxoris virum etc. The Apostle will
have him to be made Priest, that is the husband of one wife, and this is
lawful to do before priestood, but from the day of their priesthood they are
forbidden from their proper wedlock, or to live with their wives. And again
speaking of the lascivious Priests in Germany he says: Isti vero e contrario
etc. But contrariwise these men do not only abstain from one wife, but being
wholly given to lust, commit greater offenses then secular men, in so much as
they presume to have more wives, who after their orders taken are not permitted
to touch one. So Gregoryes successor, and he also a Grecian, who further
appoynteth them to be suspended from the practice of their function, accordint
to the Canons and decrees of the Fathers: and this being so contrary unto the
other words, and not mentioning any reuocatio^ of his predeessours decree,
which always in such cases is accustomable, M. Halls forgery is liable to no
excuse, but adds a new confirmation to that which needed no other, that as
well in this as in his Trullan decree, and almost in all things else he is to be
condemned as faythles.

7. And his conscience as it should seem accusing him of perfidious and
faythles dealing he seeks to ward the blow, and avoid the charge by laying
the like fault on us, bet in such confused manner being as it seems in some
choler, as he understands not himself: for after the forged testimony of
Gregory, that none keep harlot or concubine, but either live chastely, or marry
a wife, whom it shall not be lawful for him to forsake, he adioyneth
immediately: According A foolish and impertinent charge.
to that rule of Clerks* cyted from Isidore, and renewed in the Council of
Mentz to the perpetual shame of our iuggling adversaries, nothing can argue
guiltines so much, as unjust expurgations. Isidore says, or let them marry but
one, they cite him, let them conteyne, and leave out the rest, somewhat worse
then the Devil cyted Scripture. Hitherto M. Hall, in which words he charge
us as you see very hoatly, to our perpetual shame of unjust expurgations to
cite Authors worse then the Devils Scripture, to be iugglers, and guilty of
the greatest crime of all others, which is unjust Expurgations, more grievous
in this man's opinion, then to frame forged testimonies, and father them on
other Authors, as he did now immediately on Gregory the third, and is ready to
do again at a pinch, if he be urged thereunto.

8. But this clamor is only superfluous babbling proceeding from an inflamed
heat of contradiction, having no other ground besides the malice and ignorance
of the writer, and exceeding negligence in not seeing the places in the
Authors from whence they are taken, but receiving the^ upon trust out of other
men's M. Hall either did not read, or not understand S. Isidore.
notes, which the very title he gives the book does bewray: for he cyteth him
Isidor. reg. Cleric. whereas no such work under that title is extant, and the
place he alleges is out of his second book de Ecclesiasticis officijs, and
second Chapter, and had he but read the Author, the objection would have
carried the answer in his forehead: for S. Isidore in the beginning of his
book, speaking of Clergy men in general, whether in sacred or in the lesser
orders, says of them all together, that either they must continually live
chaste, or else live in the band of one marriage, which after when he comes to
every particular order, he does more fully declare: and of Bishops, Priests,
Deacons and Subdeacons he says, they are bound to continual chastity, of the
rest he says nothing at all in this matter, and thereby insinuates, that they
might marry, as indeed they might: and that he takes the word Clerici,
Clergymen in this most ample signification is evident by his first Chapter of
his second book, and very first words thereof: for thus he begins: Omnes
qui in Ecclesiastici ministerij gradibus ordinati sunt, general^er Clerici
nominantur. All who are ordered in the degrees of the Ecclesiastical
ministry, are commonly called Clerks or Clergy men, which degrees in the
ensuing Chapters he does particulerly specify, and that both sacred and others:
for he has one Chapter of Bishops, one of Priests, one of Deacons, one of
Subdeacons, one of Lectours, one of Exorcists, one of those who are called
Ostiarij, or attend to the keeping of the door etc.

9. Of the four first he concludes, that they must live continently, I mean
either in S. Isidore contrary to M. Hal.
single life, or a part from their wives in case they were married when they
took these orders: for this of Subdeacons alone, which alone concludes for
all the other Superior orders, he writes: Isti quoque vasa corporis and
sanguinis Christi Isidorus l. 2. de E^cl. offic. c. 10.
Diaconibus ad altarium offerunt etc. These Subdeacons do offer to the Deacons
at the altar the vessels of the body and blood of Christ, of whom Subdeacons.
the Fathers have decreed, that because they touch the holy mysteryes that they
be chaste, and conteyne from their wives, and be free from all carnal
uncleanness, as is commanded them by the Council. Cartha. 4. l cap. 5.
Prophet saying: be ye clean who bear the, vessels of our Lord. So S.
Isidore of Subdeacons, and so likewise the Council of Carthage, and if these
were bound to chastity, none I think will deny this band more properly to
appertain to Priests, and Bishops, who do not only touch the vessels, but as
S. Hierome says, Corpus Domini sacro ore conficiunt, consecrate with their
sacred mouth the body of Hier. ep. 3.
our Savior, and the higher degree in all reason requires more sanctity,
cleanes, and perfection then the inferior.

10. Of Deacons he says: propterea altari albis Deacons.
induti assistunt etc. Therefore they assist at the Altar in their albes, that
they may live a celestial life, Cap 8. loco citato.
and come white, and without spot to the sacrifices, to wit clean in body, and
for purity undefiled: for it beseems our Lord to have such Ministers, that
are not stained with any corruption of the flesh, but rather shine with the
perfection of Chastity: and a little after explicating the words of S. Paul he
says: Diaconi similiter irreprehensibiles. Let Deacons be irreprehensible, or
blameles, that is without spot, as are Bishops, that is chaste, containing
themselves from all lust. So S. Isidore of Deacons: and of Bishops, Bishops and
Priests.
and Priests he says as we have cyted him in the first Paragraffe upon the
words of S. Paul: Vnius vxoris virum, the husband of one wife: Sacerdotem
quarit Ecclesia, aut de monogamia ordinatum, aut de virginitate sanctum etc.
The Church seeks for a Priest or Bishop (for the word in S. Isidore is taken
for both, especially the later) either for single marriage decent, or holy from
virginity: he who has been twice married cannot be Bishop. So he. And this
being the judgment and doctrine of S. Isidors, let us according to the same
examine M. Halls charge, and see of what weight and moment it is. M. Halls
untruths in urging the testimony of S. Isidore.


11. False then it is that the sentence of Gregory, or rather of M. Hall in
Gregoryes name is according to the rule of Clerks of S. Isidore: for between
the one and other is no semblance, no coherence, no dependence, but open
contradiction and repugnance, because he brought that sentence to prove that
Priests might marry, at least under a disiunct charge, but this is not allowed
by S. Isidore, by any disjunction, or copulation, but disproued in all holy
orders from the Subdeacon to the Bishop, from the highest to the lowest, and it
is nothing else in M. Hall, then mere iuggling, and most shameful dealing to
apply that unto Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, which S. Isidore
meant of others, and to restrain the word Clerk to such only as are in holy
orders, when the other extends it to all the lesser, and to any whosoever
serve the Church.

12. Another falsity it is, that this rule is renewed in the Council of Mentz,
and that to Council. Mogun. 1. cap. 10.
our perpetual shame, whom he calls his iuggling adversaries: for that
Council is so far from renewing that rule, as that part which alone concerns
M. Halls purpose, to wit, aut certe vnius matrimonij vinculo soederentur, is
pretermitted, and the other disjunctive part of preserving perpetual chastity
is only expressed: for which this man is so eager in his crimination: and
although his words seem to touch us alone not the Council, when he says:
that this is renewed in the Council of Mentz to our perpetual shame: for
(says A false and injurious charge.
he) nothing can argue guiltines so much as unjust expurgations: for Isidore
says, let them conteyne, or let them marry but one, they cite him, let them
conteyne and leave out the rest, somewhat worse then the Devil cyted scripture.
Which accusation of his, if it be meant of Catholics, as at the first sight it
may seem, that they cut out this passage out of S. Isidore, the thing is no
less false then injurious, as appears by this book it self printed at Rome
in the the Popes Vatican, and annexed unto the last tome of S. Gregoryes works
in the year 159^. where the pallage is word by word, as M. Hall has cyted it,
and the like I suppose of all other A contradiction.
editions: if his meaning only be that the Fathers of that Council omitted it,
then as I said he contradicts himself, in saying that this Council renewes
the rule of S. Isidore, for the marrying of Priests, when as by omitting that
clause it does rather overthrow it, and allow only the single life of the
Clergy.

13. The third falsehood is of the guiltynes of the Council in this unjust
expurgation: wherein M. Hall, because it left out the sacred The Counsel of
Mentz cleared for omitting the later part of S. Isidores sentence.
clause of marriage (a heavy case) says, that they cite it worse then the
Devil cyted the Scripture. Watch I deny, and further auerre that supposing the
end of the Council, for which as well that in Germany, as two or three more of
France were called, which was for the reformation of Priests, Bishops, and
Religious persons in these Countries, the Fathers assembled took that out of
S. Isidore, which S. Isidore alone meant of such, as omitted the other clause
which concerned others, which as by S. Isidore, speaking in general was well
expressed, so the Fathers in the Moguntine Council speaking more strictly, did
necessarily pretermit, and that according to the true sense, drift and meaning
of the author, as now we have heard: so as all bitterness of words against us,
shows M. Hall to be like a waspish child, that upon every occasion would show
revenge, but wants strength to do any hurt: for all his blunt bolts are but
sagittae paruulorum, darts ^ bull rushes, fitter for women and children, then
for grave and learned men to skirmish with all.

14. The last falsehood is in the translation of S. Isidores words, for vnius
matrimonij vinculo foederentur, does not signify let them marry but one, as if
S. Isidore had given leave to Priests to marry once: for so M. Hall will have
him to be understood, M. Hall helps himself by false translation.
but rather is to be Englished pass^^ely, let them be married but to one,
according to that of the Apostle, vnius vxoris vir, the husband of one wife, in
which sense albeit he had spoken of Priests and Bishops, he had said nothing
against us, who grant that such may be ordered, but deny that they may marry
after: so as between my translation and M. Halls, there is as great a
difference, as between these two propositions: he who is once married may after
be made Priest, and he who is made Priest may after be once married. The first
is allowed by S. Paul and all others, the other by all manner of authority is
denied: and M. Hall cannot in any one particular, ever show us the contrary
practice in any place wheresoever to have been observed in the Latin, or Greek
Church: and this supposing S. Isidors words to be spoken of Priests and taken
in their most rigorous and Grammatical sense, although I prefer the former
opinion as more true, and most agreeable to the whole contexture of that second
book from whence it is taken: so as you see nothing can pass this man's pen
without many dashes of insincere and faythles dealing.

15. There follows in M. Hall another authority, or rather as he sets it
forth a main pillar M. Halls main pillar of S. Vdalricus his epistle to Pope
Nicholas the first at large refuted.
or ground of his cause, which by so much the more deserves exact discussion,
by how much M. Hall does confide on the same, as on a matter for truth
undoubted of, and for this present controversy (supposing the truth) so
forcible, as it admits no reply, and which alone so potently does bear and
beat us down, as if all arguments failed this by it self were able to supply
for all, and not without our deadly wound yield the cause and conquest to our
Adversaries, in respect whereof I will stand a little the longer on the matter,
and let nothing pass either of his text or margent, which concerns this
matter undiscussed: and that I may not seem without cause to make this so
curious inspection, and stand upon all particulers of the same, I will first
set down the thing out of M. Halls own words, and that without any alteration
of any syllable, that you may both see the thing it self of what force it is,
and how much he does repose thereon, and then answer every part and parcel
thereof. Thus then he writes.

16. But I might (quoth he) have spared all Answered by Bellar mine lib. de
Clerc. c. 22. init.
this labor of writing, could I persuade whosoever doubts or denies this, to
read over that one epistle, which Huldericus Bishop of Auspurge wrote
learnedly, and vehemently to Pope Nicholas the first in this subject, which if
it do not answer all cauills, satisfy all Readers, and connince all (not
wilful) Adversaries, let me be cast in so just a cause. There you shall see
how just, how expedient, how ancient this liberty is, together with the feeble
and injurious ground of forced continency: read it and see whether you can
desire a better advocate. After him (so strongly did he plead, and so happily)
for two hundred years more this freedom still blessed those parts, yet not
without extreme opposition: historyes are witnesses of the busy and not
unlearned combats of those times in this argument. Hitherto M. Hall.

17. And here before I enter further into this fable, I cannot sufficiently
marvel that any one who would be taken for learned, a sincere writer, and
searcher of the truth, would ever M. Halls indiseretion very singular.
adventure in such phrase of speech, with such certainty, such confidence to
gull his credulous Reader with a mere fiction, a counterfeit toy, and most
childish imposture: is it possible, M. Hall, that this fond invention so often
answered, and refuted by so many learned men, as Bellarmine, Baronius, Eckius,
Faber, Staphilus, and in our English tongue by Father Henry Fitzsimons and
others, shall again without all proof for approuance, or disproofe of what is
objected against it, be again so earnestly urged, so delivered as an undoubted
and infallible verity, and testimony beyond all exception? truly you are of a
very weak wit if you see not, or prodigal of your credit if you regard not,
or of a scared Hall. charact. of Pharas. and Christ. page 39.
conscience and iron forehead if you feel and fear not the sin and shame,
which before God and man will follow of this insolent dealing. I meruayl not
that you are so cager against such as read Bellarmine and others of the
subtilest Jesuits, as you ^earme them: for writing as you do, the policy is
good, and you may take the larger scope to coin lies, whiles you turn your
Readers eyes from the authors where they should find them detected, and read
the answer before ever you had made the objection. But to the thing it self.

18. After that the Lutheran liberty through The first occasion of this fable.
the dissension of the German Princes had taken away true faith from men, and
overthrown the ground of all virtuous actions, the better to cover the lewd
lechery and filthy incestuous marriages of their first founders, and to open
the gate to all lascivious behavior, which they saw was far more easy to
practice then to persuade, seeing the Apostle so plain for virgins, 1. Cor. 7.
and natural reason to show the excellency of that state above marriage, all
the endeauours of these new flesh-wormes was to bring the thing in hatred, by
making many fictions of the il observance of this virtue in such, as by
special vow had bound themselves to keep it, Priests I mean, and all
Religious persons: and for that examples move the multitude whereof some of
fresh memory perhaps were true, that in other times the like inconvenience came
of vowing virginity, they invented this prodigious history The tale which is
related in the counterfeit epistle of S. Vdalricus.
related in the letter of S. Vdalricus, whereof now we shall speak.

19. And although these companions agree in the end for which this tale should
be devised, yet in setting down the circumstances, and the particulers of the
fact, as it commonly happens in things of this nature, there were among the
brethren diverse opinions: first for the pla^e where it should happen, then who
should relate it, and at what time. The case related in that epistle is this in
effect, that S. Gregory making a law for the continency of Clergy men as S.
Vdalricus is made to say, whiles his men went to his po^d to catch fish, they
found more then six thousand heads of young children, which being presented unto
S. Gregory, he saw the law that he had made to have been the cause heerof, and
that the Priests to cover their incontinency, had committed this murder,
whereupon he revoked the law, and permitted Priests to marry. So S. Vdalricus
in his letter to Pope Nicholas the first, as M. Hall, or second, or third as M.
Fox will have it: and thus now they tell the t^^e.

20. But in the beginning these heads were F. Henr. Fitzsimons Cath. Confuta.
page 3 9. Staphil. in defens Theologia trimembris sect. vltim.
said to be found in Sicily, and that the mothers of these Children might not
seem to be inferior to their Fathers, Flaccus Illyricus, as Staphilus
writes, says that all of them were found near unto certain Monasteryes of
Nuns, but where these Mo^asteryes were he says nothing: and for the author of
this letter some say it was S. Vdalricus, others, as Binnius reports, that it
was not the Saint, but another Bishop of the Binn. tom. 1. in notis ad vitam
Gregorij magni.
same place and name, but in all the Catalogue of these Bishops, no second
Vdalricke is to be found, others as Benefild against M. Leech say, that he who
wrote this letter was one Volusianus, but who this Volusianus was there is no
mention, M. Hall says that Volusianus and Huldricke is all one, which to me
seems incredible, there being so little affinity in the names, and not one ever
writing that S. Vdalricke was termed Volusianus, only they of Basil, who first
printed this lie, -- Populo vt placerent quas fecissent sabulas: Terentius.
have made the fiction very forma^l, and lay that the place was Rome, the
present of 6000. heads and more was made to S. Gregory the Great, the author
of the letter S. Vdalricke, and that he wrote it upon the same occasion to
Nicholas the first, who would have renewed S. Gregory his decree, and have
forced continency upon all Ecclesiastical men.

21. But the whole narration is so fabulous, so ill patched together, so false
and forged, The thing evidently demonstrated to be a lying fiction.
as it disclaimeth from all truth of times, persons, and things, no one part
agreeing with another, or subsisting in it self; so well had they tippled who
devised this drunken letter: for else they would have seen it impossible, that
ever S. Vdalricke should write unto Nicholas the first; seeing Nicholas dyed in
the year 867. and the other was not borne till the year 890. so as between
the death of Nicholas and birth of S. Vdalricke there are 23. years: and as
though that this were not ridiculous enough for one to writ Non sat commode
diuisa temporibus.
a letter to another, who was dead 23. years before the writer was borne, they
add in the beginning of the letter, that he wrote it when he was Bishop: for
thus he writes: Nicolao Domino and Patri peruigili S. R. E. prouisori
Huldericus solo nomine Episcopus amorem vt filius, timorem vt seruus. To
Nicholas his Lord and Father, the vigilant prouisor of the holy Church of Rome,
Huldericke only in name a Bishop, sends love as a son, fear as a servant:
and to omit this manner of greeting not in use in these times, you see that he
wrote the letter when he was Bishop, unto which dignity he was preferred in the
year 924. or as the Chronicles of his own Church say 923. so as between the
death of Nicholas, and his election, there are more then fifty years: and can
any but laugh to hear of a letter written unto one, who was dead more then
fifty years before? M. Hall shall do well to tell us who carried this letter,
where it was delivered, and what answer the dead man returned thereunto, for
that will serve as well as the other for old women to tell children at the fire
side, and to make fools pastyme.

22. Moreover in the time of the first Nicholas, The marriage of Clergy men
never mentioned in the time of Pope Nicholas the first.
although diverse other tumults were raised, especially by the wicked Patriarch
of Constantinople Photius, Michael the Emperor, John Bishop of Rauenna,
Lotharius King of France, Hin^marus Archbishop of Rhemes and others, yet in the
matter we now speak of, there was never any Controversy made, no decree, no
mention at all in the life of this Pope, exactly set down by Baronius, and how
then is it possible that any should write unto him such a letter as here is
mentioned, and no mention thereof to be made in his life, or any record left,
that ever he dealt one way or other in that matter, unless it were in some
particular case, which was resolved according to the custom then in use,
without all tumult, noise, or resistance, when as this letter mentions not a
private resolution, but a public decree, either to have been made, or
intended to be made for all in general, and that with public opposition, of
which there is no mention or memory in any Author but in this letter: and it
is a lie worthy of the maker in John Fox, when speaking of this Nicholas a most
famous and renowned Pastor: by this Pope (says he) Priests began to be
restrained from marrying:

23. Again Antonius Monchia^enus Democares a Sorbon Doctor, recounting all
the Bishops of Auspurg, and the time when they lived, of all others The fable
is refuted by the Chronicle of the Church of Auspurg.
that I know most exactly, he puts in the year 858. when Nicholas was made
Pope, one VValterus who living but two years, Adelgerus succeeded him, who
remaining Bishop sixten years, dyed the year 866. one year before Nicholas,
whom S. Neodegarius following over lived the Pope, and between him and S.
Vdalrike, were Lanto, Vdelmanus, S. VVidgarius the Apostle of the Switzers, S.
Adalbertus, and Hildinus, so as this being taken out of the very Registers,
there can be no error, or not so great as can make so notorious difference in
the time, especially when as other Authors, as Sebastianus Munsterus, Gaspar
Bruschius, Henricus Pantaleon, and Aubertus Myraeus, and with them Martinus
Crusius the Lutheran, and others agree in the same number of years, and order
of succession, and our Adversaries are able to bring no Author, or authority
to disprove it, or to make so much as any seeming appearance for this
conviction of time between S. Vdalricke and Pope Nicholas the first, which
makes the whole tale more incredible, and in the judgment of any wise man
impossible.

24. And wonderful it is to see how M. Fox in this matter plays the goose,
and forgets M. Fox his contradiction in this matter.
himself, granting and denying, now affirming one thing, and then another,
and that as it were with one breath, without any pause between: for speaking
of this Pope Nicholas the first, thus he writes: by this Pope Priests began to
be restrained from marrying, whereof Huldricke Bishop of Ausborough (a learned
and holy man) sending a letter unto the Pope gravely and learnedly refuteth and
reclaimeth against his indiscreet proceedings touching that matter: the copy of
which letter, as I thought it unworthy to be suppressed, so I judged it here
worthy and meet for the better instruction of the Reader to be inserted. So he
of Pope Nicholas the first, whom he charge as you see with restrayning of
marriage, and of being reprehended by S. Vdalricke, who because he favored as
they suppose their marriages, which is with them the lapis lydius to try all
learning, and only square of holiness, is entitled a most holy and learned man.
Thus before the letter.

25. But having set down the letter at full length according to his own
translation, which is none of the best, forgetting what he had said in the
beginning, he gives presently this caveat to the Reader, that here by the way
(says he) the M. Fox was of a very short memory*
Reader is to be admonished that this epistle which by error of the writer is
referred to Pope Nicholas the first, in my mind is rather to be attributed to
the name and time of Nicholas the second, or Nicholas the third. And is it so
indeed Sir John? then why do you put it out of the due place, under a wrong
Pope? why did you tell us that the first Nicholas restrained marriage, and for
that was reprehended by S. Vdalricke? Did the Saint gravely and learnedly
refute and disclaim against the indiscreet proceeding of Pope Nicholas the
first before the letter, and after was proved not to have said one word unto
him at all, but to have spoken to another, who was Pope more then a hundred
years after his death? which of these Foxes will you believe? these are such
riddles, as I cannot understand them, and no more as I suppose did he himself
when he wrote them, and so I leave them to M. Hall to answer, who for this
matter in his margent remitteth his Reader to M. Fox, and yet he in his last
admonition contradicts M. Hall, who is resolute that it was written to the
first, and not to the second, or third Nicholas.

26. And M. Fox like a bad tinker whiles he would mend a little hole, by
knocking he The correction of M. Fox refuted.
beats out the bottom of the kettle, or at least makes the hole much larger
then it was before: for whereas most* Authors agree that S. Vdalricke dyed in
the year 974. as Herm annus Contractus, Vrspergensis, Baronius, and others, or
973. as Crusius, how could he write to Nicholas the second who was made Pope
more the^ fourscore years after S. Vdalricks death? For as Platina, Baronius,
and others affirm, Nicholas the second was not made Pope until the year
1059. such a fool or prophet do these men make this Saint to be: for if he
wrote to the first Nicholas, he wrote to one buried more then twenty years
before he was borne, if to the second to one not made Pope till more then
fourscore years after he was buried: and as for the 3. Nicholas, he is so far
off that I think his great grandfather was not begotten, when S. Vdalricke
dyed: for he was made Pope in the year 1278. and the other departed this life
the year 973. so as there are almost three hundred years between the death of
the one, and creation of other, so exact are these men in historyes, and such
regard they have to deliver the truth, or rather are so impudent and shameless,
as they care not what they write, or what they avouch.

27. For whereunto now are all M. Halls boasts come of the force and warrant of
this testimony, M. Hall cast in his cause.
that it is able to answer all cauills, satisfy all readers, and convince all
not wilful Adversaries, or else that he would be cast in so just a cause? For
who sees him not only to be cast, but crushed also in this matter? who sees
nor, on what sliding sands he places the chiefest foundations of his surest
proofs? for now all his fair words and resolute assurance of his so potent
Advocate is proved to be nothing else, but light smoke, false coin, a mere
cogging collusion, which bewrays in the writer to too much vanity, conjoined
with affected ignorance, or intolerable stupidity, in so much as I may
conclude this first argument against M. Hall, with the words of the Author,
who some years past set out S. Huldericks life, and in this matter thus
writes in the Preface: Scio ad haec impuram nescio cuius nebulonis eptstolam
Vdalrici aliquando nomine venditam, sed cum ^a ad Nicolaum Pontificem scripta
sit (Nicolaus autem primus plusquam viginti annis ante Vdalricum natum suerit
mortuus, secundus Pontificatum octogesimo, and quod excurrit anno post eum
mortuum inierit) ferrei sit oris oportet qui tantum mendacium ausit asserere,
plumbei cordis cui possit imponere. So he. Which words for courtesy I leave
vnenglished, least M. Hall should think that I applied these discourteous
terms unto him in particular, which I will not: and that author speaks to
the first framer of this fancy alone, or to all in general that will be
deceived by such fooleryes.

28. Besides this argument of time (an euiction unavoidable) other presumptions
there are which seem to me to be very effectual, and No such epistle to be
found amongst the Epistls of S. Vdalricus.
not answerable, whereof that is one which Staphilus relates of the epistles of
that Saint, all registered and reserved in Auspurg, amongst which there is not
the least sign, or show of any such letter: neither does Martinus Crusius the
Lutheran in his Sueuicall History (of which Auspurg is the chiefest City) so
much as once infinuate any such thing, which yet should not have been omitted
if it could have been found, that author taking all occasions where he can to
calumniate Catholics, and gather up all scraps of any antiquity, which may
seem to make against them: and which yields to this argument more perswasiue
validity, no Author of those times when it was written, or any other after
until our age, ever mentioned the same, or so much as heard thereof till our
late Sectaryes set it forth, and many reasons there were to have urged the
authority thereof, in case such a thing had been exta^t, written by a man of
that fame for sanctity, as S. Vdalricke, to such a Pope as Nicholas the first,
in such a matter, so often, so earnestly debated, with such circumstance of
more then six thousand childrens heads (a lie fit for Lucian) and the like,
which yet none ever did, and their silence is to me a sure sign, that no such
thing was extant in their days. Two or 3. years before the death of S.
Vdalrick^ was the contention of the incontinent Priests begun in England and
yet none ever mentioned this letter.


29. And to make this more plain, whereas with S. Vdalricke in Germany, at the
same time lived S. Dunstane in England, who also out lived him for some years,
and there that contention was then hoatly pursued by that Saint and others
against the licentiousnes of Priests, it seems to me very strange, that such
an epistle should have been written, whils that conflict was on foot, which
lasted for diverse years, and no acknowledge thereof to have been had in
England, where it might most avail, and with the authority of the Author,
have given more credit to the cause, then the others should have been able to
infringe: but no such thing was then ever alleged, not one syllable thereof in
Malmesbury, Houeden, Huntingdon, Matthew VVestminister, William Nubrigensis,
Florentius, or any other: and thereof I infer that there was no such letter
ever written, which upon so urgent an occasion, ar so opportune a time, and so
directly for the purpose of the lewd Clergy, could not have The incontinent
Clergy men of Germany though living in the same age yet never mentioned S.
Vdalricks epistle.
been concealed, but again and again been produced, insisted on, and urged
to the uttermost.

30. Or in case there had then been so small intercourse between England and
Germany, as in more then ten or twelve years a matter of this brute and fame
should be written in one Country, and nothing thereof heard of or known in the
other, our Kings at that time being of the Saxon race, yet how came it to pass
that in the time of Henry the fourth Emperor, when this practice was by him
permitted, and the Priests no less insolent then against the impugners of
their incontinency, then our Ministers are eager now for their wives; in two
Synods, one at Erphorde 1074. and the other the next year after at Mentz, to
omit other combats against Gregory the seventh, all which happened within the
compass of one age after S. Vdalricke; how came it I say to pass, that none
of these Germa^ Priests could find this letter, or so much as give any notice
thereof, especially Auspurg it self being taken by that wicked Emperor, rifeled
by the soldiers, and razed to the ground? No man there is which sees not what
advantage they had gotten thereby, and the thing happening in their own
Country, could not but have been known to some or other, if not to all of
that incontinent company, and so many favorers of theirs writing for them
against the Pope, some one or other had registered it in their behalf, which
yet hitherto was never done, and the Emperor would have been most glad to have
had such a record, to have vexed the Pope withal, and checked his decree, in
case any such had been known, or heard of in his days. In the time of S.
Vdalricke there was no controversy in Germany about the marriage of Priests.


31. Again in all the time that S. Vdalricke was Bishop, no Pope ever had any
occasion to deal, or treat of this point in Germany, and nothing was ever done
therein by any under whom he lived, which were diverse: for he was Bishop fifty
years, and many Popes in that time lived but two or three, and some not so
much, but one year only, so as there was no cause why any such decree should
be made, or thought upon, or that such a letter should be written: for all the
variance that was in his time about the marriage of Priests was in England
only, where three years before the Saints death a Council was held, and the
decrees which were made against the incontinent, by all the Bishops of the whole
land assembled about the same, were after sent unto Pope John the 13. who
confirmed them, whereof the chiefest was, that either they should put their
women from them, or themselves be put from their Ecclesiastical possessions,
which nothing concerned S. Vdalricke, and by all likely hood he never so much
as heard thereof, and if on this occasion he had written this letter to
Nicholas the first, it had been of a very stale date, to wit of more then a
hundred years after that Pope his death.

32. And as these things demonstrate S. Huldericke not to have been the
writer, so if we a little examine what is written, the contents I S. Huldericks
letter against the Protestants.
mean of this letter, we shall find how far it is from all learning, wit, and
truth, as no man would offer to be cast in his cause therein, unless it be some
outcast indeed, that cares for neither cause, credit, or conscience at all:
for to omit Supemacy.
that this letter acknowledges the Popes Supremacy against all Protestants,
and band of observing the vows of such as have vowed continency against M.
Hall: for of the first the Author says: I doubted what the members of the
body should do, their head being so greatly out of frame, for what can be more
grievous, or more to be lamented touching the state of the Church, then for you
being the Bishop of the principal Sea, to whom appertains the regiment of
the whole Church to swerve, never so little out of the right way? So he. And
yet this now in England is treason by Parliament, to say I mean, that the
Bishop of Rome is head and Vows of chastity to be observed.
supreme Governor of the whole Church, which here as you see by this grave
and learned author, as M. Fox calls him, is so plainly confessed: of the
other also thus: truth it self speaking of continency not of one only but of
all together (the number only excepted of them which have professed
continency) says, he that can take, let him take. Which exception over
throws M. Hals impossible necessity together with the doctrine of their
Church, where the practical exposition of the former words is the Friar or
Priest that can take a Nun to his wife, let him take her, and that without
any exception at all.

33. To omit this I say, what a gross and palpable untruth is that which the
Author auerreth against such as urged the testimony of A notorious lie in the
counterfeit epistle of S. Huldrick
S. Gregory for the continency of Clergy men, when he says: whose temerity I
laugh at, and ignorance I lament: for they know not being ignorantly deceived,
how dangerously the decree of this heresy was (being made of S. Gregory) who
afterward well revoked the same with condign fruit of repentance? But this
reuocatory decree, this repentance, or that the continency of Priests was an
heresy, in S. Gregoryes opinion, are no less monstrous, then malicious
assertions, never known or heard of til this letter came forth, or recorded by
any for the space of more then nine hundred years after S. Gregoryes death
that ever we can read of, and so much being written of his life by Ioannes
Diaconus, by S. Bid, Ado, Freculphus, and others, that this by them al should
be forgotten, which happened upon so remarkable an occasion as never the like
before, or since has ever happened, is a thing that exceeds my capacity to
conceive, or any man else of judgment to imagine: and if such rotten rags may be
once admitted for solid arguments, there is no ground so sure, but will soon
be shaken, and all proofs from authority will be quite taken away: for any
light head may soon frame more of these fictions, then there are heads feigned
to have been found in S. Gregoryes pond.

34. And whereas the Council of Rome before S. Gregory still urged the
continency of the Clergy.
cyted was held not long before his death, in which it is decreed, that if any
Priest, or Deacon marry a wise he be accursed. And of Subdeacons he so often
had determined, that they should not marry, nor be married when they were made,
and that no women should dwell with Priests, but such as the Canons allow, it
well shows Greg. l. 1. ep. 42. l. 3. ep. 5. and 34. l. 7. ep. 112.
what his opinion was: which again is expressed in his answer to the second
question of S. Augustine: and all this being in S. Gregory, and no memory of
the contrary in any epistle of his, or other men's writings of him, or in what
other Author soever, we may well laugh at their temerity, or rather, lament
their ignorance and simplicity, who will believe such toys, and offer to be
cast in their cause upon so frivolous and fabulous a trial, no poetical
fiction in all Ouids Metamorphosis, no dialogue in Lucian, or tale in Esop
being more fond, false, and improbable, then this of the infants heads, or
that S. Huldricke was the Author of that fantastical Epistle.

35. Furthermore that more then six thousand heads in so short a time after S.
Gregoryes decree, More then six thousand heads in one pond.
should be found in one pond, and all these to have been the base children of
Clergy men, may be told more then six thousand times to any man of judgment in
the world, and never be believed, much less of any who know Monstrum horrendu^
inform, ingens.
Rome, about which now there are no ponds, and I think verily there were as
many then, and that so many heads should be found without the bodies, and all
to be known (by their looks belike) to have been the children of Priests, and
other Ecclesiastical men, is a fit fable for Fox to insert into the Acts and
Monuments of his Church, for similes habent labra lactucas, the truth of the
Church of Protestants, and these historyes is alike: and this may be told in
Virginiae (if ever any more Ministers be sent thither to preach) or in some
other parts of the West Indyes, where the people being rude and savage, willbe
easily induced to believe any thing that is brought them by travelers, who
talk of things done in other Countries a far of, they having no means nor
list to examine the truth of the things reported.

36. And if all other arguments failed, the style and phrase of this Satyricall
epistle, well The style of this bastard epistle.
shows the Author to have been no Saint, or of any saintlike disposition:
for who would ever use such terms unto his Superior, unto the chief
Pastor, and Governor of Christ his flock as to say, through your imperious
Tyranny* for is not this to be counted a violence and tyranny etc. who would
ever twyte the Pope with cruelty, persecuting, and despightfully handling of
the Clergy? such base and rebellious dealing may better beseem M. A. de
Dominis, that lewd lost renegate, then meek S. Vdalricke: what Saint finally
would say: For so much then, o Apostolical Sir, as no man which knows you is
ignorant, that if you through the light of your discretion had understood, and
seen what poisoned pestilence might have come into the Church through the
sentence of this your decree etc. Moreover there are so many Ministerial
phrases in this letter, as the institution of the Gospel, the word of the
Lord, and the like, such mad application of the Scripture, such sp^use
aduertisments from the Lord, graced in the margent with M. Foxes notes, whereof
one is, what it is to marry in the Lord, with a solemn shutting up of the
letter, as it were of a sermon with these words, seeing that no man without
chastity (not only in Virgins state, but also in the state of matrimony) shall
see our Lord, who with the Father and the holy Ghost lives and reigns for
ever, Amen: as any may see it was never written by the holy and learned S.
Vdalricke, but was invented by some ignorant Minister, who scant knew the laws
of a letter, which is not to be ended like a sermon, although otherwise in
lying and railing he were very practical, and his crafts master.

37. For notwithstanding all M. Halls encomiasticall The proofs of that letter
weak, simple, and ridiculous.
praises of conuincing all adversaries, of being so potent an advocate, and the
lik^: whosoever will examine the proofs there alleged, and analize the whole
letter, shall see how far he was to seek for sound grounds of learning, who
wrote the same, and how feeble his reasons are for this purpose, the greatest
part of that epistle being also spent either in some bitter inuectiue, or
other, as in the beginning against the Pope, and presently after against such
as live incontinently in single life, and commit sins against nature, as
though married men did not the like, and therefore as well marriage as single
life were to be taken away, because both are subject to abuse: and in all the
later part, which is more then the half, no one place, or argument is brought
or urged of any moment, but these words, he that can take, let him take, which
we allow, and according to that rule square this consequence, he tha^ can live
a single life may be a Priest, and he who cannot may refuse, there is no
enforcement, no compulsion, all passes by free choice, and voluntary election:
and this Author in the words immediately before says, that such as have vowed
continency, are excepted from this rule, and are bound to conteyne, it being
now no more in their power to take or leave: and so if Priests (as they do)
make a solemn vow or profession of chastity, why should not they be bound also
to the observance of the vow they have made, as well as the other? what reason
can there be assigned, why the vow which Religious persons make of chastity
should bind them, and the self same vow made by Priests should not bind at
all, but leave them as free as they were before?

39. All the rest of that letter is in docume^ts bitter Satyrs, and other such
trash, and the proof Small proof.
for the marriage of Clergy men from the beginning to the end is very little,
and to no purpose at all: he begins with the permission of the old law not
recalled, as he says, in the new, to which before we have answered, and here
add further the testimony of Venerable Bede, more Beda in illud Lucae 1. and
cum implarentur dies officij ^ius.
ancient then S. Huldricke: Hoc est quod dixi quod vicis sua tempore P^ntifices
templi tantum officijs mancipati etc. This is that which I said, that the
Priests, when their course came being tied only to the offices of the Church,
did forbear not only from the company of their wives, but from the very
entering into their houses, whereby is given an example to the Priests of our
time, to keep perpetual chastity, who are always commanded to serve the
Altar. For in the old law because the Priestly succession was preserved in the
stock of Aaron, it was necessary to allot them some time for preserving their
issue, but now because there is no carnal succession sought after, but
spiritual perfection, the Priests that they may always attend unto the Altar,
are always to conteyne from their wives, and chastity is imposed upon them for
ever to be obseued. So S. Bid. And his reason carries so great force with it,
and refuteth so well the idle objection of Protestants, as there needs no
commentary to explicate it, no authority to confirm it, or other reason to be
adjoined to make it more This epistle brings nothing of moment but the
ordinary tr^ial objections.
forcible.

39. The other arguments drawn from authority or antiquity in that Rapsody,
are so barely alleged, so weakly followed, and some so impertinently
applied, as will pity any judicious learned Reader to behold, and in effect
they are the same which M. Hall has brought, and my self have answered, and
therefore in praising this epistle, he closely also seems to praise himself:
for he brings the Text of the husband of one wife, the doctrine of Devils,
the Apostolical Canon, the story of Paphnutius, S. Isidore of containing, or
marrying of one, and that Saint is there styled the writer of the rule of the
Clergy, from whence perhaps M. Hall took his error in cyting it under the
same title: and to this is added to conclude the whole matter, the imaginary
reuocation of S. Gregoryes decree by occasion of more then six thousand infants
heads never found in his mote, but only in the muddy head of that tippling
German, who half drunk, and half in a dream first devised that fable, and
M. Hall as it should seem was ashamed to mention it, as seeing it out of
common reason not only improbable, but also impossible, and set forth with such
circumstances, as well show the whole thing to be incredible, and a ly in print.

40. One place of Scripture that epistle has more the^ is in this epistle of
M. Hall, which is, let A strange argument but in no mood, nor figure.
every man have his own wife, which that honest Man will have the Apostle to
have meant as well of the Clergy, as of the laity, and the Catholics who deny
it, are false hypocrites, do lie, and faigne, and that the Priests are not
afraid to abuse other men's wives, and to commit outrage in the foresaid
wickedness: which is a Bedlam proof, that any lewd companion, though never so
base may object against the most innocent man alive, and the Jews against our
Savior himself said, that the was, Homo vorax and potator vini, a glutton and
drinker o^ Matthew. ^^.
wine, a friend to Publicans and open offend ours, but Catholics (poor men)
understand not the Scripture, says this author: and why good Sir? Hear him I
pray you in less then six lines pleading against us and for us, and over
throwing that which he would take upon him out of this text to put up. These
men, says he, have not rightly understood the Scripture, for the saying of the
Apostle: let every man have his own 1. Cor. 7*
wife, does except none in very deed, but him only which has the gift of
continency, prefixing with himself to keep and to continue his virgin (or
virginity) in the Lord. Be it so. And then if the Priests have this gift, and
have prefixed this course to themselves in the Lord, then they shall not need
to marry, and the Apostles words shall not concern them, or bind them to have
their own wives ^s it does other men. And this indeed is the very case of all
Clergy men who vow chastity, and the observance of their vow rests in
themselves, assisted with Gods grace to perform it, as before I have said, and
so the words of S. Paul appertain not unto them, but to the Laity.

41. M. Hall will perchance demand what if one who has vowed chastity find
that he has not this gift, notwithstanding he has prefixed the same to
himself in the Lord: shall be then be incontinent and not marry? I lay that
neither the one or other is allowable, not the first which is never lawful,
not the later which is unlawful to him: and this is decyded even in the very
next words of this Epistle, where the Author thus speaks to the Pope:
Wherefore, o reverend Father, it shall be your part to cause and ouersee, M.
Halls S. Hulderick pleads aagainst him.
that whosoever either with hand or mouth has made a vow of continency (as all
Clergy men in holy orders have) and afterward would forsake the same, should
be either compelled to keep his vow, or else by lawful authority should be
deposed from his order. So there: in which words you see both a compulsion for
the observance of the vow, and deposition from their order in the
transgressors, both which suppose an ability in the vowmaker of performing his
vow, or else the suggestion of M. Hall his S. Vdalricke had been very
injurious, unlawful and tyrannical, as imposing a punishment where there was
no voluntary offense, and the thing for which he is punished was impossible for
him in our Protestants opinion to perform: as that Prince should be a tyrant,
who should put any subject of his to one of these extremes, either to leese the
office and dignity he has in the common wealth, or else to pull the Sun down
from heaven, or remove the earth into a higher place within three miles of the
concauity of the Moon.

42. And seeing this doctrine delivered in the Epistle fathered on S. Huldricke
is so contrary to the doctrine of this Epistle of M. Hall, who will have such
vows to be filthy, and the keeping of them to include an impossible necessity,
it was great temerity and inconsiderate dealing in him to offer to be cast in
his cause, if this epistle do not satisfy all Readers, when as it is so far
from satisfying all Readers, as it does not satisfy himself, who will have all
such votaryes to change their vows as filthy, and to purify themselves by
marriage, and make practical trial of John Fox his note, what it is to marry
in the Lord, contrary to this Epistle, as you have seen: which being so I make
this collection as evident to me as any mathematical demonstration, that M.
Hall neither cares for his wife, nor for his fidelity, M. Hall neither cares
for his wife, nor for his credit, nor for his cause.
nor for his cause. Not for his wife, because he offered to be punished by a
divorce, if he euicted not all Clergy men's marriage, which he has not done, or
is able ever to do whils he lives: not for his fidelity, which he pawned to
leese on any decree to be showed more ample then that of the Trullan Council
for the marriage of Ecclesiastical men, which now he has seen, and that in
such excess, as in respect thereof the Trullan Canon was but like the positive
degree in respect of the superlatiue: not for his cause, which he aduentureth
on this Epistle, in which notwithstanding even in the point in controversy
debated between us, he is both cast and condemned: for we grant a solemn vow
of chastity to be made in taking of orders, which this epistle will not have
broken, but either by compulsion to be kept, or punished by deposition, so
careless a husband, so bad a Christian, so weak a protector he is, or else
which I rather think so light witted a man, as he will offer upon any occasion
to adventure all he has, be it his wife, cause or credit, though the
conditions on which he does it be never so unequal, disaduantagious, or
prejudicial unto him.

43. Before I end this matter, I will come from M. Halls text unto his margent,
where first he makes this note saying: Whether Huldericus Extreme folly to
make no doubt of that which is only doubted of.
or (as he is some where entitled) Volusianus, I enquire not, the matter
admits no doubt. So he. But this is extreme folly: for it imports all in all
to know the true Author, when all the credit of the thing reports, lies
thereon, as here it does, or else any may obtrude whatsoever broken piece of a
letter they shall find on the dunghill to be written by some Father, and the
thing shall challeng authority from the writer: and this thing never having
been seen, or heard of in the world before can have no credit if it were only
written by some late sectary, as we have inst cause to suspect, and M. Hall
cannot disprove, whereas if he could prove it written by S. Huldricke, we
should more esteem it, and answer it with more regard, the authority being
greater in the behalf of our Adversaries, then if it had been coined by some
Magdeburgia^ or el^ by some Sacramentary, either modern or more ancient. To
avoid the suspicion of this imposture, M. Hall cyteth again his learned Pope
Pius 2. or Aeneas Siluius in sua Germania, which title John Fox sets down
more fully saying: Aeneas Siluius has no mention of the counterfeit epistle of
S. Vdalricus.
Meminit ciusdem epistolae Aeneas Siluius in sua peregrinatione, and Germaniae
descriptione. Aeneas Siluius makes mention of this letter in his pilgrimage,
and description of Germany: but it should seem that John Fox his wit was gone
in pilgrimage, or or else a woll gathering when he made this note: for after
some search I have made of his books (and I think I have better means to
find them out, then Fox had) I can find none extant under the one or other
title, nor yet under the title of his Germany, as M. Hall expresses it,
neither does Trithemius in his catalogue, or Posseuinus in Apparatu, where they
set down all the books they could find of this Pope, mention any such work,
and so the mention made of this letter in this Pilgrimage is a mere idle toy,
framed out of the wandering imagination of John Fox, and upon to light credit
taken up by M. Hall. There is in his works extant an answer to one Martin
Mayer, for defense of the holy Roman Church, in which he describes some parts
of Germany by which he had passed, and speaking of Auspurg he says as the
Germans have printed him in Basil: S. Vdalricus huic praefidet qui Papam
arguit de concubinis etc. S. Vdalricus is patron of this place, who reprehended
the Pope for concubines: it lies by the river Licus. So he, as these
Sacramentaryes have set him out. Which being all granted belongs not to this
matter in hand, but concerns only the bad life of the young Pope John, then
thrust by force of friends, and maintained by tyranny in that seat, which abuse
the Church is forced sometimes to suffer as temporal states do ill Princes:
but in the one and the other personal crimes, as they tend to the impeachment
of private fame, so nothing derogate from public authority: in such the office
is to be considered apart from the life, as Moses his chair from the
Pharisyes who sat thereon, their power we reverence, their lives we abhor,
no state so high, no calling so holy, no function so laudable, but ill men have
been found therein: and if once we confound the life with the office, and out
of the unworthiness of the one infer the denial of the other, we shall leave
no Pope, Bishop, Priest, Emperor, King or other Magistrate whatsoever: and
this, supposing these to be the words of Aeneas Siluius, of which I have some
cause to doubt, both for that I have seen a printed copy without them, and
moreover I have seen three Manuscripts, of which as two were lately written and
had them, so the 3. which was much more ancient, in the text had them not, but
in the margent only, by which means forged glosses so creep in often times, as
they com at length to be printed with the words of the Author: but howsoever,
to this purpose they make nothing, and the other whom M. H^ll joins with him,
to wit Gaspar Hedio a late heretic, is of no credit to justify this matter, no
more then M. John Fox, Joseph Hall, or any other professed adversary.

44. Again, it is another untruth to say, that somewhere he is entitled
Volusianus: for though Benefild against M. Leech call the Author of that letter
Volusianus, yet doubtless he means The Author of the forged epistle vncertains.
another man distinct from S. Vdalricke who was never named Volusianus by any
writer, and this makes the whole tale more to reele, seeing it is obtruded as
a base child that knows not his own Fathers name: and if once we remove it
from S. Vdalricke (to whom as I have proved it cannot agree) the thing leeseth
all credit, and proves nothing but the corrupt dealing of such as allege it:
for this Volusianus is a name invented to make fools feign, no man knowing
what he was, where he was borne, when he lived, of what calling or credit in
the world, whether of kyt or kin to the man in the Moon, for he never lived on
our inferior orb under the first, second, or third Nicholas: if I might
interpose my guess, I should think him to be brother to Steven the subdeacon
before mentioned out of Gratian, for that he is so ready to father the
fatherles, and take a child to his charge which he never begot.

45. But, says M. Hall, the matter admits no doubt: which is another untruth:
for whether by the word matter M. Hall understand the Author of the letter, or
the contents themselus, both are doubted, yea both are denied, and to take that
for granted which rests in contro^ersy to be proved, is a foul fault in
Philosophy, and called petitio principij: as if one to credit Petitio principij
a foul fault in ^ Philosopher.
M. Hall, and to prove that for his learning he deserves to be estcemed
against one who should deny him to be learned at all, should thus conclude: All
learned men deserve to be esteemed: but M. Hall as I suppose is a learned man:
Ergo he is for such to be esteemed: no man will allow that he suppose the Minor
as granted, which only is called in question and alone necdeth no proof,
which if we apply to the present matter, we shall find in a different subject
the same argument. We deny that ever S. Huldericke wrote any such epistle, how
does M. Hall prove it? thus, whether you call him S. Huldericus or Volusianus
the matter admits no doubt but that he wrote it, to which put this Minor, but
he who wrote the letter is Author thereof, Ergo S. Huldericke is the Author.
An argument more fit for some Grillus, Corebus, Alogus, some Patch, Ioll, or
Will Summer, then M. Hall.

46. There rests one more untruth in the A foul Chronographicall error
touching the time when S. Hulderick lived.
margent, which is Chronographical about the time when S. Huldricke lived, that
you may perceive how this man in all things is rash and negligent: if he
dispute his arguments be loose, if he cite Authors their authorytyes are
either mistaken or corrupted, if he infer one thing out of another, it is by
wrong illation, and takes quid for quo, the contrary to that which does follow
of his premises, if for more exactnes he go about to reduce things to their
proper time, 20. or thirty years difference is not to be regarded: for to be
exact is against his reputation, he will not be taken for such a precision, and
therefore here he tells us, Huldericus Episcopus Argustae anno 860. which is
just thirty years before he was borne, and yet after his birth he lived either
thirty three, or thirty four before he was made Bishop: so as he is here made
to be Bishop of Auspurg more then three score years before his time: are not
these men exact writers trow you on whose fidelity so many men with such
assurance may rely their salvation?

47. And to end all this matter as though An untruth joined with a
contradiction.
he had not hitherto given us untruths enough, he adds for the final vpshot
one more, and that also combyned with a contradiction when he says: after
Vdalricus (so strong did he plead and so happily) for two hundred years more
this freedom still blessed these parts, yet not without extreme opposition:
historyes are witness of the busy and not unlearned combats of those times in
this argument. So he. And I cannot but tell him out of the Comicke: Non sat
commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec: These times agree no better then
did the other of S. Vdalricks letter to the first Nicholas: and untrue it is
that ever he pleaded so happily, so strongly, who never opened his mouth in
this controversy, untrue it is that this carnal freedom blessed these parts
for two hundred years more after his death: for under Pope Gregory the
seventh he confesses presently after, that this cause was utterly ruined, and
between the death of these two, I mean S. Vdalricke and Gregory the seventh
there is but one hundred and twelve years, and whereas that Pope dealt in that
matter some years before his death, it will follow even by the grant of M.
Hall himself, that this cause so strongly, so happily pleaded for, in the
compass of one age was quite ouerborne, and utterly ruined, so as by this
account M. Hall in setting down two hundred years, reckons only but one
hundred too much, which is not much in him, so subject every where to error,
and so careless in his assertions, as almost nothing comes from him out of any
learning or truth, that is in Controversy between us. The imaginary pleading
of S. Vdalricu^ neither strong not happy.


48. Again there is a manifest contradiction in these words: for if upon this
strong and happy pleading this freedom blessed the parts of the Latin Church,
how had it such extreme opposition? for before this time there was nothing else
in M. Halls judgment, but full possession of this freedom, and the contrary
not to have prevailed till more then a thousand years after Christ, so as all
the blessing was before S. Vdalricks pleading, and all the opposition after,
and how is not that pleading to beheld rather weak and unlucky, then strong and
happy, which had no other effect then extreme opposition, and quite overthrow
of the cause defended by that plea? For what success could be more
unfortunate, then to be cast in a cause so vehemently urged, debated with such
heat, and that between the supreme Pastor for authority, and a most eminent
Bishop for sanctity of those tims? which contradiction is made more palpable by
the next ensuing words in his letter: for thus he writes.

49. But now when the body of Antichristianisme A heap of untruths.
began to be complet (so it pleases this light Companion to prattle) and to
stand up in his absolute shape after a thousand years from Christ, this
liberty which before wauered under Nicholas the first, now by the hands of Leo
the ninth, Nicholas the second, and that brand of hell Gregory the seventh was
utterly ruined, wives debarred, single life urged. So M. Hall. And truly if
Leo the 9. and Nicholas the second ruined this matter, this plea had so short a
blessing, and so quick a cross, as it remained on foot little more then
fifty years, and that still in continual contradiction until it was
extinguished, and so, as before out of two hundred we rebated one, so out of
that one we must take another half, and leave him but fifty if his own words
be true, that this was ruined by Leo the ninth, as here he pretends, and the
blessing he talks of is resolved to this, that presently this marriage matter
was contradicted, and the contradiction so followed as it prevailed: and this
supposing what he says to be true of these men and matter, which yet are so
false, as they conteyne in them, to speak the least, more lies, then lines,
which I will briefly touch in order.

50. The first is, that under these Popes the body of Antichristianisme began
to be complete, for all The first untruth.
the Popes he names, to wit, Nicolas the first, Leo the ninth, Nicolas the
second, and Gregory the 7. were all very holy men, all learned, al excellent
Governors of Christ's Church, and, the second Nicolas excepted, all registered
in the Catalogue of Saints: and our Protestants of the primitive Church in
England were wont to tell us, that this body was complete in the time of
Bonisace the third, whom idly they would have to be that singular Antichrist
descrybed in Daniels prophesy, and the Apocalypse of S. John, and some have much
labored to draw the number of his name to agree unto the time when he was made
Pope, with other impertinencyes: and if M. Hall make the denial of Priests
marriage the complementall perfection of this body (for all the heaven and
happynes which these men have, is in their wives, and whatsoever savors or
favors not, that is Antichristian) then was it complete for some hundreds of
years before any of them were borne or thought on, as the authorityes of
Fathers and Councels before alleged do demonstrate.

51. The next is, that this freedom was still allowed, until a thousand
years after Christ, to wit, that all Priests might marry, but A lie in print.
this is to gross a lie, and fitter for him to make who is father of lies,
then for any of his children or scholars. I see the Philosopher well to have
advised a liar (though M. Hall follow not his advise) oportet mendacem esse
memorem, he who will lie must have a good memory, and remember what he has
said in one place, that he do not contradict it in another, and so be taken in
the manner, as here this honest man is, who M. H^al of a very weak memory.
two leaus before told us out of Steven the second that in the Western Church
no one of the Clergy from the Subdeaco^ to the Bishop had leave to marry, and
whereas this Steven was made Pope in the year 752. that is two hundred forty
and eight years before the thousand, how does he here tell us, that after
thousand years from Christ this liberty which before wauered was ruined etc.
what liberty do you mean M. Hall? of Clergy men's marriage? then your memory is
very short: for what freedom was there in Steuens time, when none from the
Subdeacon to the Bishop might marry? or what did all the Popes you here name
add unto this restraint? Again, the first words of your Trullan decree made
more the^ forty years before this Steven was Pope, do clean cast and condemn
you, as confessing even then the Church of Rome to have decreed the single life
of the Clergy.

52. The third untruth is, that this feeedom The third untruth.
wauered in the time of Nicholas the first, who was made Pope in the year 858.
for in all his time, as before I said no such matter was ever mentioned, none
discussed, and it seems to me very strange to hear M. Hall to talk of
Freedom Single life of the Clergy long in use even by M. Hals own Authors
before the time of Nicholas the first.
under this Nicholas for marriage that should waver, when as out of Steuens
testimony and his own Council, a hundred years before, no Subdeacon, Deacon,
Priest, or Bishop was permitted to marry: for where at that time was this
freedom? in the Greek Church perhaps? but how was their marriage ruined by
these Popes, their wives debarred, single life urged, when as still that
incontinent Clergy continued as before, as still borne out by their violent
Emperors, and schismatical Patriarchs? if he mean of the Latin Church, as
needs he must: then I ask him again in Pope Steuens time where was this
freedom? where in the time of the Trullan Synod? where before? where after?
when did it first come in? when went it out? by what authority was it done? by
what Author recorded? and can such great mutation be made, and no memory left
thereof to posterity? I think not.

53. The fourth is, when he says: Now by The 4. untruth.
the hands of Leo the ninth etc. for what in this matter did this Leo? truly
no more then Nicholas: for there is extant in his life set out by Baronius in
his history, but one decree of his touching this matter, which M. Hall may be
ashamed to apply to this purpose, unless he mean to plead for the freedom of
all harlots, as well as for his wife: for these are the words of that decree as
Petrus Dam. ep. ad Cunibertu^ Episcopu^ Taurinen.
S. Peter Damian relates them, in whom only they are extant, and who perhaps
was present at the Council: Leo Papa (says he) constituit vt quaecumque
damnabiles feminae intra Romana moenia reperirentur Presbyteris prostitutae, ex
iunc and deinceps Lateranensi palatio adiudicarentur ancilla. Leo the Pope
ordained that whatsoever wicked women should be found within the walls of Rome
to have been naught with Priests, from thence forward should be condemned as
serving mayds to the Lateran palace. So he. And in this place as the same
Author says, they were to remain under a penitential habit and rule: and
that such were truly harlots appears out of the same letter, where after he
says: Quas deprehenderit sacrilega Presbyteris admixtione prostratas. I hope
M. Hall will make some difference betwixt his wife and such a one, and then I
infer that Pope Leo of Priests marriages made no decree, but only punished
their concubines, and that only in the city of Rome: and this Minister
deserves little thanks of his fellows, that in pleading for their wives,
takes all laws made by any Pope against lewd harlots, to have been also made
against them, as though Ministers wives and such people did conuenire vniuoce,
and were all of one predicament.

54. The fifth untruth is, that he makes Nicholas The fifth untruth.
the second to be one of those who denied marriage to Priests, or rather who
ruined their marriages with Leo, and Gregory: for he likewise never dealt about
marriages at all, and concerning the incontinent Clergy in his time one decree
of his touching Priests we find in Gratian: Nullus Missam audiat Presbyteri
quem scit concubinam indubitanter habere etc. Let no man hear Gratian. dis.
32. c. Nullus.
the mass of a Priest, which he certainly knows to keep a concubine: which
point is there put under excommunication by the Synod. M. Hall seems to be of
toto jealous a disposition, that can hear nothing spoken of concubines, but
presently his mind runs on Ministers wives: and there was no need for
Nicholas to deny marriage unto Priests, when as such in the Church of Millan as
after holy orders had known their wives, or had maintained that they might be
known, accused themselves of the heresy of the Nicolaits, before S. Peter
Damian sent thither upon the report of their scandalous incontinency, and that
without al co^pulsion or inforceme^t in this form of words: Nicolaitarum
quoque haeresim nihilominus condemnamus etc. We do notwithstanding condemn the
heresy of the Nicholaits, and as much as lies in us under the oath aforsayd do
promise to keep back not only Priests, but deacons and subdeacons from all
filthy copulation of their wives, or concubins. So the Bishop of Millan: to his
Clergy.

55. Last of all it is another untruth, that The six untruth.
under Gregory the seventh (whom this railing companion calls the brand of
hell) the marriage The marriage of Priests more ruined by other succeeding Pops
then by Gregory the seventh.
of Priests was ruined, because it never had so deep root in the Latin Church
as in his time: for Henry the Emperors variance with this Pope, gave liberty
to that loose Clergy, to put themselves out of order, and withdraw their necks
from the yoke of Ecclesiastical discipline, as the turmoyls of our Conqueror
caused the like in England at the same time, the Devil taking the advantage of
such occasions to break the peace of the Church, as well knowing his best
fishing to be in troubled waters, and by setting debate between the
Ecclesiastical Governors and the temporal, to put all the members, and whole
frame of the one and other body into mutiny, tumult, and disorderly confusion:
neither did this end with Gregory, but continued after his death, as we see in
Urban the second, Paschalis the second, and others, who insisting on the steps
of their famous predecessor Gregory the seventh, still by censures condemned
that beastly abuse, never so much in use in the Latin Church as in their days,
and therefore Gregoryes successors may better be said to have ruined M. Hals
freedom and felicity, then Gregory, who left the matter more on foot perhaps
then he found it, and by reason of the great hatred the Council. Constant.
Melfitanu^ Can. 2. Placentin. Can. 4. Claramon. Can. 9.
Emperor bare his person, and sway which he had in Germany, was not able to
cure this festered wound, though afterward the constant courage of other Popes
succeeding, especially of Urban the second in whose time by four Councels it
was expressly condemned, got the victory, and quite cut it off by the root.

56. Which thing much troubles M. Hall, and therefore that you may know the
man's modesty, thus out of Auentine a late Gospelling brother he infers of
their famous endeauours in preserving the Ecclesiastical state in her wonted
cleanes by excommunicating such who after their vows took wives. A good turn
for whoremaisters, says Auentine, who now for one wise might M. Halls modesty.
have six hundred bed-fellowes. So M. Hall: but I see not how this inference
can hold, unless M. Hall mean, as he seems to do, that though Clergy men were
debarred wives, yet they were permitted to have concubines: for so his words
import, that by the debarring of Priests marriage, they gave them leave that
every one might The concubines of Priests less condemned then their wives.
now have six hundred bed-fellowes, but that is a most impudent untruth: for
all the former Popes who had any contradiction with Ecclesiastical men in this
kind, except Gregory the 7. made all their Canons and decrees against
concubines only, and thereupon began all his combat in England, and else where,
though afterward vice taking deeper root, some of those who kept concubines
shaking off all shame (the ill government of Princes, and lack of vigor in
the Bishops giving way to this wantonness) began to take them for their wives,
and this most of al in Germany in the time of this Gregory, who therefore made
his decrees against both, as well such as kept concubines, as the other who
were married, and put them both under the like censures, because both did
violate the vow they had made of perpetual chastity: and if the promise made
in marriage bynd either part to be true to other, and never during life to be
separated by a second marriage; why shall not a promise made to God who never
dies, perpetually bind him that promises during his life, seeing the promise
The band of chastity by vow, and the band of matrimony compared together.
is voluntary, the thing promised laudable, the performance easy, the reward
glorious?

57. Again, if one already married do marry another, the second marriage is
inualide and of no force, because his former wife is living (and the same of
the woman in respect of her husband) but is to be esteemed aduowtry, because
the former band still knitteth him and the first wife together, and cannot be
dissolved or broken, but by the death of the one or other party: so this kno^
of chastiiy, whereby such as receive holy orders, do by solemn vow bind
themselus to God during their life, does still bynd them for all that time, and
to offer to break the same, either by keeping a concubine, or (to color their
filth with a fair cloak) by taking a wife, is sacrilegious incest, as before
we have showed: for as the first is unlawful to all, and especially (by reason
of the annexed scandal) to Clergy men, so is the other as impossible with the
former band of his voluntary and premeditated vow as is the second wife in
wedlock with the first: and as this second marriage is no marriage but
aduowtry, so is this marriage of Priests no marriage at all, but an honorable
title of a most dishonest filthiness, with which whils these men would cover
their turpitude, Damnationem (says 1. Tim. 3.
the Apostle) habebunt, quia primam fidem irritam secerunt: They incur
damnation, because they have broken their first vow, which they made of
perpetual chastity unto Almighty God.

58. And it must needs seem strange in the ears of all moral men, to hear
these men's collections, who measuring alothers by themselus, no sooner hear
that Priests are debarred wives, but presently gather that they must have
concubines, or as beastly Bale writes (who in this matter every where beleheth
out ribaldry) Dunstanus Balaeus centur. 2. script. Britanniae in Osualdo.
perpetuo decreto firmauit, vt Clerici deinceps sub specioso caelibatus titulo
Sodomitice riuerent, aut Ecclesiarum suarum, curas omnino dimitterent. Dunstan
by a perpetual decree appointed, that Clergy men for the time to come under
the beautiful title of single life, should live Sodomitically, or altogether
forsake their Churches. So he. And who ever read such lying villainy? where was
this decreed? where mentioned? but there is no mean with these men, either you
must marry, or else have for one wife a hundred harlots, or live Sodomitically,
as though there were no Stapleten. in vita.
purity out of wedlock, but extreme turpitude, when as chastity is better, and
more easily kept in single life, as Sir Thomas Moore was wont to say, then in
wedlock, and marriage is not so sure a bridle, but that besides one wife men
will have more concubines, as appeared well in the first parents and planters
of the new Gospel in England, King Henry and Queen Anne Bullen, for neither
could that King be contented at once with one wife, or Queen Anne with one
husband: for besides the King she had other false lovers, of which all our
historyes make mention, as Mark Smeton the musician, Henry Norrice, William
Brierton, Francis Weston Gentlemen, and George The inco^tinency of the first
progenitors of the English Gospel.
Bollen Lord Rochsord her brother, all which had carnally known her, al which
were arraigned, condemned, and executed for their aduowtry, and incest
committed with her, and she for the same was beheaded in the tower, and that
within less then a year after that Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas Moore had
lost their heads, for not approving her impure marriage, and that which flowed
out of that source, for denying the monstrous title of the Kings Ecclesiastical
supremacy, never before heard of in the Christian world.

59. And this I write, not as having any list to rock the stinking craddle of
your Ghospells infancy, a work too unsavory, but to show that we condemn not
marriage, although in that state there be many aduowtrers: for the abuse is to
be sequestered as before I have said from the thing, and the argument were not
good to say, single fornication is a less sin then aduowtry, ergo it is
better for men not to marry but to live at liberty, and rather choose to commit
the lesser sin, then to put themselves in danger of the greater, because both
are damnable, and all are bound not to commit the one or the other: even so it
fares in Priests, of whose state we may not as these men every where do against
Both wius and concubins to such as have vowed chastity are unlawful.
all rules of learning, or honesty conclude, that it is better for them to
marry, then to keep a concubine, as though they were bound to one of these two
extrems, and that their state after their solemn vows, were altogether the
same with other lay men, and that it were as free for them to marry as before:
for both the one and the other after their promise made to God of perpetual
chastity, is wicked, unlawful, and damnable: and we hold not these to be
termini causales, or to infer one the other, you are bound to avoid
fornication, ergo you must needs have a wife: or on the contrary side, if you
have not a wife, you will have a hundred harlots: for between these extremes,
there is the single life of of such as live in perpetual chastity, which any
one may follow, and all are bound to follow who have vowed it, and their
marriage is a greater sin then single fornication with another woman, in
regard of the injury done to the vow, to the sacrament, to the woman married,
to the issue: to the vow, by breaking the band made to God, by a contrary band
made to his The marriage of a Priest does injury to 4. at once, to the vow, to
the Sacrament, to the woman, to the issue.
wife, which even in civil contracts among men is held unlawful: to the
Sacrament of matrimony, in that he maryeth who is not capable of marriage, and
so profanely abuses that which by our Saviors institution is sacred: to the
woman he married, for she being persuaded that it is true and lawful matrimony,
lives continually in sacrilegious incest, being indeed not his wife, but an
infamous concubine: to his issue, because it is unlawful and bastardly by the
Canon law. Such is the happynes of this freedom.

60. But to end this matter, M. Hall not contented M. Halls false accusation of
Gregory the 7. refuted.
to have called Pope Gregory the seventh the brand of hell, urges further
against him, how his decrees were contemned, himself was deposed, and that the
Churches did ring of him each where for Antichrist: let us hear his own
words, and then discuss them. But how approved those decrees were of the
better sort (says he) appears (besides that the Churches did ring of him each
where for Antichrist) in that at the Council of Worms, the French and German
Bishops deposed this Gregory in this name (among other quarrels) for separating
man and wife: violence did this not reason, neither was Gods will here
questioned, but the Popes wilfullnes, what broils heeron ensued, let Auentine
witness. Hitherto M. Hall. There is no remedy, will we, nill we, this man will
begin, will go forward, will end with untruths, for here are three more at the
least, or to speak more plainly, no one true word in the whole narration: but
first let us consider in a word or two the thing it self.

61. Daily experience teaches us, that where once emnity enters between
Princes and Where there is emnity between Princes there is also most commonly
open detractio^ of each other.
men of authority, how easy, how frequent a thing it is to devise bitter
speeches against one the other, and that because both will seem to have been
injured, both to have justice on their side, both to maintain a lawful
quarrel, and whatsoever the adverse part does though never so well, or
themselves though never so ill, all are so covered over with new coats,
crests, and mantles, as a lamb shall seem a wolf, a fearful hare a fierce
lion, and on the contrary side in behalf of themselves, a Tiger shall be tame,
and the rude Bear a beautiful beast: wherefore from the parties so interessed
no sound and impartial judgment can be expected, but that is to be sought from
others, who being free from faction, and capacity sufficient to discern the
grounds of the whole contention, shall with all candor deliver the same: and
there can be no greater coniecturall sign that any Prince mainteyneth a wrong
cause, then to see his own subjects of most power, learning, and credit to
disclay me from him, to rise, to write against him, to condemn his actions,
and utterly to forsake him: and this not only happened in Germany to Henry the
fourth in this quarrel with Gregory the seventh, but in all other nations at
that time: and all other writers since of any name, or note have condemned him,
and praised the Pope, or if any mercenary companion have set his soul to sale,
and betrayed truth for temporal rewards, as the number of such has been few,
so has their memory been infamous, their credits crazed, and their reports as
partial, as injurious, as lying, by all (heretics only excepted who place all
their hope in lying) been disesteemed.

62. In the time of Gregory the seventh ten Authors are cyted by Bellarmine
to have defended 27. Authors alleged by Bellarmine in defense of Pope
Gregory the seventh.
him, all grave, learned and holy men, and the chiefest for name or fame that
then lived, of which the two SS. Anselmes were most eminent, to wit ours of
Canterbury, and the other of Luca, whose sanctity even by the testimony of
Sigebert the schismatic monk, and favorer of the Emperor was declared by
God in many miracles which he wrought: and a little after these men by twenty
two other Authors recounted by the same Cardinal, of which some report that
he shined with miracles, as Martinus Polonus, Lambertus Shaffnaburgensis and
others, some Vincent in ^^^culo. l. 25. c. 44.
that he had the gift of prophesy, as Vincentius the French Historiographer,
some that he was most constant in Ecclesiastical rigor, as Otho Frisingensis,
and Nauclerus: in fine for his singular zeal, Oath. lib. 6. cap. 32. Naucl.
Generat. 36. vide Genebrar. in Chronico anno 1073.
learning, virtue, judgment, and perseverance until the end, all writers cyred
in the Cardinal give him an honorable testimony, to which I will adioyne two
others by him pretermitted, but both of them grave and learned, and such as no
one who favored the Emperor is to be compared with all.

63. The first is Harimanus Schedesius a German Scedel. Registro Chron. ata. 6.
who styles Gregory: Virum Deo and hominibus gratissimum, prudentem, iustum
etc. A man most grateful to God and man, wise, just, meek, the patron and
protector of the poor, of pupil^, of widows, the only and most eager
defender of the Roman Church against the wickedness of heretics, and power of
wicked Princes, usurping by force Ecclesiastical goods. So he. And this
Encomium belongs not as you see to a brand Gregoryes life and death most lau
dable.
of hell, or a proclaimed Antichrist, but to a virtuous and most excellent
Pastor, to a man of singular zeal and sanctity: and conform to these his
rare virtues, and undaunted courage in Gods cause, from which no threats of his
potent enemy, no persuasion of his seduced friends, no humane respect
whatsoever was able to transport or move him: conform I say to these was his
death, the end conspiring with the beginning, and laudable continuance of his
whole life: for so the same Author says that he dyed sancte and pre, saintly
and devoutly, which death happening unto him in banishment at Salerno, others
recount Baronius and alij.
how in his death bed he used these words: Dilexi iustitia^, and odio habui
iniquitatem, propterea morior in hoc exilio. I have loved justice, and hated
iniquity, and for that cause do I dye in this banishment. A happy love, a happy
hatred, and most happy banishment, all which are now rewarded with their due
deserved crowns of immortal glory. Carolus Sigonius de regno Italiae l. 9.


64. The other author is Carolus Sigonius in that admired work^ of his de regno
Italiae in the 9. book, who having seen ^ll the whole matter, and much
praised the worthiness of this Pope, he shows the first root of all the
discord between The lewd Bishops of Germany stir up the Emperor against the
Pope.
him and the Emperor, to have proceeded from certain licentious Bishops of
Germany, appalled at his election, as well knowing his courage and severity
against al vice and vicious behavior: Gregorius (says he) ingeniy yehementis
tum tumpraesta^ta^tis erga Ecclesiam pietatis etc. Gregory being zealous, and
of singular piety toward the Church, the Bishops of Germany being affrighted
with his notable severity, and immovable constancy in reforming Ecclesiastical
discipline presently feared some sharp correction of their lives, and severe
chastisement of their disorders, and therefore going to the Emperor, they
willed him to disanull his election, or else to expect nothing else but all the
power of this Pope to be bent against his crown. So Sigonius. So as we see that
still wicked Prelates against the due correction of their Superiors, have armed
themselves with secular power, and avoided that by force, which by all equity
and justice they should have undergone.

65. And that which made the vigor of The persons and personal crims opposed
against by Gregory made his virtuous constancy more odious.
this vigilant Pastor more odious, were the persons with whom he was to
encounter, which were the wicked Emperor, Robert Guiscard the Norman Duke, who
by force had entered upon the possessions of the Church, had al Sicily, and a
great part of Italy in his hands, and all the incontinent Clergy of Germany,
and else where: to oppose against al these was to expose himself to all
obloquies, injuries, and villanyes that either the power of so potent Princes,
or the malice of so many impure tongues could devise against him, neither were
the persons more great then their faults heinous: for thus says the same
Author: Erant grauia illa flagitia coercenda ne sacerdotia venderentur etc.
These grievous faults in particular were to be corrected by this Pope the
selling of Bishoprics or parsonages by taking the inuestiture or possession
of them from the Emperor, or other lay men, that Clergy men should have wives,
that the temporal dominions of the Church might not wrongfully be molested or
alienated. So he. Who goes on showing what this most famous Pastor did for
remedy of all these disorders, and with what success, which I omit because in
the matter we now speak off M. Hall assigns him the conquest for this
carnal liberty; which (says he) wauered under Nicholas the first, now by the
hands of Leo the ninth, Nicholas the second, and that Brand of hell Gregory the
seventh was utterly ruined, wives debarred (a pitiful case) single life
urged.

66. Now if from the Pope we cast our eyes on his Antagonist Henry the
Emperor, by whose means, as Hulderi^us Mu^ius the Zuinglian writes Henry the
4. even in the judgment of Calvin a most wicked Emperor.
this liberty of Priests taking wives in Germany took such deep root, for by
the fruit you shall know the tree, and cause by the effect, we shall find so
much in grave Authors reported of him, as he may well be said to be the father
of this deformed child, and chief Proctour of this carnal cause: for of all
Christian Emperors that ever were he is one of the worst, if not the worst of
all others: and to omit Catholic Authors both for avoiding prolixity, and for
that their words have not so great weight against these men, though never so
learned, grave, or holy, thus Calvin, to whom I hope M. H^ll will give some
credit, does paint him out: Henricus eius nominis Calvin. 4. Instit. c. 11.. 13.
quartus etc. Henry the fourth of that name a light and rash man, of no wit, of
great audacity and dissolute life: for vheras he had all the Bishoprics of
Germany partly at sale, partly laid The like has Auentinus the Lutheran of him.
open as a booty to be pilfered by his Courtiers, Hildebrand who had before
been provoked by him, took this plausible pretext to reueng himself upon
him, and because he seemed to prosecu^e a good and pious cause, he was
furthered by the favor of many, and Henry was otherwise for his more insolent
manner of governing hated of most Princes. So Calvin. And a little after: Huc
accessit, quod multi deinde Imperatores etc. To this may be added that many
Emperors which followed after, were more like unto this Henry then unto Julius
Caesar, whom it was no great maistery to vanquish: for having all things
secure they loytered at home etc. this was the conceit which Calvin had of
this Emperor, by whose procurement all the rumors were raised against Gregory,
and this testimony (which yet in that Author is rare to find) carrying so
great truth with it in respect of the Emperor, and agreement with other
historyes, I will rest thereon, and from this general inspection of the
Authors of the beginning and origin of this controversy, in a word or two
examine all the particulers of M. Halls accusation.

67. These untruths of whose words before cyted are couched so thick
together, as he may seem here to have striued to try how many M. Halls
untruths touching Gregory the 7. are examined.
lies he could well utter in a few lines: for first it is an untruth to say,
that such as misliked or rather condemned the decreee of Pope Gregory were the
better sort, for then the best of them, I mean William Bishop of Mastrick in
Flanders, had never come to that disastrous end, as the historyes do mention
that he did: for none was more earnest for the Emperor, none more eager
against the Pope, none a greater enemy to al order, The wickedness of William
Bishop of Mastrick.
none dealt more, none so much in that Council of Worms as he: for he forced
Adalbert Bishop of Herbipolis or VVirtzburg, and Herimanus Bishop of Mets to
subscribe against the Pope, and was, as Baronius out of Lambertus and others
hold him, the only Author of that schism, the Emperor doing nothing without
his counsel and direction: and when by the Pope afterward as well he as the
Emperor were both excommunicated for the same, he being at Mastricke when the
news thereof was brought him, the Emperor being also there, at the time of
Mass according to his wont he preached unto the people, taught them to
contemn the Popes excommunication, laughed and made sport at the sentence, and
being eloquent in speech, used all the art he could to make light all
Ecclesiastical censures, to extenuate the Popes authority, to complain of the
wrong done him, and to canuase part by part the judicial sentence made against
him, which to that wicked Emperor and his light Courtiers made good pastime.

68. But these merry sermons ended not so merrily: for after the holy days of
Easter ended, and the Emperor departed, this Bishop still Bruno in histor.
belli Saxonici, Lambertus in Chron. and a^j.
continuing on his wonted vein of jesting, railing, and contemning all
authority, even in the pulpit, within less then two months after the Council
of Worms, he fell sick, went home, and the disease increasing there stood by
him one of the Emperors family, who ready to depart after the Emperor, asked
what he would command him to his Master: mary (quoth the Bishop) I send him
this message: Quod ipse, and ego, and omnes cius iniquitati sauentes damnati
sumus in A heavy message.
perpetuum. That he, and I, and all such as favor his wickedness are damned for
ever: this was the last message he sent his ghostly child Henry the Desperation.
fourth: and being rebuked by some of his Clergy, who were about him for his
desperate speech, he answered them: I can say no otherwise then I see and find:
for the Devils enuiron my bed round about, that they may take my soul as soon
as it is separated from the body, and therefore when I shall be dead, I request
you, and all faithful people, that you trouble not your selves in praying for
my soul. So this most miserable man, the author and inciter of this tragedy
departed this life. Who whether he were of the better sort needs no
declaration, for God giving the sentence who never in such matters forsakes
his friends, the matter is out of all doubt or controversy.

69. And the Author I follow having set down this narration, with some more
particulers Bruno in hist belli Saxonici.
which I let pass, thus further discourses: Et cur eum solum dico
miserabiliter obijsse? cum manifestum sit omnes fere Henrici familiares and
fideles aeque miseras mortes incurrisse, and cos miseriores qui fuerant illi
fideliores quod fides illa vere erat perfidia. And why do The followers of
Henry the 4. M. Halls better sort of men dyed miserably.
I recou^t this man alone to have dyed miserably? when as it is evident almost
all the faithful friends of Henry to have had the like miserable ends, and
those more miserable who were more faithful unto him, because that fidelity
was nothing else but plain perfidiousnes. So he. And then sets down many
particulers of the ends of the chiefest Authors, instigatours and followers of
the Emperor in all his bad courses, which were very strange, disastrous, and
lamentable. The Patriark who sent from the Pope, by seduction adhered after
unto Henry, together with fifty other of his retinew dyed suddenly, the same
happened to Vdo Bishop of Treuirs, Eppo another Bishop riding over a river so
shallow as one might wade it over on foot, without danger, was therein no less
miserably then miraculously drowned: and not to insist on other particulers
there related, the end of the Emperor himself was such, as well showed how
pleasing unto God, how grateful unto men, or rather to friends and enemies,
yea even to his own children, how base and abominable his actions were.

70. For after a long rebellion against the chief Pastor his spiritual
Father and Superior, as he was a disobedient child to his mother The
unfortunate end of Henry the fourth.
the Church, so were his children no less rebellious unto him, it falling out
with him as it did with our second Henry upon the like occasion with his
Primate S. Thomas, after whose death his own children Henry, Richard and John,
were in continual revolt, and conspiracy against him, even till his dying day:
so likewise the Emperor having two sons Conrade and Henry, the first being
made King of Germany, and thereby declared heir apparent of the Empire, because
he would not obey his Father in a most filthy action, as Dodechinus and
Helmoldus relate, and out of them Sigonius, left his Father, took Lombardy
from him, and what else he had in Italy, for which the crown of Germany was
taken from him by his Father (though otherwise he were a worthy Prince, of
goodly personage, and excellent gifts of mind, which made him beloved and
admired of all) and bestowed it on his younger brother Henry, who more like his
Father then Conrade, never left to prosecute his said Father by arms, till he
had put him from the Empire, overthrown him in the field, got him, as Sigonius
says, after the discomfiture sustained in the wars into his hands, where he
forced, or as some will have it, famished him to death, and then left his body
for five years unburied at the town of Spira in Germany: and this Henry
proving no better an Emperor then the Father whom he had deposed, God not
permitting that wicked race to run on further ended the same in this Henry his
person, and translated the Empire unto the Saxons of all other most hated by
the two former Emperors, as he did the like in our King Henry the eight his
children, who all dyed without issue.

71. Another untruth it is, that the Churches did each where ring of him for
Antichrist, which is as false as any thing can be imagined: for although in
Germany such as followed the Emperor might use many insolent terms, yet they
never that Pope Gregory the 7. never by his enemies branded with the name of
Antichrist.
I have read used this, and so far were all Churchs from using the like liberty
of speech, as even in that very Country, there wanted not those, who did both
honor and reverence him, and that not particular persons alone, as Lambertus
and other learned and virtuous men, but whose cittyes and states, as Auspurg,
Saxony etc. and out of Germany all honored him as a most worthy and zealous
Bishop: and Malmesbury our best and Marian. Sco. lib. 3. Chron.
most incorrupt writer after S. Bid, does never mention him but with honor,
or his Adversaries without touch of disgrace: and of this particular decree
thus S. Anselme wrote in England: Anselm. ep. 8. in edit. vero Coloniensi anni
1612. epist. 56.
De Presbyteris vero qui se aperte reproba libidinis conuersatione Deo
reprobabiles exhibent etc. Of the Priests who by their wicked lustful
conversation make themselves reprobate before God, that without question is to
observed which the Apostolical providence (to wit of Gregory the seventh, for
that title is given to the Popes decree, as successor to the chief Apostle S.
Peter) by Ecclesiastical and just rigor has determined, to wit, that it is
no way convenient, that there the people should reverently attend, where the
Priests stubbornly stinking with open and impudent leachery, co^temning God
and his Saints, do serve at the Altars, yea they do not serve at the altars,
but defile themselves. So S. Anselme, who was so far as you see from judging
this fact of Gregory to be Antichristian, as he condemns the incontinent
Priests, and commended the Apostolical providence, together with the
Ecclesiastical and just rigor of this constant, virtuous, and most zealous
Pastor.

72. And in Italy, Godesridus Viterbiensis says the same, and recounteth the
fact with honor: Gregorius (says he) Papa co^nubia Clericorum a Subdiaconatu
and supra, per totum orbem Romanum edicto decretali in eternum prohibuit, ac
seipsum athletam Dei and pro domo Domini murum constituit. Pope Gregory by a
decretal edict did for ever forbid the marriage of Clergy men, throughout all
the Roman state or Latin Church, from the Subdeacon upward, and made himself
Gods champion, and a wall for the house of our Lord. So he. And here also we
see no such ringing of this Pope for Antichrist, but great praise and
commendation of him, and that even for this fact of restrayning the loose
Clergy by canonical censures and deposition.

73. In Germany diverse there were, who not only much commended Pope Gregory,
but also approved this particular prohibition, as Lambertus who then lived, and
of all others was most punctual and less partial in setting down all the
particulers of that bitter contention, and of Priests wives thus writes:
Hildebrandus Papa cum Episcopis Italiae conueniens etc. Hildebrand the Pope
together with the Bishops of Italy had in diverse Synods decreed, that
according to the order of ancient Canons, Priests have no wives, and such as
have, that either they dismiss them or be deposed: neither that any at all be
admitted to Priesthood, who professes not perpetual continency and single
life. So he. And this was the common sense, opinion, and judgment of all the
learned at that time, as appears by Nau^lerus who sets down the same
words, Pasci^ulus tempo^t. m. VVerneri Bertholdus Constan. in Chron. Otho
E^isingen. l. 6. and alij.
and approves them: and the like touching the allowance of the Popes decree do
the German Authors here cyted, and diverse others which I omit.

74. It follows in M. Halls words: At the Council of Worms the French and
German Bishops deposed this Gregory. So he. But there was no true Council, no
French Bishops, no deposition at all. No Council, for that it was of the
Emperors No french Bishops in the Council of Worms
calling, and that not only without all order of the supreme Pastor, but of
purpose to cross and contradict him: for having consulted the matter with his
Nobility, and having heard the answer and resolution of Gregory, that either
he should dismiss the Bishops he kept in prison, with restitution of their
goods, and call a Council in some place wherein the Pope himself might be
present, or else to be excommunicated; he searing himself, and well knowing his
actions to such, as if they had been brought in that open theater of the whole
world to public trial, that no other effect could ensue, but his everlasting
shame and disgrace, was persuaded to prevent one Council by calling another, a
true General by a false National, and to cover his own foul deeds, began to
forge others as foul on the Pope, partly touching his life, which as Lambertus
notes, was so inculpable, so Saintlike, as no aspersion could stick on him of
their injuriously devised slanders, but especially touching his election,
which although it were most canonical, as is to be seen in Platina and others,
and wholly against the inclination of Gregory himself elected, yet were they
not ashamed to charge him with ambition, and to have gotten the place by bribes
and simony, and upon this false ground all were compelled in that Council to
swear and subscribe to a renunciation of that Pope and his authority, the
form of which is set down in the Saxon history before mentioned.

75. And whereas M. Hall says the French and German Bishops in that Council
deposed Gregory: I answer him, that no French Bishops were called, none were
present but such only, who were immediately subject unto the Emperor, as the
Bishop of Metz a Dutch man, and Treuers, which are Imperial cittyes: Omnes qu^
in Regno suo essent Episcopos (says Lambertus) and Abbates VVormatiae,
Dominica Septuagesima conuenire praecepit. He commanded all the Bishops and
Abbots of his own Country (not of France) to meet together at Worms, and
the number assembled well shows that they were all of Germany, or the
adjoining territoryes of the Emperor, there being but four and twenty Bishops
^n all that assembly, as both Sigebert and Marianus Scotus who then lived do
recount: and the Bishop of Mentz in particular was so far from approu^ing the
fact of the other schismatical Bishops, ^s he together with the Bishop of
VVirtzburg or Herbipolis did openly withstand it saying: that it was against
the Canons, that any Bishop being absent without a general Council, without
lawful accusers, without competent witness, without euiction of the things
objected should be condemned, much less that the chief Bishop and Pastor of
the whole Church, against whom no accusation of any Bishop, or Archbishop
whatsoever is to be admitted, should in that manner be dealt with all. So these
Bishops.

76. But what? as in the infamous Ephesine The Ephesine Council called by
Dioscorus the Eutichian Patriarch of Alexandria.
Council called by the devilish devises of Dioscorus the Eutichian Patriarch,
where swords and clubs more prevailed then truth or learning, and through the
violence of Theodosius the younger and this his champion Dioscorus, force made
the fearful to yield their hands to that which their hearts did abhor, as
after appeared in the Chalcedon Council: so here in Worms the Emperor being
present, his chief Agent William of Mastricke of whom we have before spoken,
instead of al arguments urged by the other for the Pope brought one
dilemmaticall demonstration to conclude the whole business to the contrary, and
it is the same which now our Protestants do use, to wit, either you must
condemn the Pope, or you are all traitors unto the Emperor. Whereupon all
the Imperial Bishops there gathered subscribed, but the Saxons refused and
these who did subscribe, were presently so moved with compunction, as they sent
their letters to the Pope deploring their fault, craning pardon for what was
past, and for the time to come promised continual and inviolable obedience,
which more particulerly is set down by Bruno in his history of the Saxon wars
saying* See Baron ann. 1076.
Quod quidem pauci secerunt ex animo, qui and auctores ipsi fuere consilij
pluresvero literas quidem etc. Which few of them did do from their heart, and
those who did it were the Authors that suggested this plot to the Emperor,
but the far greater part wrote their letters of renouncing the Pope for fear
of death: but that they did it against their wills, they well showed by this,
that by the first opportunity offered, they sent their submissiue letters unto
the Pope, acknowledged themselves guilty, but pretended for excuse the
necessity they were put unto. So he.

77. And this Author living as it should seem, either in or near that time,
and being exact in his reports, all may see how little M. Halls cause is
furthered by this Conuenticle, where, as there were no French Bishops at all,
so neither did all the Germans yield thereunto, and such as subscribed very soon
after as I have said with grief and shame repented them of their error, and
excused it with the fear of present death, in case they had then refused to
perform what the tyrant exacted: and it is another untruth to say, that these
Bishops deposed the Pope Gregory not deposed in the Council of Worms.
Pope, for all that the Emperor made, was to make the Bishops renounce their
obedience, and not to acknowledge him for Pope: and so it is expressed in the
very form of their renounciation, which is put down in these words in the
foresaid Author, to wit: Ego N. Ciuitatis N. Episcopus Hildebrando subiectionem
and obedientiam ex hac hora, ac deinceps interdico, and eum posihac Apostolicum
nec habebo, nec vocabo. I N. Bishop of the City N. do from this hour forward
deny subjection and obedience unto Hildebrand, and from henceforth will neither
esteem him, nor call him Pope. So these Bishops. 78. By which words albeit
they exempt themselves from his power, and deny him to be Pope, yet touching
his deposition they did not intermeddle: and the Messenger called Roland sent
from the assembly to Pope Gregory with menacing letters from the Emperor,
which were read openly by the Pope in the Lateran Council then held in Rome
(where they were condemned by the whole Synod, and Henry himself for writing
them was excommunicated) contained in them no sentence of deposition, but a
childish threat, that he should leave the place, or they would leave him. But
the Pope was not so weak a reed, as to bend with so light a blast, and the most
part of these Bishops who are here made to threaten deposition, wrote to the
Pope to persist, and not to yield to so open iniquity: and the combat was
worthy of the known courage and virtue of this most constant and learned Pope,
and therefore after when the Emperor saw his wast words to have no effect, he
went indeed about to depose him, and put another in his place, to wit,
Guibertus of Rauenna, under the name of Clement the second, as fit a man to be
Pope, as Henry was to be the Emperor, and none acknowledged him but Henryes
followers and flatterers: but this happened more then three years after the
meeting at Worms, as Baronius out of others does well observe.

79. Another untruth it is, that this deposition was made in this name (a fine
phrase) amongst other quarrels, for separating man and wise. For neither in
the Council of Worms was this ever mentioned, nor afterward when the false
Pope was Separating of Priests from their Harlots not urged against Gregory in
the Council of Worms nor yet in the injurious sentence of his deposition.
chosen, did the Emperor in his patheticall letters to the Clergy of Rome, or
Pope himself, in which he sets down his agricuances, and causes of
depositio^, ever specify any such thing, which letters are in Baronius and
Bruno set forth at large: and none could better tell the true cause then he who
was the chief actour in all that tragedy, and yet not only he in those
epistles, wherein he purposely yields a reason, if any thing might be termed
a reason, for so unreasonable and outrageous dealing, why he proceeded so far
as deposition, does so much as once touch this point, but only his own
personal iniuryes, and the excommunication of his Bishops as Symoniacall, with
the ill election (as he would have it) and other crimes imputed to the Pope
himself: but moreover no other Authors of these time do write any such thing,
as Lambertus, Marianus Scotus, Sigebertus, Mutius, Bruno or any else of credit,
and therefore M. Hall must tell us from whence he fetches the Latin words of
his margent, that in this name among other quarrels he was deposed: maritos ab
vxoribus separat: he separats the husbands from their wives, which Gregory
never did, but only the lewd Priests from their concubines, and the Emperor as
we see never objected it: so as still there is forging, or taking up of
Authorityes at the first hand, out of late heretical writers without any choic
at all, or further discussion what truth or probability their words do bear.

80. Lastly he says: that violence did this, not reason: neither was Gods will
here questioned, but the Popes wilfulnes, but all is false: and it seems the
man to have made a vow if it may be so termed never to speak truly, which is a
filthy vow, and to that he may well apply the whole rule he mentioned in the
beginning of his letter in turpi voto muta decretum, in a filthy vow change the
decree, and the sooner he changes it, the more men will commend his honesty:
for here neither violence, nor willfullnes entered. Not violence, for he never
waged war, never incyted others thereunto for this matter, but only renewed
his decrees, and those for the most part No violence used in Gregoryes decrees.
made in Counsels, commanding the ancient custom of single life to be kept
in ure, and the abuse of marriage crept into some parts of Europ to be
suppressed, other violence as times and things then went he could show none,
neither indeed by that means could he remedy this turpitude, which there was
most spread where the Popes authority could do least, to wit in Germany, where
Henryes countermands still crossed all Gregoryes decrees, and Nero his sword
(as S. Anselme Anselm. epist. ad VValramum.
worthily calls him) S. Peter's power: not willfullnes of one man, which is
done by common consent of whole Counsels, wherein no force, violence, or
importunity is recorded ever to have been used, but the thing with full
freedom, No willfullnes.
joint consent, and uniform agreement of all to have passed; and which is much
to be noted, though the Emperor in the time of this Pope called some false
Counsels, as of Worms, Mentz, and Pauia, to withstand Gregory, yet in no one
of them all, is there any decree, or approuance of the marriage of Priests,
they bebeing as it should seem ashamed to leave extant any monument or
remembrace of so brutish a doctrine, and to all Christian antiquity so
repugnant.

81. Neither wanted there a reason for Gregory his decree, and laudable
endeavors in this Great reason for the making of Pope Gregory his decre
behalf, if M. Hall had so much wit or judgment as to conceive it: for he
still pleaded the contrary practice to have been in the Church, and thereby
showed that he made no new decree, but reformed the late abuse crept in against
the old, and that according to the ancient Canons and Statutes of the Church,
as any may see in all places here cyted, and in the Council of Rome Anno
1074. as Lambertus writes, it was decreed: Gregor. 7. lib. 2. Epiep. 45. 61.
62. 66. 67.
Vt secundum instituta antiquorum Canonum Presbyteri vxores non habeant,
habentes aut dimittant, aut deponantur. That according to the determinations of
the ancient Canons the Priests have no wives, and they who have them, either
dismiss, or put them away, or else that themselves be deposed: and writing to
Anno Bishop of Colen, he plainly says: Nouit enim Fraternitas tua quia
praecepta haec non de nostro sensu exsculpimus, sed antiquorum Patrum
sanctiones spiritu sancto praedicante prolatas of officij nostri necessitate in
medium propalamus. Your brotherhood does know that we frame not these commandes
out of our own head, but our office compelling us, we lay open the decrees of
the ancient Fathers made by the instinct of the holy Ghost. So he. And is this
trow you M. Hall no reason? or can you, if you were put to it, frame a better
then priority of time conjoined with universality of place?

-- Maenio maius number quod tibi carmen habetur?
Dispeream si scis, carmina quid sapiant.
I see you know not what reason means.

82. And the like I may say of Gods will, Pope Gregory his decree according to
the will of God.
which in the whole pursuit of this thing was only sought for, in preserving
that which the whole Church guyded by his holy spirit, had so often determined,
so many Counsels decreed, so long and uncontrollable custom of al Countries
observed, which to infring only upon the violence of a few licentious and
disorderly livers, who will take liberty without leave, and have all things to
be ruled by their own unruly passions, was little according to Gods will, and
much less was it according to his will, to break their solemn vows of
perpetual chastity made in the taking of their orders, which by the law of
nature and divine, bound them to the observance, and consequently the
transgression was against the will of God, which the Pope did labor to
reform, and in seeking reformation could seek for no other emolument or profit
to himself, then to please God: for sure he was to displease many men thereby,
and to increase the number of such as mortally hated his so constant zeal, and
infatigable labor in Gods cause: but this hatred of men proceeding from
Gregory his love to God, was no more by him to be regarded, then that of the
Jews was of the Apostls, or the hatred of the ancient persecutors Auentine a
late partial and insincere writer.
of the primitive Martyrs.

83. What broils hereon ensued, says M. Hall, let Auentine witness: but I
except against this witness, as being for time too young, for profession, too
partial, and for credit too small, to testify in this matter: and withal I
must warn this Epistler, that in cyting Authors he use more exactnes then for
two lines to refer us over to a whole book in folio of many leaves, which we
neither have leisure, nor list to read all over, and it is not worth the labor
to spend so much time in reading such Authors, so false, fond, and confuse as
he is known to be: and the words here cyted out of him seem to conteyn no
more truth then the rest now refuted: Ex interdicto sacerdotum coniugio (says
he) grauissima seditio gregem Christi perculit etc. Upon the forbidding of the
marriage of Priests a most grievous sedition wounded the flock of Christ:
neither was there ever such a plague, that so afflicted Christian people. So
he. Which is a mere Chymera, for this flock of Christ, these Christian people
were a few seditious German Priests, who took the occasion of the discord
between the Emperor and the Pope to follow their lust, and wallow in all
filthiness. If M. Hall object that not only this but the contention of the
Emperor, and all the broils then made and raised were for this cause, he will
show his reading The chief contention between Henry the fourth and Gregory the
7. not about the marriage of Priests.
to be little, and judgment small, because this was but a bad branch of another
root, an effect of another cause, and a by-lake from another greater stream.

84. For who so will read attentively what Authors do write of these times,
and what Pope Gregory in so many Councels, letters, and Edicts did decree, he
shall find before this filthy fault another to be commonly premised, to wit of
Symony, which more touched the Emperor (who as Calvin and others write, held
all the Bishoprics, and Abbeyes at sale) and the Bishops also (who having
bought their place for money, did sell al Canonries, Deanries, Prebends etc.
and were both by the Popes decrees to be themselus removed, and their doings
anulled, and so likewise the Abbots) then this other of VViues, which was
indeed but an appendix of the former, and permitted by the Emperor to increase
the number of his followers, and enemies of the Pope, being never intended as
any principal cause: for had not the Symony hindered, which was the first and
chiefest quarrel between them (which M. Hall not being able to justify does
still dissemble) the accord between Henry and Gregory had soon been made,
which never depended on these marriages: and to affirm the contrary or that
all the turmoyles were made for Priests wives, shows exceeding ignorance in
historyes, and all the course held in this bitter combat: and so to conclude
the matter we see M. Hall in 12. Ten lies in twelve lines.
lines to have told us no less then ten untruths. as 1. That the better sort
approved not Gregoryes doings. 2. That the Churches did ring of him each were
for Antichrist. 3. That at the Council of Worms the French Bishops deposed
him. 4. That he was therein deposed. 5. That the cause of this imaginary
deposition was for separating man and wife. 6. That violence did this. 7. That
the debaring of Priests wives was not done by reason. 8. That the will of God
was not sought therein. 9. That all was done by the Popes willfullnes. 10. That
the broils between the Emperor and the Pope were on this occasion. In fine
every thing he speaks in this matter is a lie.

85. At the end of the Epistle M. Hall, as a The controversy is treated whether
ever our English, Clergy were permitted to have wiue and not rather to vow
perpetual continency.
man weary of his trauells abroad, returns home to England, and leaving
Egypt, Greece, Italy, and Germany, he lands at length at Canterbury, and tells
us of the bickering of our English Clergy with their Dunstanes, which about
this time were memorable in our own history, which teach us how late, how
repiningly, how unjustly they stooped under this yoke: and for further proof
he sends his simple Reader to Bale and Fox two grave Authors ( scilicet)
that in case he have not deceived him enough, there he may be gulled and
glutted to the full: and to these two Authors cyted in the text, he adds two
other in the margent, of as much estimation as the former, to wit Henry of
Huntingdon, and Fabian, both affirming S. Anselme to be the first who forbad
marriage to the Clergy of England, and that about the year of our Lord 1080.
and the same for the year says foolish Fabian, a man too simple, God wot, to
be cyted in so serious a matter.

86. Here before I go further, I must needs let you understand how strongly the
text, and A gross contradiction between the text and margent of M. Hall.
margent of this man do contradict each other, and both of them do conteyne very
gross untruths, for without them M. Hall can do nothing: the contradiction
rests in this, that in the text S. Dunstane had great bickerings about the
marriage of the Clergy, and by his withstanding the same, M. Hall is taught,
how late, how repiningly, how unjustly the Clergy stooped under this yoke of
single life: but in the margent it is said, that S. Anselme was the first that
forbad marriage to the Clergy of England, and this (as M. Hall tells us)
about the year of our Lord 1080. Was there ever man in a dream could tell
things less coherent, or more repugnant, and contradictory the one to the
other then these? For S. Dunstane dyed in the year 988. and S. Anselme was not
made Bishop until the year 1093. which is more then a hundred years after,
so as if the margent be true of S. Anselme, the text is false of S. Dunstane,
and if S. Dunstane made this opposition more then a hundred years before S.
Anselmes time, then are M. Halls two witness, together with his own gloss,
taken tripping in a lie, who will have it to have been first commenced by S.
Anselme. Was M. Hall in his wits when he made this marginall nore to his text?
or talking with his wife of some other thing? Surely he was somewhat
distracted, and little attended to what he wrote.

87. And indeed the text is more true then the margent: for S. Dunstane no
less eagerly pursued The marriage of Priests condemned by S. Dunstane long
before S. Anselm his time.
this matter then S. Anselme, and his decrees are no less general for all, no
less severe for penalty, no less efficacious for redress then the others
made after: neither was he alone, for with him in this matter stood S.
Ethelwold of Winchester, and S. Oswald of Worcester of which three glorious
Saints and renowned Pastors, Malmesbury says: Ita his tribus viris agentibus
quasi triformi lumine Angliam serenante densae vitiorum tenebrae euanuerunt. So
through the endeauours of these three men, as it were with a threefold light
shining over England, the thick darkness of vices did vanish away. So he. And
with Binuius tom. 4. in Council. Londinen. ^aron anno 970. ex Actis vitae S.
Osw. 15. Oct b. in Surio.
these three shining lamps and lanternes of the world, our famous Edgar
conspited, and this public decree by the Bishops of the land assembled in
Synod was enacted: Vt Canonici omnes Presbyteri, Diaconi, Subdiaconi, aut cast
viuerent, aut Ecclesias quas tonebant dimitterent. That all the Canons,
Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons should either live chastely, or forgo the Churches
which they held: and S. Anselme in his decree said no more, as after we shall
see, but repeated the same Roger ^oueden in Anno 1108.
words saying, it is decreed that Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons live
chastely: so as for the extent it is alike in both decrees, and after in S.
Anselmes decree follows also the deposition of such as remained incontinent.

88. By which is refelled that which unadvisedly M. Godwine taxed.
M. Godwine writes in S. Anselme, saying: that he persecuted Priests very
extremely, Dunstane, Oswald, Ethelwold and other enemies to the marriage of
Clergy men, had only expelled them out of Monasteryes that had wives, but S.
Anselm an enemy to married Priests.
S. Anselme utterly forbidding them marriage, deprived them of their promotions
who were married, confisca^ed their goods unto the Bishop of the Diocese,
adjudged them and their wives adulterers, and forced all who entered into orders
to vow chastity. So he. And for this zeal against married Priests he boldly
taxes him, for being a little too resolute in all his determinations. Again,
he was more peremptory in diverse of his resolutions then became him; that out
of a blind zeal he was so boat against Clergy men's marriage: so this point
pinceth them to the heart, that notwithstanding he confess S. Anselme to have
been a good and holy man, of great learning, and for integrity of life and
conversation admirable, which true and ingenious testimony I allow and commend,
yet will M. Godwyn in this be his judge, and tell him that it was blind zeal
and imperfection: for without marriage among these men nothing shines, nothing
can be perfect: for which cause also he writes so basely of S. Dunstane, of
whom all S. Dunstane.
the historyes of our Nation speak so honorably, and out of them Cardinal
Baronius shutting up his life, gives this worthy testimony: Moritur Baron in
Ann. 988.. vltum.
hoc pariter anno mirificus ille Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis etc. This year
also dyed that wonderful Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury, whom singular
sanctity of life, priestly and inflexible constancy, the glory of miracles, and
all the gifts of the holy Ghost made famous, that in this respect England has
no cause to envy now at other most noble Cittyes, for their renowned Pastors.
So Baronius of S. Dunstane.

89. And in case that the three Saints named by M. Godwin had been less eager
against M. Godwine to free in ce^suring, and of a short memory.
the marriage of Priests then S. Anselme, I see not why he in that respect
should not have been more favorable also unto them in their lives, which yet
he is not: for of S. Oswald he says: That he was very earnest in setting forth
that doctrine of Devils, that debarreth men of lawful marr^^ge: of S.
Ethelwold, that he played the Rex at Winchester turning along eight honest
Priests into the world with their wives and children: of S. Dunstane he rayseth
diverse injurious slanders, but you must know the cause of all to be that which
he utters in the last words of his life, to wit, for persecuting and hunting
married Priests every where out of their livings, which clause if you mark it
well, overthrows the other before cyted concerning S. Anselme, that his
persecution was more general then the other of S. Dunstane, S. Ethelwold, and
S. Oswalde, when as yet their decrees as you have seen are all one, and alike
in general for all: and here further you have S. Dunstane no less then S.
Anselme not only in Monasteryes, or places where Chanons dwelled, but every
where to have hunted and persecuted married Priests out of their livings. Still
I must complain of want of memory in these men who in their heat of
contradiction against us forget in The famous example which happened at the
Council of Calne.
one place what they have written in another.

90. Which point is yet made more clear, by the memorable miracle which
happened at Calne, of which in a manner al our writers make mention, as
Osbertus, Malmesbury, Florentius, Huntingdon, Houeden, Matthew Westminster and
others: where in the behalf of all the incontinent Clergy, many of the
Nobility were assembled Osbert. in vita Dunstani. Malmes. l. 2. cap. 9.
Florent. in anno 977. Houeden eodem. Hunting in anno 4. Eduard. ^^.
together with their Orator Bernelinus a Scottish man, that so either by
power or persuasion they might ouerbeare S. Dunstane, Validissimum illum murum
Ecclesiae, says Malmesbury, that most strong bulwark of the Church. But
against all humane power and eloquence God showed which part pleased him best,
which highly displeased him: for the house where they sat in Council suddenly
fell down, and either killed, or sorely wounded all those who withstood the
Saint, he and his, as Osbert recounteth in his life, being free from all
danger: which wonderful event albeit Huntington the special proctour for
married Priests do ^arely recount, without any mention of the cause of their
meeting, and moreover do turn it to another interpretation; yet others
especially Malinesbury the best after Bid that we have for our historyes, in
assigning the effect truly, insinuates the cause saying: Hoc miraculum
Archiepiscopo exhibuit pacem de Clericis, omnibus Anglis tunc and deinceps in
eius sententiam concedentibus. This miracle ended the (...) between S.
Dunstane and the Clergy, all English men as well then as after yielding unto his
opinion So he. Out of which words I gather against M. Godwin, that S Dunstane
no less then S. Anselme opposed against all married Priests, and overthrew
them all, and against M. Hall that the first prohi^ition against the marriage of
Priests was not made by S. Anselme, but more then a hundred years before he
was Bishop, or had any thing to do in our English Church.

91. And as it is most true, that S. Dunstane before S. Anselme made this
prohibition, so is it most false that by him first of all, our English Clergy
did perforce stoop to the yoke of continency, as though ever before they had
wives, and genuisse filios and filias, as now we see our English Ministers to
do, which only is the ill collection of M. M. Halls manner of collections.
Hall, who when he finds any thing forbidden he forthwith infers that the
thing fordidden was always in use before the prohibition and here his wit no
less failing him then his Logic, he gathers, that because at different
times the same was restrained under two Arch^ishops of Canterbury, that it was
never before the time of one or the other: in his text he says that the Clergy
were forced to stoop under the yoke of continency by the first, and in the
margent, that it was always free to marry, and never de^yed till the later, as
now we have heard: but ^oth are false, and the single life of Priests is of far
greater antiquity then are the times of these two Saints, whom God raised to
take away the abuse crept in, and not to alter any constant custom ever
allowed or practiced in the land before: for the good corn was first sown in
that field, and the darnell after, truth was before error, the continency of
the Clergy of all ac^nowledged, of all practiced, in all times after ^ur
conversion approved: when as their vnlaw^ll marriage as it entered late, so it
endured not ^ong, so one rising and soon falling: and as for ^yme it could
never prescribe, so neither for ^lace could it ever get the full possession of
our ^ttle Island, till these later days, a thing so fil^hy after a solemn vow
to God to take a wise, ^s it never appeared without the brand of infa^y, so
base, as the basest only de^ended it, the ^est withstood it, of so narrow
bounds, as it was ^euer tolerated in Europe, Afric, or the Latin Church, nor
yet in Greece till by bad life it fell ^o schism from schism into open
heresy, and from thence unto the thraldon of the Turk^ under which now it
rests.

92. Which point concerning other coun^reys I have proved before, now I will
restrain ^y speech to England alone, and in a word or two prove the Clergy
ever to have been continent, and then obiter touch the cause of that abuse: I
mean upon what occasion it first entered and inuegled so many in S. Dunstans
time: A negative argument grounded upon manifest presumption.
and for the first I think this general negative directly to conclude, that
in all the pursuit of this business, in all the prohibitions, depositions,
censures and sentences delivered against the incontinent, we never read that
any of them did ever stand upon the former custom of the Church, or continual
practice thereof in that behalf, or ever complained that the Bishops brought in
a new law contrary to the old, or that they were made Priests when that
freedom was in use, approved, and allowed, and therefore all such prohibitions,
depositions, censures, sentences, and other penaltyes made afterward to have
been unjust, injurious, and tyrannical, as they could, and doubtless would have
pleaded, had the cause been as M. Hall will have it, that they had brought in a
new law, imposed a yoke never borne before, and contradicted the constant
known custom of the whole Land, but this none ever urged, objected,
mentioned, that ever I could read of in S. Dunstanes time, when first of all
that matter was so vehemently followed, and thereof do infer that it was not
the old custom, but a late nouelty, that by the vigilance of the pastors
before named was blasted In our first conversion the Clergy was continent.
in the very budd, and by their virtue and vigor clean ouerborne.

93. Besides this general negative, if we reduce things to their first origin,
our Church I mean of England to our first Apostle S. Gregory, who converted us
to the Christian faith; as before in general I have touched his opinion: so for
our Church in particular, what his ordinance was, is to be seen by his answer
to the second demand of S. Augustine, which was touching the continency of
Clergy men set down also in Fox: for he says, or rather resolves the matter
thus: Such of the Clergy as are not in holy orders if they cannot conteyne may
marry, but then they must Gregor. resp. ad quaest. 2. August.
no longer live among Clergy men but receive their stipends without, or out of
their company. So S. Gregory concerning our English Clergy, and no man I think
will deny Priests to be in holy orders, and consequently by this resolution to
be debarred from marriage: and not only Priests, but even Subdeacons in S.
Gregoryes time, and by S. Gregory himself were forbidden to marry, as before
they had been by S. Leo the Great, though in Sici^y about this time some abuse
had entered touching this order, the lowest of the four sacred, but it ascended
no higher.

94. And whereas Pelagius predecessor to Subdeacons bound to perpetual
chastity.
S. Gregory had rigorously urged the Canonical discipline against these
Subdeacons; S. Gregory so far mitigated that decree, as he permitted such ^s
were married to keep their wives, but forbad that any more should be ordered:
for thus he writes: Qui post prohibitionem a suis vxoribus conti^ere Gregor.
ad Petrum Subdiac. l. 1. ep. 42.
noluerint, nolumus promoueri ad sacrum ordinem etc. They who after our
prohibition will not absteyne from their wives, we will not have them promoted
to the holy order: for none ought to come to the Ministry of the Altar, whose
chastity is not approved before he undertake the fu^ction. So S. Gregory: and
to four Bishops of France, thus of the same matter: Cum his qui in sacro Lib.
7. ep. ^^^
ordine sunt constituti habitare mulieres prohibeantur etc. Let women be
forbidden to dwell with such as are in holy order, over whom that the old
enemy do not triumph, it is by the common consent to be defyned, that they
ought to have no women dwell with them besides such as are mentioned by the
Canons. So he to them, alluding to the third Canon of the Ni^en Council, to
which if we add what before we have set down out of the Roman Council, we
shall have out of S. Gregory alone the practice of England, Sicily, France, and
Italy together.

95. And as this was first planted, so was it without intermission generally
still continued, of which the testimony of Venerable By the testimony of S.
Bid it is clear Priests might not marry.
Bid before alleged is an irrefragable argument, where out of the
Commandment of the Priests daily attendance on the Altar he infers their
perpetual chastity, and adds further that it is imposed upon them for ever
to be kept, but this imposition presupposes their own voluntary election of
that state, and the vow thereunto annexed, as else where we have showed, and S.
Bid also in another place does further declare, where explicating the words
Beda lib. 3. de ^abern.
of Moses of a certain garment of the Priests of the old law, by application
to the Priesthood of the new, he says: Foemoralia quae ad operi^da^ carnis
turpitudinem fieri mandantur etc. The lynne^ ^hosen which are commanded to be
made to cover the turpitude of the flesh, do design properly that portion of
chastity, which keeps men back from the appetit of matrimonial copulation,
without which chastity no man can take priesthood, or be consecrated to the
Ministry of the Altar, that is, unless he remain a virgin, or else break the
bands which joined him to his wife: which kind of virtue is of necessity by the
law of God imposed upon none, but by voluntary devotion is to be offered unto
our Lord for so himself says: Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc, Matthew. 19.
all accept not this counsel, to which notwithstanding by a merciful
persuation he inuiteth all who are able, saying, let him take it that can. So
he. And a little after: Nu^^i tamen violentum huiusmodi continentiae iugum
impones etc. You shall not The voluntary vow of such as are to receive holy
orders.
impose this violent yoke of continency upon any, but whosoever will be made
Priests, and serve in the Ministry of the Altar, they of their own accord shall
cease to be the servants of their wives. So S. Bid, alluding unto the words
of the Apostle, that the husband has no power over his own body but the wise:
and what will M. H^ll say heereunto? I hope these testimonies 1. Cor. 7.
are clear enough to convince the fleshly freedom, which he dreameth of
touching Priests wives, not to have been known in S. Bedes time: for the two
Poles are not further asunder then this doctrine by S. Bid delivered, and that
which he pretends: and this being written so long before S. Dunstanes time,
and the yoke which yet is a sweet yoke imposed, we may easily Obij^ Beda inn.
731. Dunstan. vero anno 988.
perceive what truth, or discretion is in the words of M. Hall, who will have
our Clergy so repiningly to have first stooped under this yok^, by S. Dunstans
inforcement, who yet lived more then two hundred years after S. Bid,

96. Moreover what opinion was had of these marriages even then, when so much
ruffling was made for them, appears by VVolstan, scholar at that time of S.
Ethelwold a learned and virtuous man as Malmesbury does describe him, Malmesb.
lib. 2. c. 8.
who in the life he wrote of the Saint his master, speaking of those Priests
which M. Godwin before called eight honest Priests turned into the world with
their wives and children, thus sets forth their Vulstanns in vita Ethelwoldi.
honesty: Erant tunc in veteri Monasterio Canonici moribus valde deprauatis,
elatione, insolentia, luxuria fadi etc. There were at that time in the old
Monastery Chanons of very corrupt life, filthy for their pride, impudency and
leachery, in so much as some of them would not say Mass in their turn, and
casting away their wives, quas praeter ius The marriage of Priests against law
and conscience.
fa^que sibi copulauerant, which against all law and conscience they had
married, they did marry others, and bestowed all their time in gluttony and
drunkenes, which the Bishop not enduring, with the consent of King Edgar,
thrust them all out. So he. And were not these honest men indeed, trow you,
worthy of M. Godwins praise and compassion? and how was their marriage then
esteemed lawful, why by so learned and virtuous a man is termed to be against
law and conscience, which can be for no other reason, then for the solemn vow
of chastity annexed unto their order.

97. If from private authority we will draw this matter to more public, we
shall find that by S. Dunstane three Counsels were called, to wit, at London,
Winchester, and Calne, and this marriage condemned in them all. Another
Counsel was called after at Winchester 1070. and the Marriage of Priests
condemned by many Counsels in England.
same again renewed: in the year 1102. S. Anselm called a Council which was
held at S. Peter's Church in Westminster, and that by the common consent of all the Bishops, the Nobility and King himself, in which Council the noble men
also were present, not as Judges or dealers in Ecclesiastical affairs, nor
yet out of any right or duty, which they could claim in that Court, Malmes.
l. de Pontif. Angliae in Anselmo. Houeden, Florentius Matt. Paris. Matthew.
Vestmonaster. in ann. 1102.
but as Malmesbury writteth: Huic Conuentui affuerunt Archiepiscopo Anselmo
petente a Rege Primates Regni etc. At this assembly at the request of the
Archbishop Anselme made to the King, were present the noble men of the Kingdom,
that thereby whatsoever should be decreed by the authority of the Council might
by the uniform care and solicitude of both orders be put in execution. So he.
And of this Council the decrees are extant in Malmesbury, where touching this
point by common agreement of all, thus it was defined.

98. That no Archdeacon, Priest, Deacon, Chanon, marry a wife, or keep her
whom he has married, and the same of a Subdeacon after his vow of chastity:
that a Priest as long as he keeps unlawful company with a woman be not
Legal, nor say Mass, nor (if he do) that his Mass be heard: that none take
Subdeaconship, or any higher order without the vow of chastity: that the
children of Priests be not heirs of their Fathers Churches. So there. And six
years after which was the last before his death, he called another, the Charter
whereof is extant in Florentius and Houeden, it begins thus: Haec sunt
statuta de Archidiaconibus, Presbyteris, Diaconious, Subdiaconibus, and
Canonicis in quocu^que gradu constitutis etc. These are the statutes which
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, and with him Thomas A famous Council in
which the King to wit Henry the first, all the Bishops, and nobility were
present.
the elect of York, and all the Bishops of England, in the presence of our
renowned King Henry with the assent of his Earls and Barons decree, in the
year of our Lord 1108. concerning Archdeacons, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons,
and Canons, of what degree soever. So the inscription, and for that the
assembly was so great and honorable, and the decree so plain and grounded on
antiquity, to which it does appeal in the very entrance, I have thought it
requisite, here entierly to insert it, that it may also be extant in our
English tongue. Thus then it goes.

99. It is decreed, that Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons do live chastely, and
have no women in their houses besides their nearest kinsfolks, according to
that which the holy Council of Niece has defined. But such Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons as after the interdiction of the Council of London (immediately
before mentioned) The strict decrees of the Counof London against the
incontinent Clergy.
have kept their wives, or married others, if they will any more say Mass, let
them put them away so far from them, that neither the women enter into their
houses, nor they into the houses of the women; neither let them purposely meet
in any other house, neither let such women dwell in the territory or precincts
of the Church: if upon some just occasion they must speak togeater, let them
speak without the doors before two witnesses: but if by two or three lawful
witnesses, or public report of the parishioners, any one shall be accused to
have transgressed this decree, he shall purge himself by bringing six
competent witnesses of his own order if he be a Priest, if he be a Deacon
four, two if a Subdeacon, and he who fails herein shallbe adjudged a
transgressour of the sacred decree. But such Priests as contemners of the
divine Altar, and holy orders have chosen rather to dwell with their women, let
them be removed from their divine office, deprived of all Ecclesiastical
living, and being declared infamous be put out of that rank or order: but he
who out of stubbornes and contempt shall not leave his woman, and shall presume
to say mass, if he be called to make satisfaction shall refuse to come, let
him be excommunicated. The same declaratory sententence comprizeth all
Archdeacons and Canons if by them the statutes be transgressed, either of
leaving their women, or avoiding their dwelling with them, or for the
distriction of the censure: again all Archdeacons shall swear that they shall
take no bribes for permitting the transgression of this decree, neither shall
they suffer Priests whom they know to have women to sing Mass, or appoint
their substitutes: and the Deanes also shall swear the same, and the
Archdeacon or Deane who shall refuse to swear, shall leese his Archdeaconry or
Deanery. But the Priests who shall resolve with themselus by leaving their women
to serve God, and the holy altars, for forty days forbearing their office,
shall have for that time their substitutes, in which time such penance shallbe
enjoined them as shall seem fit to the Bishop to impose. So far this Council.

100. I pretermit others of later times, whereof one of them was called under
this King Henry the first, and in the same were present such Bishops, as both
Huntingdon, and out of him verbatim trusty Roger his Echo, I mean Houeden
say, that they were Columna Regni and radij sanctitatis hoc tempore: The
pillars of the Kingdom and Houeden. anno 1175.
shining beams of sanctity at this time; and another under his Nephew the
second Henry (who was also present therein) called by Richard of Canterbury,
both which were held at London, and both condemned this incestuous marriage, and
the like did diverse others after these which are confessed by our Adversaries,
and need not here to be alleged, for that which already has been said of
the Counsels of S. Dunstane, in one of which was King Edgar, and these others
of S. Anselme, with the other particular testimonies before cyted, do plainly
persuade 1. Ponderation.
any without other proof this verity, especially if he will with due attention
make these ensuing ponderations thereupon. There can be no greater national
proof then that which is brought for the continency of the Clergy.


101. First no English man that regards the credit and authority of his
Country can desire, or perhaps imagine any greater national proof then to
have all the Bishops together, with the King and his Nobility, in two or three
several Counsels to sit, define, deliver, and command the single life of the
Clergy, and that according to the ancient Canons, to accurse the marriages of
Priests, no Pastor ever disclayming, but with joint consent and uniform
agreement, urging, procuring, and executing the same: the Kings also to wit
Edgar, and the first Henry two most valiant, wise, and learned Princes, who
only had occasion to show themselus in this matter, agreeing with the Bishops
strengthening the Ecclesiastical decrees with their royal assent and power,
and with the Kings and Bishops the whole Nobility did accord: when on the
contrary side, which is much to be noted, before the time of Edward the sixth,
M. Hall can produce no one Council or Conuenticle, of any Bishops, no one
Parliament of the land, no one public register of any common consent, no not so
much as any private testimony, but of Fabian a late Merchant of London (if I be
not mistaken) and Henry Huntington, whose untruth is so notorious, as his
scholar Roger Houeden for shame omitted it, though for want of better M. Hall
is contented to take up such outcast rags, and therefore I appeal to all my
Contrymen who make any account of the authority of their Nation, and
public records thereof, to judge whether the Catholics or Protestants make the
better plea, seeing the first have all to stand for them, Clergy and Laity,
Pastors and sheep, Kings, Nobility, scholars, Saints, all antiquity: and the
other to have none to join withal, but such as for their lewd life and wicked
demeanor were condemned as deuoyd of all piety, learning, or common honesty.

102. If in case of some temporal estate any Gentlemen to prove the title of
the Land he A fit similitude.
holds, should produce the public sentence of all the Judges in England,
purposely in two or three Kings times assembled together, and in every
assembly iudicially to have decided the matter in favor of the possessour, and
condemned his adversaries of imposture and intrusion, and this their decision
and condemnation in diverse records among the public monuments of the Land to
be extant: and on the other side the adverse part could bring forth none of
former tyms to speak for them but theeus, rogues or other malefactor, either
punished for faults, or upon their repentance pardoned; what Judge, yea what
reasonable man would make doubt, who had the better right in law, and on whose
favor the judgment should pass? And truly even so it fares in this
Controversy, in which for the continency of Clergy men in England we bring
forth the Judicial sentence of all the Pastors, or spiritual Judges of the
Land, and that not one time only, under one King, but at sundry times, under
three Kings when this question was most moved, we bring forth I say the
judicial sentence of six Counsels, all accepted, ratifyed, executed in the
whole Realm: with these Pastors at that time did the whole flock I mean
Princes, Peers and people conspire, and the later times ratifyed the decrees of
the former, so as this was the uncontrollable voice of the whole Land, which to
disprove M. Hall brings forth nothing but the repining of them who were
condemned, that is the delinquents themselves, and some one or two of as much
credit as himself (as Fabian and Huntington) that say they were unjustly
punished, and only say it without any other proof at all: and whether such a
blunt denial of two particular men, especially of two such men, ought to sway
more then all the former sentences, and judicial records of the whole Kingdom
together, needs in my mind no great deliberation to determine.

103. Another ponderation may be taken from the sanctity of the persons who
defined 2. Ponderation.
the Catholic doctrine, as in the late Council before cyted even by
Huntingtons own confession, they were such as were the pillars of the land and
The sanctity of the persons who defended the continency of Clergy men.
shining beams of sanctity, and before that S. Anselm the myrour of the world,
of whose singlar learning, zeal, and piety, we find every where honorable
testimonies: Huntington calls him, a holy and veneraeble man, Matthew
VVestminister a noble Prelate, Nubrigensis says, that he was, Vir sanctus, and
excelsus in verbo gloriae, and in the next Chapter, sortitus est nomen grande
iuxta nomen magnorum qui sunt Hunting. anno 3. Guil. 2. VVestmo. anno 1109.
Nubrigen. l. 1. cap. 2. and 3.
in caelo: He got him a great name according to the name of such as are great
in heaven. Matthew Paris speaking of him writes thus: Cuius vitam laudabilem,
cuius actus eximios, cuius transitum ab hac luce caelestem ad patriam, crebra
eius miraculorum insig^ia persequntur: Whose worthy life, whose noble deeds,
whose passage from this light unto his country of heaven, many miracles do
still declare. So he: but of all others William of Malmesbury Paris ann. 1109.
is most copious in his praises, I will only out of diverse cite two passages,
one where he begins to speak of him, the other where he ends his life: in
the former thus he writes: Anselmusquo nemo vnquam iusti tenaciter, nemo hoc
tempore tam anxie doctus, nemo tam penitus spiritualis fuerit, Malmes. lib. 4
in Guil. 2.
pater patriae, mundi speculum. Anselme then whom none was more constant in
defending justice, none so curiously learned at this time, none so spiritual,
the father of the Country, and looking glass of the world. So there: and in
another place: Perseuerauit in co ad exitum vitae inuictus vigor, Lib. 2. de
gesti^ Pon. Anglor.
pietatis feruor etc. vir qui omnes quos quidem viderimus sapientia and
religione praestaret. There remained in Anselme even unto the ^ast gasp an
invincible courage, fervent piety etc. a man who for wisdom and virtue
excelled all whom we ever have seen. So Malmesbury.

104. And to let pass others, even Protestants of more moderate disposition
have not denied him his due praise, as we have heard of M. Godwin who calls
him: a man of great learning, M. Godwin in his life.
and for integrity of life and conversation admirable, and for his too
peremptory dealing against Clergy men (as he terms it) he imputes it to
blind zeal far from malicious intent of doing wrong: but who will imagine that
M. Godwin can see where S. Anselme was blind? And Holinshead notes him for a
stout Prelate, without any touch of disgrace in all that he writes of him,
which had not been spared had he found any thing in him that had been liable
thereunto: and John Fox, who ^lthough he speak well of few, yet he out of
others commends S. Anselme when he treats of his election, albeit
afterward he do discommend him even for that for which by all S. Dunsta^ S.
oswald. S Ethelwolde.
other Authors of former ages he has been judged most commendable.

105. Of S. Dunstan, Oswald, and Ethelwolde, we have before spoken, and
William of Malmesbury is pro^use in the praise of each of them a part in their
lives: and no marvel, for all three were very holy men, and not only admired
in England, but reverenced abroad, and by the whole Church acknowledged for
Saints: of the first, to wit S. Dunstane, enough for this matter has been
said aheady: and of S. Oswald M. Godwin gives him this Encomium: be was very
learned and left some testimonies thereof in writing, not yet perished: for the
integrity also of his life and conversation, he was much reverenced: the
greatest fault that I find in him is, that he was very earnest in setting forth
that doctrine of Devils, that debarreth men of lawful marriage etc. many
miracles are reported to have been done at his tomb in regard whereof the
posterity would needs make him a Saint. So he. Of the third, Matthew
Westminster says, writing of his death: Eodem anno S. Ethelwaldus migrauit ad
Dominum. In this year S. Ethelwald went to our Lord, or departed this life,
and this title of Saint is given him by all our writers of these times, and M.
Halls friend Henry Huntington Hunting. l 5. in ^^gar. Houeder ibide^s.
much prayseth him saying, that he was: ^gregius Praesul, aedificator sepium,
auertens semitas imquitatis, and plantans radices charitatis. A worthy Prelate,
a builder up of the hedges of virtue, turning men from the paths of iniquity,
and planting in them the root of charity: and in fine, of them all three
Malmesbury writes, that: Mi^u^runt per Malm^s. l. 2. de gestis Pontij. (...)
Angliam vt lumina crederes e ^aelo arridere ^ydera. They shined over England
as ^ights, in so much as you would have thought the stars to send their comfort
from heaven. So he. And so much of these.

106. But now for such Priests as had their Trulls, if you look into the
monuments of antiquity, The incontinent Clergy as the sum of the world
commended by none.
what memory or mention is made of them, you shall either find nothing at all,
or that they were the very scumme, and refuse of the Clergy: and M. Hall having
raked this impure dunghill, could find but one only man to speak for him, to
wit Henry Huntington, who yet has but these words: Hoc Concilium prohibuit
vxores Sacerdotibus Anglorum, antea non prohibitas In Hunting. in anno 1101.
delivering of which short sentence M. Hal maks us three untruths: for thus he
writes: Anselme, says that Historian, was the first that forbad marriage unto
the Clergy of England (and this was about the year of our Lord 1080.) til then
ever free. So M. Hall. But by his leave Huntington does not say that S. Anselme
was the first that forbad marriage to the Clergy, for S. Dunstane had forbidden
it more then a hundred years before: again this was not about the year of our
Lord 1080. for Huntington himself expressly puts it more then twenty years
after, and this year twice set down in the margent, was more then twelve
years before S. Anselme was Bishop or had any thing to do in England. If he
mean 1108. wherein as I confess there was held a Council, so I deny that
this can agree with Huntington, who puts it the next year after K. Henryes
coronatio^, which was in the year 1100. and lastly it is untrue that marriage
of Priests till then was ever free: for it is enough for the verifying of his
words (unless M. Hall will have him to contradict himself, and all truth) that
in the trouble some time of William Conqueror and his son William Rufus,
who sold the Bishoprics of England for money, the Priests had gotten this
liberty: which Commentary his words will well support, for truly translated
they are only these: In this Council S. Anselme prohibited wives to English
Priests before not prohibited: for the word before, may signify immediately
before, in which time perhaps though they were not allowed, yet the wickedness
of that King, weakness of the Symoniacall Bishops, wanting so long their
Metropolitan, and licentiousnes of the Clergy forced the better sort of
Pastors to tolerate that which although they did condemn, yet could not
redress.

207. And this being the only witness, and he, if he mean as M. Hall will have
him, being Henry Huntingtons ill demeanor in his history.
taken tardy in his evidence, and that both in respect of the time, and matter
(for the first he puts a year to soon, and altogether misreporteth the
later) his words in this matter cannot prejudice our cause, unless they were
seconded by some better authority, of more upright and indifferent judgment:
for this Henry was so far set on this marriage matter, and to impugn the
adversaries thereof, as he seems quite to have forgotten the law of a
History, which requires all truth and integrity in the things related, in both
which this man was deficient: for in all S. Dunstans life he never speaks of
this matter, which yet was the chiefest matter of moment then debated: and on
the other side he commends him who opened the fluse to let out all this
puddle of impurity amongst the Clergy, I mean Edwyn elder Brother unto King
Edgar, of whom our best Historiographers report much villainy, for which half
his When and by what occasion this licentious liberty entered into England.
Matthew. VVestin. anu. 956.
Kingdom was taken from him by the insur^ection of his subjects, and given to
his brother: and as well for that, as other misfortunes soon after dyed,
having reigned but four years, of whom, as Stow well notes, is lest no
honest memory, unless that which Matthew Westminster writes of him: Cum annis
quatuor libidinose simul and tyra^nice regnum depres^sset Anglorum, iusto Dei
iudicio desunctus etc. After he had four years lewdly and tyrannical abused
the Kingdom of England by Gods just judgment he dyed. And consequently he was
the fitter instrument to further the^ filthiness of this sacrilegious marriage
of the Priests and Clergy. For in his time besides the usual incursions of for
rain enemies from abroad, and civil war^s of subjects at home, where one
half of the Realm was in arms against the other, and both out of order, as
it still happens in such occasions, Frequentes lites (says Osbert)
sediditiones nonnullae varij confliclus hominum Osbert. in vita Dunstani.
suborti, totam terram grauissimis tribulationibus concusseruut. Frequent
contentions, very many seditions, diverse conflicts risen amongst them, shaked
the whole Land with most grievous tribulations. So he. And hereupon as well
Priests as people being apt to cast of the yoke of Ecclesiastical and Civil
discipline, when they saw neither the one or the other law, by reason of the
present tumult and confusion of things, able to be exacted, took this
lascivious liberty to do what they listed: besides this I say the lewdnes of
this young King added oil to the flame, and so concurred with the wicked to
discompose the Ecclesiastical state, following the counsel of his queen, as
Malmesbury says: quae tenerum iugiter obsidebat animum, who still possessed
his wanton mind, that gathering the raskality of the land about him, Miserrimis
satellitibus subnixus, he cast out all the Religious men of the whole kingdom,
seized upon their goods, injuriously abused their persons, and tyrannized over
all the monasteryes, of which Malmesbury, the house of this Author, was made a
stable, and above all he hated S. Dunstane, the chief pillar of the Religious,
and therefore banished him into Flanders, where as Matthew Westminster writes
his wanton Counselor labored also to have pulled out his eyes, but was
defeated of her purpose, and all this for that the Archbishop Saint Houeden^
anno 957.
Odo, Vir clerus ingenio, says Houeden, and virtute laudabilis, spiritu quoque
Prophetiae pollens: Famous for wisdom, renowned for virtue, endued also with
the spirit of prophecy, had upon S. Dunstans suggestion, as they imagined,
separated this concubine from him, punished her again after her return, and
excommunicated the King himself.

108. Under this King then, and by this occasion the Clergy declining to this
bestiality, none furthering it but the wicked, all the good resisting it, as
was well seen in Edgars time, when things being restored to their former
peace, and the Pastors had in their due regard, this abuse with great fervor,
and speed was extinguished; we may conceive how laudable the thing was which
did first spring from this lawles liberty, and how shameless Henry Huntington
is, who against the credit of all out best authors, Henry Huntingtons
insincere manner of writing.
Malmesbury, Florentius, Houeden, Matthew Westminster, Polidore and others,
says, that Rex Edwyn non illaudabiliter Regni infulam tenuit. King Edwyn
worthily swayed the scepter of the Land, and lamenteth that untimely death
brake off the course of his prosperous and joyful beginnings, when as even at
his very entrance to the crown, yea even the same day he was crowned, he left
his Nobility, and retired to his two concubins the mother and daughter, as some
will have it, or else to be naught with his own kinswoman, as Holinshed out of
others, from whence being perforce recalled by S. Dunstane, this quarrel
between the Saint and him began, which was so followed, as there was no end of
persecuting him, till the King had ended his life, of which this good Historian
has no one word.

109. But afterward when he recounteth Henry Huntington prayseth the wicked
and forgeth crimes in the innocent.
the base incontinent dealing of a Popes Legate sent into England, who
inueighed against the incontinency of Priests in the forenoone, and was taken
with a concubine himself in the after, then he could find his tongue, and
after a solemn preamble tell us: Res appertissima negari non potuit, celari
non decuit, the thing was most evident, it could not be denied, is was not fit
to be concealed, out it must, and that in the worst manner, the man was taken
with such a lust, and yet this thing which he makes most evident, and not to
be denied, is rejected by Baronius as a fable, and that among diverse other
reasons, because this man is the first Author thereof, so false in oother
things, so partial in this, of which neither William of Malmesbury, nor
Florentius his Continuer (who both were then living) do speak any one word,
though the later do mention this polidore Virgill, Holiashed, Stow etc.
Cardinal, and set down all the Canons of the Council, and had no reason to
have dissembled the things objected, had it been so notorious, and public as
Huntington makes it, from whom all our late Protestant writers, and others
also, upon too light credit, have borrowed, and inserted it into their
historyes.

110. And truly seeing this sole Author Henry Huntington what he was.
alone, so to revel in this matter, I was moved out of a curious desire to see
what he was. Bale says he was a Canon Regular of S. Augustins order, and the
title he bears in the forefront of his book is, that he was Archdeacon of
Huntington, of It is probable that his father was a Priest when he begot him.
which profession and degree I did marvel to see one so inclined to defend
incontinency, and the marriage of Priests, seeing he was not married himself,
and that all other Authors at that time in England, and before had condemned
it; I found further after some search in the very next page, after the place
cyted by M. Hall in his own history, that he confesses his Father to have
been a Priest, and consequently as it may be thought he pleads but for his
birth right, and the best copy hold of his inheritance: for thus he writes of
him: Eodem anno Pater illius qui hanc scripsit historiam mortis legibus
concessit etc. The same year dyed the Father of him, who wrote this history,
and was buried at Lincoln, of whom it is written.

-- Stella cadit Cleri, splendour marcet Nicolai
Stella cadens Cleri, splendeat arce Dei.
The sense of which distich is, that the star of A bad child that could put no
better Epitaph on his Fathers tomb.
the Clergy was fallen, and the shining of Nicolas over cast; but he wishes
that the star falling on earth may shine in heaven, and to that end desires al
Readers to pray for his soul, with an anima eius requiescat in pace: and in
case my conjecture be true, that he begot his son Henry being a Priest, he had
indeed great need of prayers, but of his being a star of the Clergy, unless he
did penance for the same, and stood not in defense thereof, as the irregular
Chanon his son Henry did, there is no cause to imagine, but rather that he Iud.
in ep.
was to be numbered among those stars, which S. Jude calls sydera errantia,
for such men are not the stars of the Clergy, but the clouds rather and
ignominy thereof. But to digress no further with this Author, let us come to
some other ponderation. 3. Ponderation.


111. The third ponderation is taken from the Authors who have written of this
matter. M. Hall only cyteth Henry Huntington, and he also is foully streyned to
reach home: whereas for the Antiquity and learning of the Authors alleged for
the continency of Priests.
contrary we bring his authority by whom Christian Religion was first planted
in England, we bring the greatest Clerk that ever antiquity yielded us, we
bring one who lived when the bickering with S. Dunstane began, and what he wrote
of Priests wives, we bring S. Anselme when it was again renewed, we bring the
approuance of all the best Historiographers and scholars of the Land, so as
both our authorityes are positive in the affirmance, far more ancient for time,
and without comparison for esteem more eminent, then any can be alleged to
the contrary: and if Tertullians rule be true (as M. Hall granted and denied
it together in the beginning of his letter) that priority of time infers
infallibility of truth, then the cause is ours, and M. Hall is cast, or else let
him produce some more ancient writers, or of such credit, as S. Gregory, S.
Bid, S. Anselme and the like, or if authors want, to deal for a farewell more
friendly with him, let him bring me for the first three hundred years after
the arrival of S. Augustine into England but one Bishop, Priest, or Deacon,
who was married, and in that state lived freely with his wife, and was so
allowed, and I will rest contented, and put him to no further A large offer
made to M. Hal.
trouble for proving his freedom: and who sees not this my offer to be very
large, in case marriage had been as freely then permitted to Priests as it is
now to Ministers, as he contendeth? And if neither authority in writing, nor
example of fact can be found, and we show both the one and other for their
single life, then I trust none will be so unequal a Judge, and professed enemy
of truth, as not to acknowledge it, appearing so plainly in her native colors,
and so Al authority stands for the single life of Priests none against it of
any account or worth.
evidently marked with infallible certainty.

112. And it must needs be a great comfort unto Catholics to see Heresy have so
weak defense, to see this cause so ouerborn by us, as you have heard, to see
on our side stand S. Gregory our Apostle, S. Bid, S. Dunstane, S. Ethelwold,
S. Oswald, S. Anselme, so many Kings, Counsels, Nobility, consent of the
Realm, continu^ll custom of time, all writers of most account, in one word
all the flower of authority, learning, and sanctity, which ever our Nation
yielded since these broils of the incontinent Clergy began and before also;
and on the other side to see M. Hall for want of other help to lay hold on one
obscure Author Henry Huntington, for time not very ancient, for credit small,
and for the very thing he affirms out of him untrue, al others disclayming
from him, all pleading for us, unless they be such as are not worth the taking
up, and that even until the time of Edward the 6. when also those who there
dealt against us, had first in another Parlame^t before pleaded for us, and
subscribed to that which afterward they condemned. If any say for their
excuse, that the later Parlaments are of equal authority with the former, and
that one may repeal what the other has enacted: I answer that so it is in
civil affairs, which depend upon the present disposition of persons, times
and things: for it may so fall out, that one law which heretofore was very
expedient, may be now hurtful, or the contrary: but for matters of faith, or
things thereunto appertayning, this rule does not hold: for as the certainty of
Religion depends not on men, who are mutable, but upon the sure, immovable,
and everlasting truth of Almighty God, always one, always inuariable, so must
the same also be constant, one, and uniform in it self, without any change or
alteration at all: neither is this faith to be fashioned out by Parlaments of
particular Nations, but if any difficulty arise therein, or in any other
Ecclesiastical affayre, the Pastors (who alone are to direct the flock of
Christ) in General Councils are to sit judges, and define the matter, and lay
men not to intermedle therein. This always has been the practice of the
Christian world, by this have errors been rooted out, unity and purity of
faith mainteyned, the people kept in peace, the Church in esteem, and this
failing, errors, as experience has too deerly taught us, have increased,
heresies without all order, or unity have been multiplied, common peace
broken, holy Church contemned, the whole frame of Christianity shaken, and al
things disioynted and put out of order.

113. Another ponderation may be drawn 4. Ponderation.
from the difficulty of this grant for marriage in the very beginning when it
was first proposed in Parliament, in the time of King Edward The first grant for
marriage of Clergy men gotten in the Parlame^t with great difficulty.
the sixth, and was so strongly opposed, as it could find no passage, but only
for the time past and that also not without some hard straynes, it seeming
indecorum unto them all to behold the Pastors as fleshly as the people, and no
purity or perfection of life to be in one more then in the other, but sicut
populus, sic Sacerdos, to be all carnal, all drowned in sensuality, al alike
more corporal then spiritual, more attent to the body See the three Conuers.
par. 2. cap. 12.. 22. etc.
then soul, to pleasure then penance, temporal emoluments, then eternal
happynes: but what should they do? deny it absolutely they could not: for the
Ministers practice had prevented their hindrance, and they came provided in
that behalf, not having so much patience as to expect the Parlaments
permittance: and he had given them example who for place and authority was the
chiefest among them, their Archbishop Cranmer the first married Metropolitan
that ever was in England.
Cranmer I mean, the first married Metropolitan that ever England saw, and it
was to no purpose to go about to restrain the members from the influence of
the head, or where the root was corrupted to seek to save the branches from
infection: this also being the chief point of Evangelical liberty among them,
happily renewed (as M. Hall says) with the Gospel, but indeed was so new, as
a new pair of shoes never made before, could be no newer. And this Gospel
was not according to S. Matthew, but Martin Luther as we have showed, and a
very lascivious Gospel that to satisfy the lust of these wanton companions,
did break all bands and promises made before to God of a better life.

114. But seeing afterward all the offspring to tracke so constantly this path
of their progenitors, necessity excluding all counsel of further
deliberation, and the great multitude of these married men all means of
redress, they were forced in the next Parliament to permit them all to take
wives: permit them I say, for approve them they did not, and that also in
despite of all laws made ever before in all Provincial, National, and
General Councels to the contrary, against all authority of man, as they
termed it (this parliament being as you may imagine of Angels) all practice of
the Land, and An Angelical Parliament of black Angels.
whole Church for so many ages without control of any, but Schismatikes or
Heretics, and now from the highest to the lowest, all Archbishops, Bishops,
Chanons, Curates, and other Ministers of the Land, were licenced to marry, and
remarry before and after their ordering, to any person or persons, and to be
restrained therein no more then any other man whatsoever, which was never seen
done in any National decree that ever was made in the world before these later
heresies began: and if M. Hall think this my denial too absolute, let him
bring me out of all antiquity but one example, which yet he has not done. And
this perhaps together with the indecency of the thing it self, made the
makers of that statute to premise this Exordium Anno. 2. Eduar. 6.
thereunto. As though it were not only better for the estimation of Priests and
other Ministers in the Church of God, to live chaste, sole, and separate from
the company of women, and the band of marriage, but also thereby they might the
better intend to the administration of the Gospel, and be less intricated
and troubled with the charge of household, being free and unburdened from the
care and cost of finding wife, and children, and that it were most to be
wished, that they M. Hall says that this is impossible.
would willingly, and of their selves endeavor their self to a perpetual
chastity, and abstinence from the use of women. The makers of the Statute
though they permitted marriage, yet preferred chastity in Clergy men.
So the beginning of this Statute.

115. And by this you may see both what the makers of the Statute thought and
wished in this matter, and also that the impossibility of living a chaste life,
which M. Hall so much pleads was not then admitted, or held to be sound
doctrine: for else all these great Rabbines who repealed in this behalf all law
of man had been very simple men indeed to make such a persuasion for a thing
impossible, and which lay not in the power of man to observe, much less were
they so impudent as to challenge the use of former ages and general custom of
the Church, as this man no less fondly then falsely does, for the true cause
indeed of this permission was for that these goats who were now chosen to
govern the sheep, were so wanton as they could not conteyne, but must needs
out of hand in all have have either wives, or rather women, and so much in a
manner is insinuated when they urge that such as cannot conteyne (as all
Ministers and Apostata Priests do say they cannot) may after the Counsel of
the Scripture live in holy marriage: so it pleased them to term their
sacrilegious Where does the Scripture counsel such as have made vows of
chastity to break their vows and marry?
turpitude, and that also according to the Counsel of the Scripture, which
never counsayled any man after a solemn vow to marry, but the contrary: but
now the color or cloak which was to be cast over, to keep this their leachery
from the sight of the simple, was that some forsooth had vowed chastity who yet
were unchaste livers, as if some married men also were not the like, and
therefore by the same reason they might as well have condemned marriage, as
single life. He that made marriage (says M. Hall) says it is honorable, what
care we for the dishonor of those that corrupt it? And the same demand I make
in this matter, Chastity of single life is not only Matt. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
honorable, but more honorable by our Saviors testimony, and plain text of
S. Paul, then Cypr. l. de discipl. and habitu virgin. circa initium
is marriage, and S. Cyprian worthily says of Virgins, that they are, Flos
Ecclesiasti^i germinis, and illustrior portio gregis Christi: The flower of the
Ecclesiastical of spring, and the more honorable portion of the flock of
Christ: and what care we for the dishonor of those that corrupt it? Nothing at
al: we commend the thing, we condemn the abuse: as the later is damnable, so
is the thing it self both of singular perfection, and of no such difficulty,
but that we may Gods grace assisting us very easily observe it. But to draw to
an end.

116. The last ponderation is the manner 5. Ponderation.
of disputing, by which M. Hall uses to show the continent life of the English
Clergy to have been lately begun in S. Dunstans time, all his proof is in
these few words. The bickerings of our M. Hall^ loose manner of disputing.
Clergy with their Dunstans teach us how late, how repiningly, how unjustly
they stooped under this yoke: but this teaching he talks of I cannot
conceive, or how out of S. Dunstans bickerings he can conclude the continency
of Clergy men to have been lately, repiningly, unjustly imposed: for the force
of this reason must rest in this, that because S. Dunstane had bickering with
the Clergy about their marriages, and did make them leave their wives,
therefore continency is not ancient, but was repiningly admitted, and unjustly
imposed: if this be his meaning, by the same reason I will prove no thieves or
malefactors ever to have been in our Country before the time of King James:
for who knows not that the Judges both in London, and all the Shyres of the
Land, have had every year, and still have some bickering with such people:
will M. Hall thereupon thus argue. We see now with our eyes what bikering the
Judges have with thieves and malefactors, and thereby we are taught how late
these people have stooped under the yoke of prison, bar, and gallows: Ergo
before these times it was ^ree for all to robb, ^^calt, murder and the like,
and no penalty was ever imposed upon them: where is your wit M. Hall? apply
this to your own words, and you shall find the argument to be the same, or if
you deny it, show me the disparity.

117. If you say, that S. Dunstane brought in a new custom against the old,
that, as you M. Hall must not suppose that as granted which is only in
controversy.
know is the point in controversy: and how will you prove it out of his
bickerings? did the delinquents ever plead prescription? did they ever tax S.
Dunstane with nouelty? and imposing a yoke never before borne? what ancient
Author records it? None at all. And the contrary is clearly euinced by that
we have said, and their repyning no more infers their innocence, or excuses
their lewdnes, then the repyning of such as are in Bridewell under the
correction of justice does prove them honest women, and that their punishment
is lately invented and unjustly inflicted. This is M. Halls last proof
conform to the rest, and with the same as he ends his arguments, would I
also have ended this letter, but that his triumphant conclusion forces me to
make a brief recapitulation of what has passed in this combat between us,
that you may as in a table see both what cause there was he should so crow, and
how that he as well as other of our Adversaries have a special grace, when
they have proved nothing, to v^unt above measure of their chymericall
conquests: for if you bar them of that boasting humor, of lying, of railing,
of corrupting Authors and childish disputing, their pens will cast no ink,
their books will be very barren, and they in short time for matters or
controversy will become altogether mute.

M. Halls bragging Conclusion is examined: together with a brief
Recapitulation of what before has been said.
HAVING discussed hitherto all M. Halls arguments, and deciphered their
weakness, or rather having showed how they have been answered by others, and
resumed by him without any notice of their former refutation, and that with
such confident courage, as he pawneth his wife, his fidelity, his cause, and
all thereon, which if truth and equity may give sentence, he has all forfeited:
yet such is the man's misfortune, his wit being so shallow, and self esteem of
his own worth and works so great, that as before he never more bragged the^
where he had least cause, and was most overthrown, so in the very end where he
should have excused the want of exact performance of what he had undertaken, as
necessarily knowing all his proofs to have been so disproued before, as
neither altogether, or any one of them all cold subsi^t, yet having passed the
bounds of modesty by his intemperate railing on v^, and immoderate praising of
himself, without further reflection he ru^heth on forwards, and in lieu of M.
H^lls pride and vanity.
this excuse and humble opinion of himself (a there is ^o cause God wo^ why ^e
should have any other) he comes aloft with an I^ triumph, and like a
co^querour in his triumphant chariot, with law^ell, crown and scepter in hand,
talks of nothing else, but conquest^, victoryes, subduing Adversaries,
^e^ching and defending the truth; which yet in this bravery, he so betrayth, as
even in this triumphant Conclusion which he makes, there is nothing he has
that includes not in it some notorious ^alshood; observing in some sort the
rules of art which will have the beginning and end of a work to have some
proportion, and connection together, and so as he began bluntly with five lies
at once so will he end with as many to speak the least: for thus he writes.

2. I have (says he) I hope fetched this truth far enough, and deduced it low
enough, through many ages, to the midst of the rage of Antichristian M. Hall
for a fare well gives us a fardle of untruths.
tyranny: there left our libe^ty, there began their bondage. Our liberty is
happily renewed with the Gospel: what God, what his Church has ever allowed,
we do enjoy, wherein we are not alone: the Greek Church as large for extent a^
the Roman (and in some parts of it better for soundnes) do thus, and thus have
ever done. Let Papists and Athiests say what they will, it is safe erring with
God, and his purer Church. So he. And to all this vaunting there needs no
other answer, then that of the Wise man: Nubes and v^ntus and pl^ui^ non
sequentes, vir gloriosus and promissa non complens. As the c^oud Proverb. 25.
and wind and no reign following, so is the man who vaunteth much, and
performs not his promises: for all these wast words, are but clouds without
water, vain blasts of presumptuous pride, promi^ing much and performing
nothing: and M. Hall in his long travel is but like unto one who makes a
great journey to the sea side, to fetch home salt water in a ^yue, or to those
of whom the Prophet speaks, who sowed much and reaped little, and put all
their gain in sacculum pertusum, a purse pierced through the bottom, from
which all did fall out that was put in: for if M. H^ll will rightly cast up his
accounts, he shall find that he has gained as much by all his labor for his
cause, as if he had sat still and said nothing, though for his credit this he
had gotten, to be h^ld a very insincere and superficial writer: for he wants
learning to frame an argument, reading to find the truth, modesty in his
terms, and conscience in telling so many lies which are as thick with him as
hops in harvest.

3. And whosoever will consider what before has been said, will see the vain
hope of this man to vanish like smoke: he says that he has fetched this truth
far enough, and deduced it low enough, through many ages, even to the midst of
the rage of Antichristian tyranny: o how much is truth for her deliverance out
of bondage be holding unto M. Hall? to so potent an Advocate? Scilicet
liberanda veritas (says ^ertullian) expectabat Marcionem. This conquest of
fetching truth so far was rese^ued to Tertul. ^^ Marci^n.
these ^ymes, to M. Halls trauells, to his learned pen, but in this his valiant
exploit of fetching home truth he should not have forgot that rule thereof
delivered by S. Ambrose, and was much worth his noting: Veritatis (says this
Father) Amb. lib. ^ ^e Offi^. cap. 24.
^^est regula, vt nihil sacias commendandi tui causa, quo minor alius fiat.
That is the rule of truth that you do nothing in your own commendation whereby
another may be abased, as here M. Hall does, whiles in praising himself for
fetching truth so far, of his happy renewing of his liberty by the Gospel, of
erring with the purer Church, and the like, he contumeliously calls the
Catholic Church and the government thereof Antichristian tyranny, and most
basely gives as it were the defyance to Papists and Atheists, which terms
needed not, were all so clear on his side as he would have it, but that the
leuity and malignity of his distempered brain, where reason failed would force
it out with railing: and he thought his own praise too little unless it went
combyned with our contumely. In this I confess his faculty is better then in
proving the continuance of the marriage of Clergy men, which notwithstanding
his brags, has been found to be to ^ard a task for his weak ability.

4. And when he tells us, how far this truth is fetched, and how low deduced
through many ages, I must truly tell him, that he has performed no such
matter; the primitive church the ensuing ages, the later times, all authority
of any weight or worth are against him, until the time of Edward the sixth,
the freedom he now possesses was never possessed in England, no Bishops were
married, no Priests but of lewd life ever attempted it, abuse as times gave M.
Hall strives as it should seem to utter many untruths in a few lins*
occasion crept in, but never had public allowance. And if he mean by the
time of Antichristian trranny the time of Gregory the seventh, then is his
impudency very singular to say, that he has cleared it till his time, when as
the single life of Clergy men was more in use in the Latin Church ever before
that time, then whiles he lived: and as these are very gross untruths, so are
the rest which follow as after, I shall show, to wit that, that there left his
liberty, matrimonial I mean, that there began our bondage, that his liberty
is renewed by the Gospel, for in our Gospel we find no such matter, that he
enioys what God, what his Church has ever allowed, which is a double lie or
two lies in one line: that in this his extensiue liberty he is not alone, that
the Greek Church is as large for extent as the Roman, that in some things for
soundnes better, that thus it does as they do in England, that thus they have
ever done, are four other falsehoods: and in fine there is nothing true in all
this conclusion, as it shall appear by the ensuing recapitulatio^ of what
before has been proved.

5. Yet this by the way I must tell him, that all the soundnes he means of the
Greek Church is, for that it allows that married men may be made Priests,
though it never allowed any Priests to be made married men, much less any
Bishop: for else who so will read their confession in the censure, which
Hieremias their Patriarch made upon heretical articles sent him Censura
Eccl^siae Orientalis.
by two Lutherans out of Germany, Mar^inus Crusi* us, and Iacobus Andrea, he
shall find for the number of Sacraments, real presence, unbloody sacrifice, The
confession of the Greek Church.
justification by works, traditions, free will, monastical life, praying to
Saints, the use of holy images, praying for the dead, and other points very
Catholic assertions, agreeing with us, and condemning the Protestants: so as
if M. Hall (poor silly soul) will make himself an arbirer to judge of the
soundnes of Churches, and have his cause to be helped, for that the Greek
Church in one thing favors him against us, we may (if we thought such
arguments worth the making) better thereof infer the soundnes of our Church
against him, with which the Greek not in one only, but in very many points,
and those also the greatest and most essential of Christian Religion, does
agree: and truly omitting the error of the Procession of the holy Ghost, and
ridiculous Supremacy of that Patriarcke, condemned as well by our Adversaries
as by us, in the rest they seem Catholics, at the least their positions are
such: and albeit in some particular eustoms they differ from us, yet are not
those of such great moment, but that with unity of faith a perfect peace and
accord might be made between us, if all will stand to that which their
chiefest Patriarck in so open a confession has taught and declared. But to
come to M. Hall.

6. He vaunted much in the beginning of his letter of the Scriptures, and told
us, that if God should be judge of this Controversy* it were soon at an No
divine authority for the marriage of Ecclesiastical men.
end and therefore he passed not what he heard men or Angels say, while he
heard him say, let him be the husband of one wise: but the proof this divine
authority has much failed him, and no place in any Prophet or Apostle has
decided the same: and such as this poor man has brought are but cramb:
^ecoct^, cole worts twice or thrice soden: answered I mean and reanswered by
Catholics, especially by Cardinal Bellarmine, and the solutions deeply
dissembled, such a worthy wight is this writer: and it has been showed not
one text or citation he has brought taken in their true sense and meaning, to
ma^e for his purpose: as for example of the doctrine of Devils forbidding
marriage, of the Bishop being the husband or one w^^e, that marriage is
honorable, and the bed undefiled, of the Apostles carrying their wives about
the world with the^, with others of the old Testament, all which how they are
by him either streyned, misinterpreted, or not rig^tly understood, has been
at large declared in their due places; and his two brutish Paradoxes also fully
refelled, that the vow of Chastity is unlawful, that it is impossible, and
that by the excellency of the virtue vowed, eminency over marriage, persuasions
of the Fathers thereunto, the ^harp rebuke and punishment of the
transgressors, the wickedness of the marriage of votaryes, and that none but
Heretics ever maintained it: and further at large is proved the foresaid vow
to be most laudable, and for performance to iuclude no impossibility at all.

7. To this is added the rigor of the Civil law in punishing the deli^quents
in this kind, very ancient and austere, which severity supposes the observance
to be in the power of the maker, as it is in the power of others not to steal,
commit a ^u^ery, and other like offenses, in which if they transgress, no
Judge will excuse their fault as proceeding out of any defect of ability to
refrain, but supposi^g that as known and granted by all, punish them for
doing such acts which they were able to avoid, and by the law of God, Nature
and Nations were bound not to commit, and having committed deserve to be
chastized. After this the constitution of the Apostles, and what other proof
is brought for their practice are discussed, what Caietan, Pius, and Panormitan
have said to the contrary is answered, and in fine it is euinced most clearly,
the Apostles, excepting S. Peter, not to have married, and in case they had,
even by the verdict of M. Halls own Authors, after their calling to the
Apostolical dignity, never more to have known their wives, much less to have
carried them in pilgrimage all the world over with them, as these men
(Ministers I mean that cannot be long from their wives, and therefore would
have the Apostles to be as weak as themselu^s) do fancy and surmize.

8. Hereof it follows, if M Hall will not mistake the state of the question,
that he has not setched this truth of his far enough: for from the Apostles he
finds, he fetches nothing that can avail him, and so reaches not home if
he M. Hall destitute of all authority of the ancient Father.
speak as he seems of time, though for place like a wild wanderer he have
trauerst Greece, Egypt, Asri^ke, and other coasts of Europe, and returned as
wise as he was when he went forth. Of the next ensuing ages for four hundred
years he cyteth but three Fathers, Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Athanasius, the first
has nothing to the purpose, the second is very grossly abused, the third
mistaken, not any one or all together make any thing for him: much he is and
indeed too much in the fact of Paphnutius recounted by Socrates, for he
corruply sets it down to his advantage against the mind and meaning of his
Authors. And the thing is fully answered and showed either to be false, or not
to make so much for M. Hall as he would seem to have it: the names he adds
after of married Priests and Bishops are partly false, partly true, altogether
impertine^t, and plainly show this Epistler not to understand the thing he
treats of, but to roue at random and in many words to say nothing to the
matter.

9. Not content with Priests and Bishops, he comes to Popes, and will needs
give them a singular privilege: for he will have Popes to have begotten Popes,
and the children to have Popes belyed, and Socrates abused.
succeeded their Fathers in the Pontifical Sea, as Kings sons do their
parents in that Crown and kingdom, al are lies taken out of the Chafe, but
fathered upon Gratian, and here clearly refelled as counterfeit: then he
shows out of Socrates, what some Bishops did, whether Heretics or Catholics
he says not, nor yet of what place, but being himself a Grecian borne, and
brought up in Coustantinople, where no Patriarch was ever known to have
married, or to have used after wards his wife, which is our question, he says,
that all the famous Priests or Bishops of the East observed the same custom,
not compelled thereunto by any law (says he) though not a few Bishops did the
contrary, and it may well be imagined these Bishops not to have been of the best,
and their example could not make this custom usual, much less universal in
the Greek Church, as has been showed out of S. Hierome, S. Epiphanius, S.
Leo. And truly for Bishops to have known their wives in that state which
Socrates avouches, was never there lawful, no not in the Trullan Synod as you
have seen: and it was no sincere dealing in M. Hall to make this heretical
historian seem to speak of all the Bishops of Greece, whose words are plain
to the contrary and expressly mention some particular only.

10. From particulers proofs he comes to more general, and urges the Council
of Trullu^ and therein he much bestirreth himself, but as it falls out with
bad brokers that buy and sell and leese by the exchang so M. Hall after this
labor even by his own verdict is proved and proclymed faythles, and the
Council at large is discussed, and proved never to have allowed leave to any
Clergy man in holy orders to marry, howsoever some married men were ordered to
be Priests, but never to be Bishops: and this being but a National Council,
unlawfully assembled, never wholly approved, cannot prescribe The Counsel of
Trullum.
laws to the whole Church: and M. Halls sanctifying the same, and making it a
General, because it favored marriage (to speak nothing of his lies) argues
in him more love to his wife, then care he had to see or seek out the truth:
and notwithstanding it had been such, yet had he lost much more to his cause,
then gained thereby, as is declared in many particulers, of the real presence,
sacrifice, worshipping of holy images, especially the Cross, the holy Chrisme,
power of Priests to remit sins, and the like: yea even in that very cause for
which it is brought and urged it makes against him, so little heed does M.
Hall take of what he writes. Again presently after he does contradict his
own authorityes, and will for seven hundred years have nothing but open
freedom, when as out of the Council he should have inferred the contrary,
because then this freedom in part was first granted, and never permitted before.

11. After this Council, as if there with he had opened A^olus his den,
follows a boisterous A boisterous charge.
blast of raging words, wherein for want of other matter, this honest man
charge us with blemishing, burning, blotting, cutting, and tearing of the
Trullan Canon out of the Counsels, and that against the evidences of Greek
copyes, against Gratian, against pleas of antiquity, and which most of all
pinceth, against the marriage of Ministers, and Ecclesiastical persons: but all
this storm is soon assuaged, because it had no other cause then the mere
ignorance, and malice of him who raised it, and this C^non of his general
Council without all blemish* blot, fire or sword is found to be entire in our
copies, Greek and Latin, albeit the decree be not so flat, howsoever confirmed
by authority of Emperors, but that it abides a denial, yea is proved
Schismatic, and the second Pope Steuens distinguishing upon the point, as he
will have it, is absolutely without any distinction proved to be a lie, and the
Canon fathered on him to agree rather to Steven the Subdeacon father to Pope
Osi^s and Deusdedit, then to any Pope of that name, though M. Hall be very
peremptory and resolute therein: but his words be no oracles, or prove for the
most part any thing else, but either the vanity, malice, or ignorance of the
speaker.

12. Which well appears in a heap of demands, which follow immediately upon
the former charge, discharged long ago by Bellarmine, which all bewray the
weakness of the writer, as has before been showed in every particular: and as
mad an inference he makes after when by a non sequitur he concludes saying:
So then we differ not from the Church in this, but from the Romish Church: in
which words I think the poor man understands not himself: for M. Halls
Non sequitur.
when he says, we differ not from the Church, what Church does it mean? either
the whole Catholic Church, or some particular member? if the whole, then how
does he exclude the Roman, with which all Europe and Afric the greatest part
of Greece and all Egypt did agree? If of a particular branch or member, then
how does he say: we differ not from the Church, when as he differs even from
that very Church on which he would seem most to rely, the Greek I mean; for
as has been showed to M. Halls cost, if he esteem the loss of his fidelity
for such, of four things defined in that Council, that three are against him,
and yet so blind a doctor he is, as he can discern no difference, but as
though there were perfect agreement in all things, he says: we differ not
from the Greek Church, but from the Latin, and as well he may say that a man
and a horse do not differ in any thing, because they agree in this, that either
of them have one head though in other matters there be never so large and
manifold differences between them.

13. I let p^sse his untruths before detected whereof this was one, that for
seven hundred years there was nothing but freedom, which if it be not spoken
per antiphrasim, is to gross a lie Untruths by heaps.
as has been delared: and that this scuffling began in the 8. age, as if the
continent life of the Clergy had then newly entered, or sought to find entrance,
when as still it had been on foot and full possession before, as by the
definitive sentences of so many Counsels gathered in Asia, Europe, and Afric
is demonstrated, and the contrary by M. Hall is without all proof or
probability affirmed, though he streyne far and forge a text of the third
Gregory to this purpose, and foully mistake S. Isidore, and then upon no other
ground, but his own error and oversight, most pitifully exclaim against us,
with I know not what outrageous crime committed to our perpetual shame, whom
he calls his iuggling Adversaries, and will have us deal worse then the
Devil: but this shame I have shaken off from us, and it must rest on himself,
and all the iuggling is resolved to this, that M. Hall cannot see that which
lies open before his eyes, and therefore as he is suspicious thinks it by
some iuggling devise to be taken away. Alas (poor M. Hall) I pity your
ignorance, but condemn your malice, feign you would byte, but wanting teeth
you can but only bark: you esteem your self a gallant man when you rail at
our doing or doctrine, but your wit is so weak, and will so wicked, as the
later which is blind and should be guyded by the former, only directs your
pen, and shows your judgment and learning to be alike, little I mean in
respect of the desire you have to do us hurt, in case you were able. God
forgive you, and send you a better mind.

14. There follows another fundamental proof which is so potent, that M.
Hall will be cast The fable of S. Huldericks Epistle.
in his cause if it do not answer all cauills, satisfy all Readers, and
convince all not wilful adversaries: and this forsooth is a learned and
vehement epistle of S. Vdalricus unto Pope Nicholas the first, in which we see
(says this blind man) how just, how expedient, how ancient this liberty is,
and not only that, but there-withall also the feeble and injurious grounds of
forced continency, read it (says he) and see whether you can desire a better
Advocate. I have done his friend M. VVhiting that favor as to read it for him,
and I see this Advocate in writing to the first* Nicolas to have been as blind
as M. Hall: for in ca^e S. Vdalricus had written it (as it is euinced that he
did not) he had written it more then 50. years after the parties death whom
he did write it unto, and more then twenty years before himself who wrote it
was borne: and therefore I desire in M. VVhitings name a better Advocate, that
may plead after the usual manner of other men, and not write letters before he
have either body or soul, eyes to see, tongue to speak, or hands to write,
and then ^end them not to the living but to the dead, and in the co^tents to
speak the truth, and not tell us tales of six thousand heads found in one
mote, with other the like impertinencyes before refuted: and finally I must
tell M. Hall, that the cause is very weakly defended, that relyeth on such
rotten grounds of forged fictions, and if he had esteemed it to be of any
worth, he would never have made hazard thereof upon such fooleryes: if he be as
prodigal of his wealth, as he is of his wife, cause, credit, and fidelity, his
children shall not be ouercharged with any rich inheritance which he is like to
leave them, for he will be sure to live and dye a beggar.

15. In this counterfeit epistle there is no antiquity set down for M. Halls
carnal liberty, neither can we espy therein the feel lenes of the ground of
forced continency, because we force none thereunto, but compel such as without
all inforcement out of their own free and deliberate election have vowed it,
to the observance of their vows, which this letter as lawful does allow,
though we may not allow this liberty to M. Hall to change the name of Vdalricus
into Volusianus, nor to authorize it from them that have mention thereof, as
Aeneas Siluius, nor yet from such as in case they have some mention, are
themselus of no credit, as Gaspar Hedio, John Fox, or such like fablers, nor
finally to vaunt of a happy plea and triumphant conquest, where never word was
spoken, or stroke given, or thing done more the^ in the idle fancy of some new
fangled Ghospellers, how soever this wise man tell us that heerupon this liberty
blessed the world for 200. years after, but I have at one dash bated one
hundred, and fifty more at another, and that from the warrant of his own
words, and proved this Plea, if ever there had been any such as there was not,
to have been very unlucky, as well for the discredit of the maker as overthrow
of the matter, and that in so short space as has been before set down.

16. And because this modest man rayles at the seventh Gregory for utterly
ruining the marriages of Priests, and makes him the most Of Gregory the 7.
Nicholas the 2 and Leo the 9.
mortal enemy that ever the vow-breakers had (which I impute to his great
honor, as it is also to be reviled by heretics) I have at large defended him,
and his whole contention with Henry the Emperor, and showed how constantly he
behaved himself in this sluttish business: and although M. Hall would feign
have him to be amongst the first parents of such as suppressed the marriages of
Clergy men, yet the truth is, that before his time these marriages were never
thought upon in Germany, but then the Clergy brake forth first into that
intolerable beastlines: and the like is proved by Nicholas the second (for the
first had never any thing to do in that controversy) and Leo the ninth, whose
decrees are only against concubines and harlots of incontinent Priests, without
any mention of wives, which in their tims were not any where allowed or perhaps
so much as thought upon: and it may seem a wonder to an^ who knows not the
custom of Heretics to see one to claim prescriptio^ of time for the marriage
of Clergy men, that cannot bring one Canon, one National decree, one direct
authority of any ancient Father for seven hundred years together, and after
that time to allege a mere patched proof of a schismatical Conuenticle,
which more hurts then helps his cause, and yet to brag that for all that
time there was nothing but marriage, nothing but liberty, no vows, no chastity:
but these are the usual pangs of heretical insolency.

17. Diverse other points upon this occasion are discussed, as the deposition of
Gregory the seventh feigned to be made in the Council of Worms, and that
for separating man and wife: but there was no deposition made, no separation
mentioned. Then whether Gods will (which this man still supposes to stand for
the incontinent vow-breakers ^or the Popes willfullnes was sought therein: and
lastly, whether the broils between Henry and Gregory were about this matter,
and what flock it was that was so afflicted by the Popes censures as Auentine
reports, which was not indeed any flock of Christ, for such still adhered
unto their renowned Pastor, kept their vows, and were not shaken with that
tempest: bu(...) a few stinking impure goats, given over (...)ll lust and
leachery, whom neither fear of God, nor shame of men, nor vow though never so
solemn, nor band though never so strong was able to conteyne.

18. Touching our English Clergy M. Hall is very brief, and has scant six
lines in his text thereof, yet as few as they be, they contradict The English
Clergy.
the Comment he makes on them in his margent: for in the Text the bickering
began with S. Dunstane, in the margent with S. Anselme: in the Text we learn
out of our own historyes, how late, how repiningly, how unjustly the Clergy
stooped under this yoke by S. Dunstane: in the margent S. Anselme was the first
that ever forbadde marriage to the Clergy of England, till then ever free. If
ever free till then, how came it to pass, that S. Dunstane more then a hundred
years before that time had made the Clergy so repiningly and unjustly to stoop
under the yoke of continency or single life? how is he free that has his neck
in the yoke? If S. Dunstane made them stoop a hundred years and more before S.
Anselme, then truly can it not be said that S. Anselme was the first, that
ever forbad marriage, or that until this time it had been always free to
marry. Of what credit his two Authors alleged are, is there declared, and
further out of S. Gregory, Bid, VVolstane, Anselme, Malmesbury etc. out of
National Councels, and other proof it is showed, our English Clergy in the
first pla^tation, in the continuance, and always in general to have been
continent until the time of King Edward the sixth, though sometyms in the
troubled state of the Land, in some places, this beastlines began, but was
never publicly allowed: neither can M. Hall, or his two Authors Fox and Bale,
show any one public decree, any one Canon of Council, any one authentical
Charter or Record of so much as any one single Bishop extant to the contrary.

19. All which being thus declared, and as The particularity of M. Hals vaunt
is briefly examined.
occasion served the uniform practice of all the Christian Church in Asia,
Europe, and Afric showed to stand for us, and the very Authors of any account
brought by M. Hall himself to the contrary to be more ours then his, as well
for the Apostles themselves and Apostolical times, as also for the ensuing
ages after; M. VVhiting may see the truth of this Thrasonicall vaunt that M.
Hall makes, when he tells him for a farewell, that he has fetched this truth
far enough. For before K. Edward the sixth (not far off God wot) he can fetch
nothing to prove the large liberty now usurped by our English Clergy, if the
married Ministers with their wives may so be termed: with their wives I say,
because their wives are as much Clergy women as they Clergy men, and in one
word have as true calling to teach, preach and minister their Sacraments as
their husbands have. And when this man out of his wandering imagination further
adioyneth, that he has deduced it low enough through many ages, to the middst
of the rage of Antichristian tyranny; I must tell him that he has made no
other deduction, the^ of his own ignorance, lies and folly, which without
breach or intermission like an entiere third are begun, and followed to the end
of his letter: and all the rage of Antichristian tyranny he speaks of, is
nothing else, but the outrageous railing of a Fantastical sycophant, who for
want of learning, and truth is forced to talk of that he does not understand,
to confirm one lie by another, to mistake what he should prove, and to forget
all modesty.

20. There left (says he) our liberty, there began their bondage. Where M.
Hall do you mean? In Terra Florida, Virginia, or Vtopia? For the word (there)
is referred to place, and not to time, or if you will abusiuely take it from
time, I demand when this l^centious liberty for the marriage of Priests began
to be restrained? If (as before you signified) under the first and second
Nicholas, under the 9. Leo, and 7. Gregory, your own Trullan Council before
these times is against you, which forbids your Bishops to marry at all, or keep
company with their wives, and would permit no Priest to marry. And that no
Priest might be married, I have cyted in the end of the second Paragraffe many
Counsels out of all the coasts of Christendom. And whereas he further adds
our liberty is happily renewed with the Gospel, it is hard to define what
liberty, happiness, what Gospel he means; and of what God, what Church he
talks, when he says: what God, what his Church has ever allowed, we do
enjoy: for this Church is some invisible castle in the air, never seen on the
earth, and this We, is equivocal, and may include Lutherans, Caluinists,
Protestants or Puritans: and let it include all or some one branch among all of
these sects, yet is the lie notorious: for in all the Christian Church, this
liberty has ever been banished.

21. The Greek Churches (says he) do thus, and thus have ever done: if he
mean as he seems that these Churches use the liberty of the English Church
renewed by this later Ghospel, it is too to gross an untruth, and yet not
proved by any See censura Orienta^is Ecclesiae c. vltim. in principio capitis.
one authority of the Fathers, nor yet of his sacred Trullan Conuenticle: and
M. Hall does well to name the Greek Schismatical Church of this day, which yet
comes short in this very point of the English, for in all his Letter he has
not brought one a^cient authority for the Churches of Europe and Afric, more
then one only of S. Cyprian touching the example of Numidicus, which if any
spark of shame be left, may make him blush to think upon. All the rest are
broken pieces out of S. Vdalricus, Gratian, Panormitan, Pius 2. Caietan and
others, either in themselves counterfeit, or with the co^trouersy in hand
nothing at all coherent.

22. Wherefore to end this matter with him for whom I began it, I hope now,
good Sir, that you see M. Halls valor to have been valued by yourselfe at too
high a rate, and even there to have failed where you esteemed most of his
ability; in this matter I mean, where besides mere babbling what has he
proved? how many words has he used and cyted authorityes only to cast a clowd
upon the truth, and to hide it from the eyes of his simple Reader? Many are his
M. Halls impertinencyes.
braggs, his citations thick, his promises great, his confidence singular, but
his wit is weak, his ability small, his performance nothing. After his first
entrance with lies which continually increase, he mistaketh the state of the
question, and talks of many things not denied by his adversary, not in
controversy between him and us, he brings in a bedrole of names of such
Bishops as had been married, but proves not that they used their wives when
they were Bishops, or ever married again after their wives were dead, as
Robert Abbots late of Salisbury did in great have with Mistress Dike. And what
does this conclude? he brings authorityes to prove that chastity is not of
the substance of the order, not annexed by divine law expressly set down in the
Scripture, and is this for him? It is against us? He taxes Nicholas the 2. and
Leo the ninth for condemning of the marriages of Priests, who only decreed
against their concubins, without any mention of their matrimony: and what can
he infer thereof? In fine either he cyteth weak and counterfeit authorityes,
or else mistaketh most pitifully the places which he does cite, and so in
saying much, concludes from the Fox to the fern bush, from the apple to the
oyster, from the full Moon in March to the fresh flowers of May.

23. On the otherside I leave you to see the authorityes I cite either to
refute his assertions or to confirm the contrary: the use of ancient times we
must take from ancient writers, they as you have seen, are wholly ours, they
never allowed Bishops to beget children, to marry again in that state, neither
do their authorityes patronize the marriage of the Clergy, but condemn it: and
in case some were married before their ordination, yet after they were no
longer husbands, but lived apart from their wives, as S. Hierome does witness;
and I leave you to determine whether of us both has further fetched, or deduced
lower the cause he defends, who has gone through more ages, places,
Churches, who has the general consent to stand for him? He who can show the
custom of all the Christan world, Europe, Afric, and Asia, and that without
contradiction for the two first, and best authority that can be brought for the
other, or he who out of one third part culleth a small parcel only, late for
time, for extent not large, and that not proved but by heretics, not procured
but by such as endeavored to make tumult garboyl and sedition in the Church:
and then further whether without the liberty of a lie he may be said to
challeng the practice of the Christian Church, or liberty of the Gospel?

24. Finally the single life of Clergy men as in the example of the Apostls who
left their wives was first began, so from age to age in the universal Church
without intermission has still gone on: as the practice thereof both for time,
place, persons may truly betermed Catholic or universal, which as a thing
undoubted of was so far forth in the 2. Counsel of Carthage acknowledged,
Council. Cartha. 2. cap. 2.
as therein the Fathers assembled did say (as I for an vpshot say also unto all
Catholic Priests) Quod Apostoli docueru^t, and ipsa seruauit antiquitas, nos
quoque custodiamus. And then immeditaly they adioyne: Ab vniuersis Episcopis
dictum est omnibus, placet vt Episcopi, Presbyteri and Diaconi, velqui
sacramenta contrectant, pudicitiae custodes etiam ab vxoribus se abstinea^t. So
this Council against the liberty, Gospel, and alages of M. Halls deduction.
I hope he will be more favorable to this Synod, then to put it under the rage
of Antichristian tyranny, and that he will not for the love of his own trull be
so base, as to prefer the Trullan Counsel before it, because this is for more
ancient, and without comparison much more authentical the^ that: and these
words having been extant in this Council for a 1000. years and more, there was
yet never one found so far without aforehead, as to check them as false, to
condemn them as erroneous, or to rail at them as Antichristian; much less so
impudent to contradict them, as to deny that ever the Apostle so taught, or
that ever antiquity did so practice, unless it be such who make no other rule of
belief but the Kings Purple, or their own pleasure, as in this particular is
most evident.

25. For in K. Henryes time it was against the law of God for Priests to marry,
in K. Edwards against the same law to forbid marriage. In K. Henryes days only
because the King would so have it, the Supremacy was by solemn Oath allowed,
and accepted, and that proved again and again by the word of God: when as yet
all other Sectaryes out of our precincts, as well Cal^inists, Lutherans,
Anabaptists, and others, from the same word disputed, urged, exclaymed against
it, and still do, as a monstrous, usurped, and unlawful title. And now under
his Majesty the Protestants themselves have so pared and minced it, as shortly
if they hold on, we shall see it brought to nothing, which yet in the beginning
was so eagerly defended, and that with the effusion of so much blood, and other
cruelty as if it had been the only main Article of our salvation: such is the
base servile nature of Heretics to turn their sails to every wind, and not
to care what they believe, so they believe Athan. ep. ad so^it. v^tam agent. in
fine.
not that which they should* Non enim^ says S. Athanasius sinceriter ad verbum
Dei accesserunt, sed ad omnia tanquam Ch^meleontes transformantur: semper
mercenarij eorum qui earum opera^ requirunt, non veritate^ pro scopo habent,
sed veritati voluptatem anteponu^t. So he of the Arians: and as truly might he
have said it of all the Authors of these late Sects and schisms Luther,
Cranmer etc. and of all other Heretics in general, who as the same Father
says of such as were about Constantius the Arian Emperor: Ibid.
Cerebrum in calcaneis depressum habent, have their wit, not in their heads
but, in their heels, and will see nothing but that which makes for their own
pleasure and content: as M. Hall for the single life of Clergy men, could not
find any thing in the Monuments of the ancient Fathers, but for marriage of
Priests nothing else but full freedom; whereas if his brains had been in his
head, he could not but have found all authority of any weight or worth to be
against him, as before has in part been showed. And if in this Letter there
have been any default, that which follows in the next Paragraffe will make
supply, wherein I shall show him so ignorantly to conceive, so falsely to set
down our opinions, so foolishly to confirm his own, so to outface notorious
lies, so to contradict himself, so to rail and revel, so to talk at
random, as if his brains be not in his heels, you will at the least see and
confess also, that he has very little, or none at all left him in his head.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
In the Advertisement fol. 3. lin. 2. for Slout, read Clout. Ibid. for
slowterly read clouterly.

Page Line Fault Correction. 47. 32. Theodous Theodorus 57. 14. declayme
disclayme 65. 27. after upon 67. 26. profits perfits 70. 22. is it it is 72. 6.
dele if 78. 32. aduowtresse aduowterers 84. 32. my me 87. 2. highly high 91.
17. dele the 98. 31. confess so confess 99. 25. Oecumeniall Oecumenicall 100.
29. would will 133. 15. dele of 137. 26. had pigs and pigs 138. 32. aspexti
aspexit 159. 23. as a 161. 16. all at all 173. 16. promised premised 17^. 15.
tropheam tropheum 202. after Imagebreakers, add, in the East, as he had no
leisure to call Counsels, being etc. 225. 34. deaconish deaconship 238. 14.
gloss glass 250. 24. as and 279. 27. dele no 294. 22. and of 312. 4. whole
old Ibid. after willfullnes, add, for that cannot be said to be the
willfullnes of etc. 322. 27. had wives had had wives Ibi. 27. genuisse
genuissent 328. 26. why which 349. 12. As though Although 350. 9. rather other

FINIS.

