The most excellent and pleasant Book, entitled: The treasury of Amadis of
France: Containing eloquente orations, pythie Epistles, learned Letters, and
fervent Complayntes, serving for sundry purposes. The worthiness whereof
and profit, does appear in the Preface or table of this Book. Translated
out of French into English.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Thomas Hacket. And are to be sold
at his shop in the Royal Exchange at the sign of the green Dragon.

To the right worshipful ^ir Thomas Gressam knight, T^omas Hacket wishes
the favor of God, long life, increase of worship, continual health and
felicity.
WHEN I call to my remembrance (right worshipful Sir) what our merciful and
good God has done for us, by his unspeakable omnipotency, and also what
gifts he has endued man vvithall, we can not choose, but be thankful to
him for his vvorthie benefits bestovved upon us: who so notes substa^cially
from time to time what vvorthie instruments God has raised up in all arts
and sciences, as some passing in singleness of gifts as Aristotle, Galen,
Ptolome, Pliny, with other, with those vvorthie Orators the Grecians, as
Demosthenes, Isocrates, and that vvorthie Roman the Prince of Eloquence
Marcus Tullius Cicero, whose excellency has surpassed all others, and been
leaders and scholemasters to all others. It was not without great cause
(right worshipful) that man is called Mycrocosmos, that is to say, a little
world: it was not without great consideration, that Aristotle calls him
the sercher of secrets: for what thing is there in this world but man has
sought it out, be it never so hard or obscure? what virtue in stone or plant
or any growing thing: yea the virtue of beasts, fishes, fowls, and
serpents, and whatsoever is contained in the earth, air, water, or fire,
metals, mines of gold, silver, lead, tin, iron etc. In fine, how excellent
in all philosophy, asvvell natural as moral, as Arithmetike, Geometry,
Astronomy, Cosmographie, and besides all these, those most excellent
historiographers: and yet in my mind this surpasses all others, that is to
say, to be an excellent Orator, singular in orations, pythie and ingenious in
vvriting Epistles, for thereby is brought to pass the most excellent things
for public government, as also for every man's private cause and use: for
who knovveth not where learning and good government consists, their
orations be of most excellent force to set forth how times have been
passed, with the time present, and also to give warning, and foresee for time
to come, how the good and virtuous have merited and received perpetual fame,
as to the overthrow of the wicked too their reproach and ignomie. So (right
worshipful) this book which I present unto you, is stufte with pleasant
orations, fine epistles, singular complaints, with matter mixed so fitly and
aptly to serve the turn of all persons, not curious nor filled full of obscure
and dark sense, but plain and pleasant, depending and answering one an
other, with most delectable matter for all causes, as well encouraging the
bashful person and covvarde to be valiant, as the vvorthie ladies and
damselles in their amorous Epistles, feruente complaints of injuries handled
most excellently: And yet I confess not so grave and vvorthie matter as your
vvoorship deserves to have. Therefore I crave pardon at your hands for this my
rash enterprise, trusting in God you will receive it in good part as a token
of my good will toward you, and though it yield not so pleasant a grace in
the English tongue as it does in the French, the which it was written in,
I know your vvoonted manner and good nature is to take small things in good
part, which has imboldened me at this present, to dedicate this book of the
Treasury of Amadis of France unto your worship, and when god sends to my
hand any other, I do intend to make ye partaker thereof. And therefore least at
this present I should seem to be over tedious unto you, I commit you to God,
with my good Lady your wife, with all your family, praying to God for
your prosperous and good succes^e in all your affairs and enterprises.

From London, by yours for ever, THOMAS HACKET.

To the gentle Reader.
A VERY friend of mine (most gentle reader) instantly desired me, to english him
this french book, entitled the Treasury of Amadis, the which when I had
well perused it, pleased me not a little, as well for the elegant phrase
thereof, as for the diversities and arguments therein wrapped and enclosed. For
truly it abounds with such eloquent orations and wise counsels: with such
sweet and delicate Epistles and letters especially of love, so courteously and
annably handled: with such exhortations and admonitions so prudently penned:
with such lamentations and complaints so sorowfully and mournfully expressed:
with such consolations and comforts in adversity, so friendly and lovingly
pronounced: with such answers and replications so ingeniously invented: with
reproaches and tauntes so bitingly and bitterly spoken: with requ^sts so
humainly and ciuilly demanded: with excuses so craftily and subtly painted
and colored: with defyances so stoutly and courageously sent to the
adversary and received, that if a man were astonished and much amazed, it would
quicken him, and suddenly revive his spirits again. For what a dullarde is
he, that wise counsel. virtuous exhortations, friendly admonitions, witty and
subtle persuasions shall not quicken and revive? and how far without sense
is he, whom amiable, fine, and beautiful ladies with their ticklyng and
flatteryng words shall not awake, stir up, and call to their lure, wanton
fancy, and fervent lou^? What stony and hard heart has he, that with the
glittering and twinkeling of the eye, the abundant tears, the dulcet and
sweet parolls of his paramour (wherewith this fine flattering book is
infarced) will not be mollifyed and melted? And how depely are they drowned in
sorrow, that with godly and virtuous consolation will not be comforted? What
weak and cowardly hearts and stomachs have they that will not be stirred or
moved with the rhetorical and eloquent orations, the vehement persuasio^s, and
liberal promises and rewards of wise, noble and worthy capitains, pluck up
their hearts, invade their enemies, and (for worthy renoume sake, and immortal
glory) fight stoutly and corageously, as Amadis, the king of England and
France, and Flor^an with other did (as this proper book in diverse places
recites) most cordially? Wherout men may learn to be noble orators, wise and
prudent counselors, excellent Rhethoricians, expert captains, amorous
companions, fervent and honest lovers, secret messengers, obedient servants,
elegant enditers of lovely Epistles, sweet pronouncers and true ortographers,
of the french tongue so pleasant, so highly commended, and so embraced of all
men. Wherefore (gentle Reader) let it not loathe thee (I pray thee) to read this
fine and fruitful book, nor to ensue the honest and virtuous lessons, the
prudent admonitions and good counsels of the same: for thou shall not at any
time (as I think) repent thee more for the reading of it, than I for the
translating thereof, the which although it be but rude and unpleasant, yet my
mind and hand were neither negligent nor slack to profit thee, and to
english it ^o thy consolation and comfort. Therefore receive it, I pray thee, as
it is, in good part and with thanksgiving for my good will and pains taking,
if thou esteem it thanks wo^rthie, if not, amend it I beseech thee, and I
with all my heart shall thank thee now and ever.

Farewell.
T. H. in praise of the book.
AS Gold is gold true touchstone tries
at every ryme and season,
And does refyne the good from bad,
which stands with all reason:
So Amadis of worthy fame,
in France which did excel,
Whose work is pende, yea for thy sake,
whom many like full well.
The noble, and the valiant,
the tyrant and the stout,
The noble Dame and Damsel eke,
the lover that does doubt:
The worthy and courageous knight
that chale^geth the field,
And shows himself a champion eke,
and makes his foes to yield.
The Lion and the Lioness
with courage stout and bold,
Does show them selves in nature plain.
as they do here unfold:
As every sort may imitate
and learn here for to write:
To serve their present use and time,
a way for to indite:
Sometime with piththie tauntes,
sometime in pleasant sort,
Sometimes with just revenge of wrong,
sometimes with decente sport:
To every kind of wight
this book will serve the turn,
Of Orations fit, and Pistles pure,
themself for to adorn.
What though sometime Demosthe^es
of Athens was the chief
In Greekishe tongue to utter there,
which serves for great relief.
Iso^rates, by whom the Greeks
did reap a perfect gain,
So did the Gauls and Frenchmen eke,
of Amadis certain.
And now from forayne phrase
into our English tongue,
Is brought this worthy work I say,
for old and eke for young.
Take it in good part therefore,
and let it not to vewe:
Till other things come to my hand^
I bid thee to adewe.
A. R. In praise of the Book.
OF others all Physician best,
who bears of right the bell,
Is he, who most diseases knows,
and eke can c^re them well.
Of Gardens all, most pleasant is
that Garden to my mind.
In which with beauty flourishing
most sorts of flowers I find.
That market is extolled most
that has of wares most store,
For many times to have his ch^y^^
a man will give the more.
Uarietie in every thing,
except I judge amiss,
Does put away all weariness:
what say you then to this,
That Author here has practiced
far passing Phisickes skill?
For that the body, this the mind
with pleasures great both fill.
Or else the Garden green, in which
great choice of flowers are:
For flowers do fade, this still abides:
how shall it then compare
With this that like a market is?
in which are to be found
Such sorts of wares, as if for choice
a man would give a pound,
He could not so be sped again,
if he should seek throughout
The world so wide from place to place,
it viewing round about.
Uarietie if thou do wish,
then buy this book so brave,
By reading which for price but small,
great profit thou shall have.
Besides the pleasure that thou shall
by reading in it reap,
Of Eloquence and Rhetorike
thou may hoorde up a heap,
To spend when thou have need:
as if thou would persuade
Thy friend to help, when as thy foe
does mind thee to invade.
The profits all and pleasures great,
if I should but rehearse,
That by this book may come to thee
in such rude kind of verse,
It trouble would perchance thine ears
that look for an end:
Wherefore to know of profit more
to Preface I thee send.
Wherein thou shall be sure to find
such things as name does tell,
In treasure this thy profit is,
thou shall perceive it well.
Treasure it hight, the name is right,
if well thou do it read,
It will procure the Authors sure
to have great thanks for meede.
FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters of this Book, reduced into common places
for the more speedy and easy finding of the manner to write Letters missiues,
according to the mind and argument of him that vvriteth.
A Form to declare his advice, to ask or to give counsel of any thing to
Lords, friends, parents, alies, or subjects. 2 A form to write, or to say,
that they accept the counsel given. 3 A form to ask, or to declare to any
man his deliberation and mind concerning some business. 4 A form to pray and
to desire a man to do a thing, or to show him self favorable. 5 A form to
commend a thing to one, and to recite some thing that is chanced. 6 A form
to accord, promise, and refuse a certain thing to any man. 7 A form to
declare to a man, the good affection that he bears him. 8 A form to write,
willing to recompense, or to give a thing to any man. 9 A form to laud,
praise, or to answer to the praises of some one. 10 A form to give thanks to
one. 11 A form to write when a man will please one. 12 A form to write or to
speak amorous and lovely purposes. 13 A form to excuse him self of faults
committed to the prejudice of other. 14 A form to excuse him of the thing,
whereof a man may be taxed. 15 A form to excuse him, and to ask pardon. 16
Complayntes and diverse heauinesses. 17 A form to incite one sooner to succor
a thing that is in danger, than to tarle to lament some accident or chance.
18 A form to comfort one. 19 A form to declare his ioyfulnesse by writing or
by word. 20 A form to complain him to ^ome one, demanding aid and comfort.
21 A form to reprehend, or to tau^^ one, whether it be by writing, or by
word. 22 A form to threaten, or to answer to the threatenings of an other. 23
A form to accuse, or to reproach some thing to another. 24 A form to injury,
or to accuse one of unfaithfulness. 25 A form to take, or to give leave. 26
Orations to incite his vassalles, friends, or alies to take arms, and to
encourage the soldiers ready to fight. 27 A form to defy one for him self,
or for other. 28 A form to accept, or to refuse the defiance. 29 A form to
yield him self prisoner. 30 A form to write, or to pronounce any thing in
manner of a prophecy.
Finis Tabulae.
A collection of the most excellent orations, epistles, complaints, and other
things of all the Books of Amadis of France.
The oration of the Damsel of the Sea to the soldiers of France, exhorting
them to bataile. About the end of the.9. Chapter of the first Book.
MY companions and friends, let us be of good courage, and cause our fortitude
and strength to be known, and remember the estimation that the French men have
obtained by the feats of arms. We have to do with people astonished, and half
ouercommed: let us not now make a change with them, taking there fear, and
delivering them our victory: for if they see but your assured faces only, I am
fast and sure that they cannot suffer nor abide it, let us rush in among them,
for God does help us.

The oration of Lisnarde the King of England unto his subjects and friends,
exhorting them to give him counsel. About the beginning of the.33. Chapter of
the first Book.
MY friends, there is none of you that is ignorant of the graces that it has
pleased God to show me, making me the greatest earthly Lord that is this day
in all the Isles of the Occean: therefore it seems unto me very reasonable,
that even as we in this country be the cheifest, that also we be not the
second to no other prince, to render unto him immortal thanks through good
and virtues deeds, in the which we ourselves ought to rest and to continue.
For thy^ cause I pray and commau^d you (for as much as kings are the cheifest of
the monarchies, and ye the members) that ye advise you together in your
consciences, to counsel me what y^^ shall think best for me to ^o in this
matter, as well for the consolation of my subjects, as for the entertainment
and augmentation of our estate: assuring you my friends, that I purpose to
believe you as my loyal and faithful subjects: therefore I pray you once
again, that every man without fear devise as well particularly as generally
what ye^ shall think we should or ought to do in this behalf.

The oration of Serolo is the Fleming and Earl of Clare, the which he spoke
and made to the counsel, to induce them to the thing that King Lisuard ought
to understand and know for the utility and profit of his kingdom. In the
self same Book.
MY Lords ye al have perceived the good zeal that ye king has to the
government and rule not only of the common w^ale of his kingdom, but
particularly for the augme^tation and honor of cheua^rie and knighthoode, the
which he does desire to entertain in greater pre-eminence than ever it has
been. And therefore my Lords (saving yours better advice, and opinion) my mind
is, that all we, doing and following the interpretation of our prince, should
counsel him, that he make himself strong with money and men and for they are
the sinnews and the spirits of war and peace, by the means whereof, all
earthly kings are mainteyned in their force and authority, considering that
great treasure truly is to pay the soldiers that cause kings to reign, the
which by no occasion should any other where he spent, or else it should be a
very sacrilege, seeing that it names it self holy. And thus doing he may
maintein^ his estates in tranquillity, and make and obtain glorious conquests
against those that would let him. And to come the better thereunto, he ought by
means to seek and to recover and get all the good and valiants of whom he
should be advertised as well strangers as other, showing them great
liberalitie^ whereby his name shall slye and he spoken of throughout all the
world, the which from the furthest part of all the earth shall come unto his
service, trusting for their labor and service to be well rewarded. By whose
aid and help he may easily o^tayne the monarchy above all the princes of the
North and West: for it was never red nor perceived, that any^ princes made
themselves mighty and great, but he that ^ought, and drew unto him the good
and valiant knights: I say bought, favoring, and honoring them and
distributing their riches and treasures unto them that did them little harm,
but have conquered greater pursuing and following their victories.

The oration of Barsinam the Lord of Sansuegue, the which held in counsel
against the president of Serolois, wherein he^ exhorts them not to deceive
themselves through evil counsel. In the first Book.
MY Lords it seems beholding your countenance that the Earl of Clares
opinion is wholly approved: for I see already that the most part of you do
agree unto his saying, without hearing the contrary part debated:
nevertheless I trust my Lords to make you all, and hereafter the king
presently to know and understand how greatly I desire to be a friend unto
him, and to you, and to all his realm. The Earl of Clare not long since has
counseled that the King your master should fortify himself in the strength
and multitude of strange knights, the which he counseled to be called for^
and that from all the parts of the world. Certes if his opinion be believed,
and that ye bind your selves to follow it, I am fast and sure that within a
little while, the quantity of them shall be so extreme and great, that
your King (the which is a good Prince and a liberal ^^ willing too thank
and advantage them,) shall not only give them the thing that he is accustomed
and wont to give you, but shall take that is yours from you, to gratify and
advantage them the more, considering that naturally all new things, not
gotten and woonne, do please us. And thu^ whatsoever service ^ee shall do be
it never so good, ^e^ shall fall into his disdain and forgetfulness, and
those strangers shall lift you out of your seats, that now do promise you
sure rest: and therefore my Lords, first or ever I conclude, this fact
seems to me such, and of so great importance, that ye all should take heed
with good and ripe deliberation of your wise and sage judgments. I esteem that
there is none of this assistance that does presume or think that I speak
otherwise than reason, and the good love that I bear you does monish me: for
(God be thanked) I am such a one that I may as easily pass and set by the
greatest prince my neigbour, as he may pass and set by me: but finding my self
and being in so noble a company, among whom I have received so great honor
and favor, I had rether (God be my witness) never to have bin borne, than to
bow and turn. Thus my Lords ye ought promptly and diligently to think upon
this matter, least that hereafter ye repent you with too much leisure.

The oration of King Lis^arde, wherein he resolves the plurality of aduises
and counselles that was given him. In the first Book.
MY great friends I am well assured that the love which ye bear me, and the
desire to do me service, has set you in these difficulties, and I believe that
there is not he of you all, that has not spoken as nigh the truth, as was
possible for him to do, and so, that your aduises be so good, that they cannot
be better: yet this is a thing sure and certain, that the kings of the earth
be not esteemed great for the number of places that they possess, but for the
quantity and multitude of people whom they command and rule. What can a King
do alone? it may be, that less than the most simplest of his subjects: and
furthermore, it should be too hard for him, yea truly impossible, without
people to govern and too maynteyne his estate, had he never so great a
treasure, the which cannot be better employed, tha^ to divide it among those
that deserve it. Thus every man that is of a good judgment (as I suppose) will
say, that good counsel, and the force and strength of men is the true
treasure. And yet if ye will know this thing the better, ye see that this by
the selfsame means made Alexander so great, Julius Caesar so strong, and
gentle Haniball with many other, the which have gotten by their name
immortalities and by tresoring up of men and not of gold, they were made Kings,
Emperors, and Monarchs: for they knew liberally to distribute their money to
those whose merits they knew, and to entertain them so graciously, that they
might call themselves Lords both of hearts and of bodies, whereby they were
served with great fidelity. Therefore my good friends, I pray you all as
effectuously as I may possible, that ye will aid and help me as much as ye
may, to recover those good and valiant Knights, whether they be of this
country or strangers, the which I promise you by the faith and word of a
king, to entreat and honor in such sort and wise, that they shall have cause to
praise and to content themselves: for you are not ignorant, that the better we
are accompanied, the more we shall be feared and redouted of our enemies, and
you the better kept, ntertayned and esteemed. And if there be any virtue in
me, you may easily judge, that the ancients for the new (whilst I live,) shall
not be forgotten: therefore none of you ought to delay the request that I make
unto you, but obey it, the which thing I pray you again, and expressly
command you, and that incontinently every one of you particularly do name
those unto me whom ye know, and as yet to in are evnknown, and for this intent
that they (if there be any in this Court) may obtain and get such rewards of
us, that they which are absent, may be affectionate to come and serve us, and
also to pray them, that they depart not from our company without our knowledge.

The Oration of the Queen of England upon the favor that men ought to bear
to Ladies. In the first book about the and of the.38. Chapter.
Seeing it pleases you to give place and to favor my request. I pray you
from hence forth so do, and to show so much goodness and honor to all
Ladies and Damselles, as to have them in your protection, and to defend them,
taking their quarrels against all those that would in any manner of wise molest
them: and so, that if by fortune you have promised a gift to a man, and an
other to a Lady or to a Damsel, that you first accomplish the Ladies, as
b^ing the f^ebler person, and that has more need to be recommended and
helped. Thus doing, they shall be from henceforth more ^auored and better taken
heed to than they have ^eene: for why, the evil which are customed to do
them injury, fynding them in the fields, and knowing that they have such
Knights for their Protectors and defenders as you be, shall not be bold to
trouble them.

The Oration of King Arban to his Soldiers, fighting agaynst^ King Barsinan
Lord of Sansuegue, the which by treason would have made himself King of
England. In the first book, the.38. Chapter.
MY fellows and friends, you have fought so well this day, that there is not
he that does not merit to be esteemed among the most gentle companions of all
the world: but if you have begone well, I trust we shall daily go from
better to better, and if you remember that you defend your ^elue^, as well to
mayntaine your good Prince, as your liberty, and that against a tyrant, (...)
and an evil man, the which without the fear of God would vsurp other men's, and
feed^ him self with the blood of your Children. See you not how he has
entreated those of the Castle that he has taken by falshoode ^ Do you not see
the end whereto he intends: the which is not but to bring this noble
kingdom and the subjects thereof to ruin the which have been by the grace
of God so long conserved, and continually have lived in reputation to be
faithful subjects unto their Prince. Know you not the persuasions the which
that knave has used before the assault that he gave us, thinking to deceive us
by his golden tongue? No, no, he is very ill arrived, I am sure that there is not
he of us all, that would not rather chose to die a thousand deaths. And is
it not true ^ certes I see in your good visages, that if I should think or
say otherwise, I should lie: and although they have more me^ than we, yet we
have better hearts and more right than they. And thus we ought not to fear,
but to leave off all doubt, to live henceforth in the reputation that we
merit and deserve, assuring you my friends, that they are retired (if you
have marked it) with a countenance of men not affectionated to see us again,
and what so ever that traitor. Barsinan has said, our King is not dead, for
he will come shortly to succor us. In the mean while I pray you my
companions, that none of you be troubled, but to do and continue as he has
begone, having before his eyes, that it is much better to die for liberty, than
to live long in captivity and misery, and that under a miserable Prince.

The Oration of the Lord of Sansuegue, unto his Soldiers fighting against
King Arban inducing them to take and to be of good courage. In the first
book.38. Chapter.
MY friends it is not inoughe to have given knowledge unto our enemies that
they be (if I will) at my mercy: therefore I am minded (without the loss of
any more of you) to delay the matter for five or six days, that Archalaus may
or shall send me King Lisuardes head, for that I believe that they showing it
unto them, shall no more be so bold to gainesay me, and thus by love we may
draw them unto us. Therefore let every one of you rejoice and be merry, for I
being King (as I trust) shall enrich you all.

The Oration that Abisco, which through tyranny occupied the Lordshippe of
Sobr^dise, made unto the inhabitants of the country. In the first book.43.
Chapter.
O Captive and unfortunate people: I have well perceived ye ease that the
presence of this wench does give you, and that you lack wit to labor: for
why? as far forth as I know, you will love her and better accept her for
your Lady (although she be a woman feeble and weak to defend you) than me,
that am a wise and a hardy Knight, notwithstanding you see her weakness, and
that in so long a time she could not recover but only two Knights, the which
are come to receive their ignominious death, whereo^ I have great pity.

The Oration of Apolidon, to the Emperor of Constantinople his father,
rendering unto him all obedience. The second Book and first Chapter.
Sir, now of late I have perceived and understood by many, that my brother is
not content with the partage and division that it pleased you to ordeine and
make for us, and because I know what annoyance this is unto you, and seeing
the entiere amity of him and me is ready to be broke. I humbly beseech you to
receive again all that it has pleased you to give me, and to bestow it: for I
would hold and think my self happy to do the thing that might quiet your
mind, and right well fethered and content, to have the thing that you have
left him.

A Letter of the Princess Oriane to Amadis, accusing him of unfaithfulness.
The second book and second Chapter.
MY passion without measure, proceeding of so many causes, does constrain my
feeble hand to declare by this Letter to you Amadis of France (an unfaithful
and too perjured a lover) the thing that my dolorous heart can hide no longer.
For seeing that the unfaithfulness and little steadfastness that you have unto
me (the which am unfortunate and forsaken of al good fortune, because I loved
you above all worldly things) is now manifest, and also that with so great
injury you are gone so far from hence, to draw near to her, the which
(considering her young age, and small discretion) can not have in her the thing
to favor you and to entertain you: she has purposed also to banishe from me
for ever this extreme love that I bear you, seeing that my heavy and poor
heart can have no other vengeance. And if I would take in good part the injury
and wrong that ye do me, it should be but great folly in me, to will well
unto the most unthankful, for whom to love perfectly, I hate all things and
my self also. Alas, now I perceive very well (but it is to late) that I
submitted too unfortunately my liberty to so ingrate a person, considering
that in satisfaction of my syghings and passions, I see my self mocked, and
unfortunately deceived. Therefore I forbid you that you never come before me,
nor where I shall be resident and present, and be ye sure, that the ardent and
burning affection that I did bear you, is converted as you have demerited,
into enmity and cruel fury. Now therefore get you hence to some other place,
to prove (with your perjured faith and sweet words) and to abuse other
unfortunate persons as well as me: besides that, you shall hereafter prove that
none of your excuses as concerning me, may have nor take any place, but I not
willing to see you any more, shall lament the rest of my heavy life with
abundancee of tears, the which shall not cease, but by her end, that shall
not sorrow to dye, but because you are the homicide.

The complaint that Amadis made when he received Orians vigorous Letter,
declaring the mobilitie of fortune, by the which she banished him from her
company. In the.2. book and.4. Chapter.
ALas fortune, that art to light and without root, by what occasion have thou
preferred and elevated me among all the best Knights, afterward to bring me to
ruin so lightly? Now I perceive well, that thou may do more evil in an
hour, than grace in a thousand years: for if in time past thou have done and
given me pleasure or joy, thou have robbed me of that even now most cruelly,
leaving me in martyrdom much worsse than death: and seeing it was thy
pleasure so to do, why have thou not at least wise made equal the one with the
other? considering thou know that at other times thou haste contented me,
nor that neither without mingling of it with sorrows and great troubles. So
then thou should have reserved for me some little hope, with this cruelty
wherewith at this present thou do torment me, executing in me things
incomprehensible in the thoughts of those that thou do favor, the which not
knowing this evil, esteem the pompes, glories, and honors that thou do
lend them, sure and perdurable. Nor they remember not that besides and above
the torments that their bodies shall suffer to mayntaine them, their souls
shall fall in hazard of their salvation. Therefore if with the eyes of
understanding (the which the souereine Lord has given them) they might see thy
mobilitie, they should desire rather thine adversities, tha^ thy light
prosperities, although it be confirmable to their sensuality: for why? by thy
flattering and wantonness, thou do bring them to ruin, and at the last they
are constrained to enter into the laberinth of martyrdom, having no power at
any time to come out again. But adversities are clean contrary, in so much
that if a man patiently resist them, avoiding disordinate apetite and ambition,
he is lifted up from this low place to glory everlasting. And yet I most
unfortunate, could not choose this good part, considering that if all the
world were mine, and taken from me by thee, having only the good grace and
favor of my Lady, that should be sufficient to maintain me in all honor and
prosperity: but that failing me, it is impossible for me by any manner of
means to live and continue. Therefore I heseech thee, for the favor and
payment of my faithfulness, that thou give me not death with anguishe. But if
thou be licensed to take my life from me, that thou make diligent haste, taking
compassion on him, of whose torment that he shall have (if he live any longer)
thou art ignorant.

A cmplaint of the like argument that goes before, the which Amadis sent to
his Father.
O King Perion my Lord and father, you shall have very little occasion to be
heavy for my death, and the cause thereof to be hidden from you: but seeing
that the heaviness that should be by the knowledge thereof can not revoke my
torment, I pray God that my unluckiness be never opened unto you, but kept
close and hidden as long as you shall live, and that not to advance and hasten
the rest of the years that you have yet to live.

Amadis complaint sent to the Lord Galuanes, thanking him for his good and
gentle deeds.
O My second father Galuanes, I am very sorye that my contrary fortune has
not permitted nor suffered me to recompense the great Obligation and band that
I am bound in unto you: for if my father have given me life, ye have saved it,
delivering me from the peril and danger of the sea, whereunto I was, being as
yet in the first hour of my notiuitie and by birth predestinate, and since
that, you hau^ nourished me so sweetly and tenderly, as though I had been your
na^urall child.

Florestans exhortation to his companions, being sorry for Amadis, whom he
esteemed to be in pain, to the intent to go to succor him. In the second
book the.6. Chap.
MY Lords, it is not for us to weep nor to make such lamentations when
necessity does command us to remember how to succor and to help my Lord
Amadis: Let us leave such manner of doings to wom^n, and let us devise together
to provide for this great inconvenience. And as for me, I am of this mind,
that we without any longer d^lay take our horses, and do our diligence to
f^ade him, then shall we know whether there be any mean^ to find remedy for
him: for the time, doing as we do now, passes away, his heaviness and
pains more, and he himself goes further from us. The Lord Ysanie (as he
says) cond^cted and led him a little on his way, he may show us what way he
took, and if we tarry any longer, we shall lose him without hope to see him
any more. Therefore my Lords let us give our diligence to follow him.

The Hermit speaking to Amadis, does comfort him in his adversity. The second
book the.6. Chap.
O Knight, I believe that you have some great affliction in your soul: yet if
your heaviness do proceed of repentance for some certain sin that you have
committed, truly my son, you are happy: And if it be for some temporal
loss (as I esteem) considering your age, and the estate wherein you have lived
hitherto, you should not thus trouble yourself, but require and ask pardon of
God, who would pardon and forgive you, and receive you for his.

The Hermit does yet speaking to Amadis exhort him to take heart of grace and
courage, and not to abuse himself for women.
I Promise you my friend, that ye do not well (being a young knight and well
made) to enter into such despair and mistrust, considering that women cannot
k^epe their love, no not even in the presence of them that love them, for
natuaturally they readily forget, and yet believe more sooner, specially those
things that men (which fondly give themselves unto them) do report of them, the
which even when they think to have joy and contentation, do find themselves
in all despite and t^ibulation, as ye do experiment and prove it by your self.
Therefore I pray you from henceforth to be more virtuous and co^^^ant: and for
as much as it has pleased God to call you to the title of a kings son, to
govern his people, return to the world, for it should be a loss thus to
loose you: nor I cannot presume nor imagine who she is, that has brought you to
such anxietie: considering that if one woman alo^e had in her all the
perfections that all women have together, yet we should not for her sake leese
such a man as year.

The heaviness of Oriane for Amadis, after that she was advertised by men of his
departure. In the second book the.7. Chapter.
AH unfortunate person that I am, seeing that I with so great wrong have caused
him to die, whom I most thee^ly loved in this world. And seeing it is out of
my power to revoke the evil that I caused, I beseech you my friend to accept
my repentance in satisfaction of the euil^ that I have purchased you, with the
sacrifice that I shall make of my proper life, to follow you unto death: and thus
the ingratitude that I have committed against your fidelity, shall be
manifest, you being revenged and I punished.

Guillans oration to the Queen for Amadis his shield or scutchion that he had
found. In the second Book the.8. Chapter.
MAdame, a few days ago and past, I found all Amadis harneys with his
stutchion laid nigh unto a fountain, the which men call the fountain of the
plain field, wherewith I was displeased: the which I the self same hour and
time bound unto a tree, leaving it in ye custody of two Damsels which were in
my company, until I had been through out the country to seek and to enquire
what was become of him. But I was not so fortunate to find him, nor yet to have
news of him. Therefore I knowing the merit of so good a knight, which never
had other desire, but to prepare himself to do you service, I purposed (seeing I
could not bring him) to bring unto you (for a testimony and witness of ye
bond that I owe to you and to him) his armure, the which ye shall command (if
it so please you) to be set in some evident and open place, where every man may
see them, as well to have and to hear some news of him by the strangers that
ordinarily come unto this Court, as to augment the virtue of all those that
commonly follow the wars, taking an example by him whom they follow, the
which by his high knighthod has obtained the first place among al those that
ever on their backs ware harneys.

The lamentation of Oriane, understanding by Guillan the loss of Amadis. In
the second Book and.8. Chapter.
AH unfortunate that I am, I may now well say, that all the felicity that ever
I had, is a very fantasy, and my torment a pure verity, considering that if I
have any contentation, it is only by the dreams that solicit me by night: for
being awake, all austeritie does af^lict and trouble my poor spirit, and in
such sort, that as much as the day is unto me a grievous martyrdom, the
obscurity and darkness is to me only pleasure and solace: because that
sleeping I see my self before my lover, but watch that depriueth me of so great
ease, causes me very much to feel your absence. Ah, my eyes no more eyes,
but streams of tears and weepings, ye are well abused, for as much as being
close, ye see him alone that contenteth you, and being open, all the noysomnesse
and troubles of the world come to obfuscate and to darken you. At the furdest,
the death that I f^ele nigh and at hand, shall deliver me of this anxietie, and
you my friend shall be avenged of the most unthankful that ever was borne.

The exhortation of Mabile unto Oriane, that would have cast hirselfe down
headlong, by the mean of Amadis adversity. In the second Book the.8. Chapter.
HOw is it Madame, where is the constancy of a kings daughter, is this the
wisdom whereof ye are so greatly renoumed? have ye already forgotten the
evil that ye thought would have chanced through the false news that Arcalaus
brought the last year to the Court? And now that Guillan has found my
cousins harneys, was ye said, because that he is dead? believe me that ye shall
see him shortly again, and that he will as soon as he shall see your letters
come unto you.

Amadis does comfort himself by the news that he received of Oriane his
friend and lover. In the second Book the 10. Chapter.
O Fearful heart so long time troubled, who could have resisted such a
tempest, notwithstanding the abundance of tears that thou so continually
distilledst and shedst to com^ to the point of death. Receive at this present
this medicine, the which only is for thy health, and come forth of these
obscure darknesses the which have so long obfuscated thee, taking again the
force to serve her, the which of her grace and goodness has revived thee.

Orianes letter to Amadis, by the which she excuses her self unto him of
certain faults of love the which were in her. In the second book and.10.
Chapter.
IF the great faults committed through enmity (afterward reknowledged to
humil^at hirselfe) be worthy of par^on, what ought it to be of those, that are
caused through too great abundance of love? yet my faithful lover, I do not
deny you, that I deserve not much pain. For I should have considered, that
when things be most prosperous and joyful, that fortune the which does spy and
considers them, does come then to bring them heaviness and misery: Also I
should have remembered your virtue and honesty, the which was never found in
fault: and above all, I should not, no not to dye, for I have separated from my
understanding the remembrance of the great subjection of my heavy heart, the
which proceeded nor came not but of that wherein your own was enclosed,
being certain that if any flames have been cooled, so have mine also, as it is
perceived: and in such sort, that the envy that he had to find rest unto his
mortal desires, has been the cause to augment t^em. But because I have failed
as they do that being in the highest of their good hour and fortune, and very
certain of their love of whom they be loved (nor cannot comprehend in them
so much goodness) become jealous and suspicious, more by their imagination,
than by reason, dusking this clear felicity with the cloud of impacience,
believing sooner the report of certain persons (it may be that speak evil)
not very true and vicious, than that of their own conscience and certain
experience. Therefore my faithful friend, I pray you effectually to receive
this my damsel (as from her that recogniseth in all humility the great fault
that she has commiited as concerning you) the which shall cause you to
understand better than my letter, the extremity of my life: o^ whom ye
should have pity, not for any merit, but for your reputation, the which is
not esteemed and judged cruel, nor seeking vengeance there, where ye find
repentance and subjection, when that no penance can come from you more
rigorous, than that, that I my self have appointed and ordained for my self,
the which I bear and patiently do suffer, trusting that ye will remit it, and
restore unto me your grace and favor, and likewise my life that depends
thereof.

The lamentation of fair Tenebreu^, which returned from Mirefl^ur, declaring
unto the Damsel of Denmark, that without cause he had suffered many things,
touching her, that she was not a faithful lover. In the second Book the.10.
Chapter.
BY my conscience (said the fair Tenebreu^) I was never in more danger of
death: and I marvel where she has forged this fantasy, that she had against
me, seeing that I never thought to do the thing that should displease her. And
notwithstanding I had forgotten to think on it, yet I deserved not so cruel a
letter as this is that she wrote unto me. And although I make not the outward
shows and hypocrisies that many ca^ do and make, yet I leave not of to measure
the goodness and graces that I have received of her: nor this thought was not
sown in so evil ground, that she should not regard the fruit, as long as the
spirit shall have means to cause the heart to live, seeing that the one and the
other are wholly dedicate to serve and to obey her. Ah ah my God, I remember yt
when Corissande came into our poor hermitage, I believed then, that it was
done for me. The good Lady lamented her self of the passion that the suffered
for loving my brother Florestan too much, and I should die for very
displeasure, to be so wrongfully chased away by Oriane. How great pains, what
travels, what unmeasurable torment have I thus long suffered in the poor
Rock, having consolation of no creature living but of the good Hermit, the
which solicited me and spoke to me of patience. Alas what hard penance, for a
thing not offended? believe me my well-beloved Damsel that I was so greatly
troubled, that from one hour to another I desired death^ and oftentimes also I
feared to lose my life: but think upon the desperation wherein I was then,
when I showed the Damsels of Coris^ande the song that I made in my great
tribulation.

The Oration of Gandalin unto fair Tenebreus brethren, to encourage them to
search and to succoure him. In the.2. book the.12. Chapter.
BY God my Lords, all your weepings cannot cause him to be found, whom ye
desire, if it be not by some other good diligence that ye may newly take upon
you. And notwithstanding that ye have already done what ye can, so ye should
not he anoyed to seek him better than ever he wa^ yet sought for, seeing yt ye
know welynough what he particularly would have done for you, if fortune had
advanced the occasion. Now therefore it is your parts to do the like: ^or
if ye leese him thus, it shall not be only the loss of the most gentlest
knight of all the world, but of the best pacient that ye have: and
furthermore, all ye paraduenture may be blamed. Therefore my Lords I pray you
for the love of God, to do unto him the duty of a brother, of a friend, and
of a companion, beginning again to seek him without sparing of your bodies,
or the prolonging of time.

Defyance made by a strange knight unto king Lisuard, provoking him to war,
if he will not accord to the marriage of Oriane with the prince of Basigan^. In
the.2. book the.12. Chapter.
I Defye thee king Lisuard and all thy aliens in the name of the puissant and
mighty princes Famongomad Giant of the burning lake, Cartadaque his neuew
Giant of the defended mountain, Madafabull his brother in law, Giant of the red tower, Lord Quedragant brother to Abies that was king of Irelande, and of
Arcalaus the inchanter, the which do send thee word by me, that they have
sworn the death of thee and thine. And to do this, they will aid king
Cildadan, to be in the number of the hundredth knights, the which shall surely
destroy thee. Yet nevertheless if thou will give Oriane thy inheriter to fair
Madasime the daughter of the most douty Famongomad to serve her as her Damsel,
they will suffer thee to live in peace, and be thy friends: ^or they will
marry her to the Prince Basigan^, the which does well deserve to be Lord of
thy countries, and of thy daughter also. Therefore king Lisuard chose of these
two conditions the best, peace as I have devised, or the most cruel war that
may chance unto thee, having to do with so mighty and so doutye princes.

The answer to the strange knight by king Lisuard, showing the greatness of
his courage. In the.2. book the.12. Chapter.
BY God knight, they that have given you such commission, know me very ill,
for I have all the days of my life more esteemed ieopardous wars than
shameful praise. In so much that I should be greatly reprehensible toward God
the Creator, that has appointed and made me king over so many people, if for
lack of heart and courage I should suffer them to be outrageous. Therefore ye
shall return and show them, that I had rather have war all my life, the
which they demand and desire, and at the last to die sighting and in battle,
than after their word and mind to have peace, yt which should be so greatly to
my disadvantage. And because I desire to know at length their will and mind, I
will send one of my knights, the which shall go with you, and cause them at
length to understand my mind and intention.

Florestan defyeth Laudin, the which spoke sore against Amadis advantage, for
whose love he presented him the combat. In the second Book. the.12. Chapter.
KNight, I am not borne in this country, nor the kings vassal, so that for
any thing that ye have said unto him, I have none occasion to answer^ in as much
as here are present many ^etter knights than I am, above whom I would take
nothing in hand. Yet for as much as I cannot find Amadis (which is as I esteem
very profitable unto you) I am ready to fight with you, and to cease and end
the quarrel that ye have unto him: and to the intent ye may know me the
better, I am his brother Florestan, the which does offer to fight with you,
under this condition and conuention, that if I may overcome you, ye shall be
bound to leave off the quarrel yt ye have against him, and if ye overcome me,
revenge upon me part of your choler and anger. But yet thus much there is, that
ye ought not to find the duty strange, whereunto I submit me: for I have no
less occasion to sustain the quarrel against you (he being absent) than ye
have to mainetaine King Abies, whose nephew ye are: being full sure that it is
in the power of my Lord Amadis to revenge me, if fortune do suffer you to have
the advantage over me.

Laudins answer to the Lord Florestan, the which in time convenient does
accept the combat. In the second book the 12. Chapter.
MY Lord Florestan (que Laudin) as far as I see and perceive, you have an envy
and a desire to fight: but I can not satisfy you, not having any power in me
to do that, whereunto I am sent by other: Also I have promised my Lords that
called me to their company, before my departing, not to take any thing upon me
that might let me to assist and to do my duty before the battle, and therefore
you shall at this present time have me excused till the battle be ended, for
then I promise you to take upon me the combat and fight that you demand, and
sooner I can not tend unto it.

Vrgandes Letter to King Lisuard, where he forspeaketh the ruin of fair
Tenebreus. In the second book the.15. Chapter.
TO you Lisuard King of England, salutatio^ and greeting meet for your
Majesty. I Vrgand of Cogneue, your humble servant, do give you knowledge,
that the battle appointed between you and King Cildadan, shall be one of the
most cruel and dangerous that ever man shall see: in the which the fair
Tenebreus, that only has given you so great hope, shall lose his name, and
through one stroke that he shall give al his noble acts shall be forgotten, and
you even then shall be in greater enmity than ever you found your self in: For
many good Knights shall lose their lives, and you your self shall fall into
that danger, even at that instant when the fair Tenebreus shall draw the
blood out of your belly: and yet at the last for three strokes the which he
shall give them of his part, they shall remain victors. And be ye sure Sir,
that all this doubtless shall chance: therefore prouid^ wisely for your
affairs.

Vrgands Letter to my Lord Galaor of France, foretelling him his ill fortune.
In the.2. book the.15. Chapter.
TO you Lord Galaor of France, wise and hardy Knight. I Vrgand of Congue do
salute you, as he that loves you and esteems you, and would that you should
understand the thing that shall chance and happen unto you in the cru^ell
battle between the Kings Lisuard and Cildadan. Be sure therefore that about
the end of it if you be there, your strong and boystuous members shall deceive
your invincible heart, and at the departing of the battle, your head shall be
in the power of him, that through the three strokes which he shall give, shall
remain victor.

A Letter of Arban of Norgalles, and Angrio^ of Estrauaux, to King Lisuard,
causing him to understand the great pains that they suffered. In the.2.
book.15. Chapter.
TO the most high and mighty Prince Lisuard King of England, and to all our
friends and alies being in his Realm, we Arban of Norgalles, and Angriote de
Estreuens detained, and being in dolorous prison at this present, signify unto
you, that our misfortune more cruel than death it self, has set us in the
power of the vnpitifull Gromadace, the wife of Famongomad, the which revenging
her husbands and her sons death, does afflict us with so many and strange
torments, that it is impossible to think upon them, and in such sort, that
from hour to hour we desire the end of our lives, to be at rest. But this
mischievous woman to cause us the longer while to suffer, does prolong so much
as she may our death, the which with our own hands we would have prepared,
but for fear of the love of our souls. And for as much as we at this pre^ent
are so sore wounded, that it is impossible we may resist any longer, we send
you this Letter written with our own blood, by the which we beseech God to
give you the victory against these traitors that have thus outrageously
handled us, and to have pity upon our souls.

The Oration of King Lisuard to those of his host, exhorting them to fight
strongly. In the.2. book the.16. chapter.
MY companions and great friends. I believe that there is not he of you al,
that does not sufficiently understand how we have enterprised this battle
with good right, and also to defend the honor and reputation of England, the
which King Cildadan and they of Irelande would deminish, denying us the
tribute, the which at al times they have paid to our prodecessors, recognizing
ye benefits which they have received of them in times past. I know well that
there is not one of you all that has not an entiere heart and a bold: and
therefore it is no need further to encourage you against those that you have
to do withal, having your honor before your eyes, the which you esteem more
than a hundredth lines, if it were possible to have them one after an other.
Therefore my friends, let us stoutly go forwards, having no regard of any
cruel Giant and full of blood, the which are of their company. For a man is
not the more esteemed because of his rude and great members, but for his good
heart and courage. You see that oftentimes the Hare does ouerleape the Ox,
and a Sparow Hawk or a Merline to to beat and to overcome a Kyte. Our enemies
do put their trust in the face of these monsters, having no regard of the
wrong that they have and do us, and we trust that God, the which is a doer of
right, will give us force and strength to overcome them, through the dexterity
of our persons, and diligence that we shall show and do. Therefore my friends
let us stoutly go forwards, thinking that every one of us even of himself is
sufficient and able to fight and to destroy the most brave of all their
company: assuring you that if we this day win the honor of the battle,
besides our renoume and glory that shall compass the universal world, there
shall never enemy of England lift up his head with an evil eye, to look upon
us.

King Cildadans Oration to his Host, to be corageous to defend their liberty.
In the second book the.16. Chapter.
GEntle Knights of Irelande, if ye perceive why and wherefore you go to fight:
there shall not be one of you all that shall not blame his predecessor, that
has so long delayed the beginning of so glorious an enterprise. The Kings of
England usurpers and tyrants (not only against their subjects, but upon their
neighbors) have taken in times past without any right, upon our ancestors a
tribute, the which you know very well they have paid oftentimes: and for this
cause we are come into this place to defend our liberty, the which can not be
paid nor recompensed with no treasure: This is your deed, and the right, not
of you only, but of your children, the which unto this time have been holden
and reputed by them whom you see, and are purposed to make you bondmen and
slaves. Will you then live always in this sort? will you continue the yoke
for your successors? are you of a less and weaker heart and courage than your
neighbors? Ah, if we be victorious, they will restore that they have of ours:
I am fast and sure that fortune does favor us: For you see the honest men that
are come to aid and to succor us. Knowing our good right and title, let us
thruste in among them gentle Knights, for I see already that King Lisuard and
his company are in doubt to turn their backs unto us, they be (as they say)
a^customed to win, but we shall learn them to custom themselves to be
woonne. Of one thing I will advertise you, that is, that every man aid and
help his companion, keeping your selves as straight and as close together as
may be possible.

An exhortation of Mabile to Orian, the which was not content In the.2. book
the.7. Chapter.
MAdame, I marvel at you, and of your manner of doing: for as soon as you are
gone and delivered of one envy and tribulation, a new does solicit you^ and
you should (as me thinks) take better heed what you speak and say of my
cousin, not persuading yourself that he has holden or had this purpose, or any
other to trouble you, considering that you may be assured, that he never
thought to offend you in word, thought, nor deed. And the prowess and noble
acts that he has done, as well in your presence as in your absence, might
have borne you sufficient witness. But I see well enough what it is you make
me believe and to think, that you (being weary of my company) will drive me
away under the color that my cousin is to much youres, abusing your self of
the service that he does and hears unto you. But yet when you have lost me,
it shall be but a small matter, providing that your Amadis (I may well say) be
not the worsse entreated: For you know well and I also, that the least notice
that he shall have of your trouble, shall be sufficient and enough to cause him
to die: so that I marvel what pleasure you take to torment him so often, doing
for you that is possible to be done for any other Lady alive. Consider you not
that after that Apolidon would that the proof of the chamber forbidden was
common to all the world, that it should not stand with reason, for my cousin
keeping Briolanie to do as other do. Truly I believe that neither she nor you
are yet ^ayre enough to obtain and ^ in that which all the fair women that
have been since a hundred year hitherto could have or obtain. Therefore I may
well assure me, that this new ielosie proceeds not of any fault that he
has made you, the which does not think but to obey you: but his misfortune
has already so ruled him, that to please you, he has not forgotten himself,
but setting by none estate but by you, has entierly disdayned all his lineage,
and has esteemed them as strangers, not knowing them nor no other but you,
whom he does reverence as a God, and yet you will utterly lose him. Ah, ah, the
dangers and evident perils, in the which he and his have been oftentimes for
the love of you, as well against Archelaus, as in this last battle, are now
very ill recognized, seeing that in the satisfaction of them, you desire the
destruction of the head and principal of my parents. Is this ye goodness and
the recognizing of the services that I have done you? are these the first
^ruites of the hope that I had in you? Certes I am now very far off from the
thing that I hoped and breathed for, seeing before my eyes the ruin and
destruction of him conspyred, whom I love best in this world, the which is
more yours than his own: But yet (if it please God) it shall not be so, nor no
such inconvenience shall approach me so nigh. Certes, to morrow I will pray my
brother Agreus, and my uncle Galuanes to conduct me into Scotland, the which
will do so much for me, as to bring me from your company that is so
unthankful. Then she disposed her to weep so greatly, that it seemed she
should melte into tears. Alas said she, I pray God that the cruelnesse you
do and show to your Amadis, may turn to vengeance upon you to satisfy al
his kindred, the which shall not lose so much (losing him) as you alone, and
again, that this may be the greatest misfortune that may happen and chance
unto us.

Orians answer to the foresaid Mabile, excusing her of the thing that they
accused her of. In the.2. book the.17. Chapter.
AH, ah, poor unfortunate woman among all that be most desolate and heavy:
who would ever have thought that this thing might have fame at any time into
your heart, that you have now opened unto me? Alas I opened my self unto you,
(having none other about me, worthy to understand my heauinesses) to have
counsel and comfort, and you discomforte me, and entreat me worsse than I
have deserved, reputing me far otherwise than I am, or shall be so long as my
spirit shall sustain my heart full of bitterness, the which causes me to
presume that no other thing but my evil fortune has advanced and brought me
into this kind of entreaty, seeing that you have taken in ill part that I
told you for the best. And God never help me, if I thought in all my life, of
that, whereof you blame me and accuse me: for I am so sure of your cousin,
that I will no other thing but to content and please you, and so much there is,
that I had rather die, than that any other than I my self should have the
honor of the forbidden chamber. Judge therefore what trouble it shall be to me,
if Berolanie that goes before to prove the thing, obtain it: This
notwithstanding my cousin and friend, I pray you to pardon me, not to prolong
(if it be your pleasure) to advise and counsel me of the thing that as you
shall think I were best to do, for your cousin might be too heavy, if he
knew the thing that I have suspected of him.

A Prophecy of Vrgand unknown to Orian, foretelling her the thing that should
chance unto her. In the.2. book the.18. cha.
IN the time when your great heaviness shall take place, many good Knights
shall suffer for the love of you. Then the strong Lion accompanied with his
beasts, shall come forth of his den, and through his high roarings and cryings,
he shall so fear them that shall have the keeping of you, that you whither they
will or no, shall remain between the claws of the kingly beast, the which
shall set upon your head the rich crown, that shall be no more yours: then
this beast being famished, and having your body in his power, shall carry it
into his den, where he shall so feed himself, that he shall pacif^e and
assuage his mad and outrageous hunger. Therefore my daughter, take heed what
you shall do, for the thing that I have told you shall happen without any doubt.

An exhortation of Vrgand to King Lisuard, inciting him to entreat well his men
of war. In the.2. book the.18. Chaper.
Sir, you seem unto me now, to be well accompanied, not so much for the
number of great personages which are nigh unto, as for the amity and love
that they (as I am sure) hear you, whereof you should laud and praise God.
For a Prince beloved of his, may keep his estate in great surety and
safegarde: therefore sir, take pain to entertain and to entreat them well,
so that your fortune (the which as yet does not leave of to favor you) go
not far from you if you do otherwise: and above all other things, keep your
self from evil report, considering that it is the very poison and ruin of
Princes the which believe it.

A Prophecy of Vrgan, unknown as well to the King as to other his Knights.
THere shall be great contention between the great Adder and the strong Lion,
the which shall be succored and helped by many cruel beasts, and shall come in
such a fury, that a great number of them shall suffer dolorous death. The fine
Raynard the Romayne shall be wounded with the claws of the strong Lion, and
his skin shall be cruelly rent and ^orne, wherewith the great Serpent shall
be in great perplexity. At this time the sweet sheep covered with black
wool, shall be set in the midst of them, the which with his great humility and
his sweet bleings, shall mittigate and assuage the braveness and frecenesse
of their courage, causing the one to be separated from the other: ^ut as soon as the hungry Woolues shall descend and come from the next Mountains
against the great Adder, and being destroyed by them, with a great part of
his followers, he shall enclose him in one of their cauernes. The tender
Unicorne putting his mouth into the brave Lions ears, shall with his loud
cry awake from his strong sleep, and causing him to take part of his
beasts, shall go most diligently to help the great Adder, whom they shall
find bitten, and so wounded by the hungry Woolues, that they shall see great
abundance of blood shed upon the ground: then he shall be taken from the
Woolues teeth, and they being plucked in pieces and life restored to the great
Adder, leaving all the poison of her intralles and guttos within her ^au^rns, he
shall be content and consent to be put among the claws of the strong Lion: and
the white Hind, the which in the fearful forest does eleuate and lift up hi^
mowings against heaven, shall be rejected and repelled.

Another prophecy of Vrgan unknown to Amadis, declaring the thing that should
chance unto him. In the.2. book the 18. Chapter.
AT the hour and time that ye shall be wounded to death, defending the life of
another, the martyrdom being yours, and the profit other men's, the recompense
that ye shall have, shall be a great and an evil contentation, and a putting
off from the thing that ye desire most to approach unto. Then your good cutting
and rich sword shall so bruise your bones, and cut your flesh in so many places,
that ye shall find your self weak and faint of bloud^ and so outrageously,
pursued, that if half the world were yours, ye would give it^ so that your
sword were cast into the depth of some profound and deep lake, wherout it can
never be drawn: therefore think upon your destiny, the which shall be such
as I have told you.

Amadis excuse that he calde not his companions with him to be at the combat,
for he himself had taken it in hand. In the.2. book the.19. Chapter.
MY Lords I pray you all to have me excused, and not to be miscontent with me,
assuring you, that if it had been in my choice to have chosen a companion to be
of the company (considering the great valiant acts, whereof every one of you
is provided) I should not have known whom I should have chosen. But Ardan for
the hatred that he bears me, and for the love that he has to Madas^me, would
fight alone against me, and seeing that he has so required it, I could not nor
ought not to refuse it, ex^ept I should have showed my self a sl^thful coward,
and to make a contrary answer not conformable to his request and demand. And
when he would have taken m^ knights with him, where think ye I should have
sought for aid or succoure but among you ^ considering ye do know, that my
force does it self double with yours, when we are together.

Amadis answer to Ardan Canille, that defied him before the king. In the.2.
book the.10. Chapter.
HOw now (que Amadis,) do ye think that I have not heart enough and right, to
abase the pride of such a man, and so bold as Ardan is? I ensure you, that if
I had not enterprised to fight with you, I would be content to do it, and only
to let the marriage of you and Madasime. And for this cause, the hostages of
whom ye vaunt your self, should not differ and delay to do their diligence
and duty: for I trust to revenge the good and the valiant king Arban and
Angriot of the great injury and wrong that they received being prisoners.

Ardans replication to Amadis.
I Have caused them (says Ardan) to come with me, knowing that ye would
demand and ask for them: although that I have good hope to set them again in
the power of Madasime, and also to give her therewith, the half of your bonet,
in witness that it pertains not to such a Lord as ye are, to have and to
hold any such brave and vantageous purposes with me, and to give her (so doing)
great pleasure. It shall please our king that she be set in some evident and
high place, to the intent she may evidently see and behold the vengeance that I
shall take upon you, and the unfortunate ends whereof ye shall dye.

The Oration of Gandadel before king Lisuard against Amadis and his aliance, to
put and to bring the^ out of the kings favor. In the.2. book the.20. Chapter.
Sir, I have all the time of my life desired to keep the faith that I owe unto
you, as to my king and natural Lord, and shall do, if God be pleased. For
beside the oath of fidelity that I have and owe unto you, for ye of your
gracious goodness have done me so great good and pleasures, that if I should
not counsel you in that I shall see to touch your royal majesty, I should
greatly fault against God and man. By the means whereof (Sir) after I had very
long bethought me upon this thing that I shall declare unto you, repented me
oftentimes that I had deferred it so long, not for any envy that I bear to
any man (God be my witness) but only for the inconvenience that I see ready
if ye promptly and wisely do not remedy it. Ye know yt at all times there has
been between the realm of France and the realm of England great coutrouersie,
because the kings your predecessors have continually pretended a right of
soueraintie: and although that for a certain time this quarrel is swaged, so
it is very like that the French men (remembering the wars and damages that
they have endured and suffered by your subjects) shall secretly in their hearts
and courage take counsel to revenge themselves. And Amadis the which is the
head and principal of them all, is not come (after my opinion) into this
country, but to do it, to practice and to win men, with the which joined to
ye might that he may cause to come, shall procure so much business, yt so it may
chance, it shall not be easy for you to resist him, and lo there is already
appearance thereof. Sir, he of whom I speak unto you, and they also of his
aliance, have done me so great honor and pleasure, that I and my children are
greatly bound unto them: And if it were not that ye are my liege Lord, I would
not for any thing speak against Amadis, I am so much his friend and servant:
but in things that respect your person, God send me to die sooner, than I
should spare any living man, no not my own child. Ye have received Amadis
with so great a number of his parents, and other strangers into your Court, (as
ye are a good prince, a liber^ll, and of a noble courage) that at length their
company and folowers shall be found greater than yours. Therefore sir, it should
be good and well done to provide before hand, or ever the fire be through
kindled.

The Kings answer to the foresaid Oration.
BY my troth my friend, I believe that ye do advertise me as a good and
faithful subject: Nevertheless, considering the service that they (of whom
ye do speak) have done me, I cannot comprehend nor perceive in my mind, that
they will do me any cowardly or evil turn.

Gandandels replication to the king, upon the self same purpose, and in the
same Chapter.
Sir (he answered) this is it that does abuse you: for if in times past they
had offended you, ye would take heed of them, as of your enemies: but they
have known and wisely do know how to disguise their treason under an humble
manner of communication, accompanied with some service the which they have
already employed and done, waiting for an opportune and a good hour.

Amadis request unto king Lisuard to give Galu^nes the Island Mongase. In the
selfseme Chapter.
Sir, although that I have not done you hitherto so much service as I desire,
yet I have taken courage (trusting in your great liberality) to ask you a
gift, the which cannot turn but to your honor, and moreover, binding them to
whom ye shall grant it. Furthermore sir, said Amadis, the gift that I and my
companions being present do pray you to grant us, is, that it would please you
to give to my Lord Galuanes the I Will of Mongase, for the which he shall
faithfully he sworn unto you, and do you homage, and marry Madasime: this
doing Sir, ye shall enrich a poor Prince, using and showing mercy to one of
the most fairest gentle women of all the world.

Amadis Oration to king Lisuard, with the which he leaves and forsakes his
company. In the selfsame Chapter.
Sir, I have hitherto thought that there was no king nor Prince in all the
world that had better knowledge in thing of virtue and honor than you: but
yet now we perceive the contrary, by the experience that ye have given us: so
that we seeing ye have charged and taken new counsel, will go and seek a new
fashion and manner of living.

Amadis Oration to Oriane, by the which he declares unto her, that he is
constrained to go out of the kings service. In the selfsame Chapter.
MAdame, says Amadis, we must needs do, that he has commanded us, otherwise
we should offend your honor, abiding against his will in his service, seeing that
he might presume and think, that we in no another place could not meet any
that would receive us: therefore I pray you not ^s take it evil, if for a time
obeying him, I be constreyned to depart from you. You know the power that ye
have upon me, and that I am so much yours as you may wish and desire: and also
I know well, that if I should be evil reputed, ye are she that would receive
and take thereof most displeasure, so greatly ye love me, and so well ye do
esteem me: the which thing causes me again to pray you to take my absence in
good part, and to give me leave to depart, using still your accustomed
constancy and virtue.

Orians answer to Amadis, excusing her self to him. In the same Chapter.
MY friend (answers ye Princess) ye are greatly to blame, thus to complain
you of my father: for if he have received any goodness of you, it was for my
love and favor only and by my commandment, and not for his love: for I alone
caused you to come and soiorne in his company. And so it is not in him to
recompense you, but in me, whose ye are. It is very true that he continually
has thought the contrary, the which does greatly blame you, that ye answered
him so indiscreetly. And again because your departure (being constrained) is
to me the most grievous thing that might chance unto me, yet I am content to
satisfye my self, and to obey reason more than delight and pleasure, the which
I have by your presence. Therefore my friend, I will that, that pleases you:
because I am well assured that to what place so ever ye shall resort, your heart
yt which is mine, shall remain with me for a gage of the power that ye have
given me over you and it: also that my father lees^ng you, shall know by those
few that shall be left him, the thing that he has lost in you.

Amadis answer and replication taking his leave of Oriane. In the same Chapter.
MAdame (said Amadis) the goodness that ye do unto me, is so great, that I
esteem it no less, than the redemption of my proper life: for ye know that
every man of virtue ought to have his honor in such estimation, that he should
prefer it above his own life. Thus Madame, seeing it is of force, ye I to
co^serue it must go far from you, do so much yet (if it please you) for me, as
during my absence, to send me as oftentimes as ye may news of you: and
continually to keep me in your grace and favor, as he, the which was never
borne, but to obey and to serve you.

Amadis Oration to his companions, declaring unto them the causes of his
departing from the king. In the selfsame Chapter.
MY Lords, because men have wrongfully blamed the Lord Galuanes, Agraies, my
self, and some other that are here present, to leave and forsake the kings
service, as they and I have appointed, we thought it meet and good, to cause
you to understand what the occasion is. I believe that there is is not one of this
company that does not perceive, whether that since our coming into England the
authority of this prince be augmented or diminished: therefore without
consuming of time, in rehersing the services that we have done for him, for the
which we had hope to have had with thanks good and great recompense, I will
declare br^^fly unto you wha^ ingratitude be uses against us, and in such
wise, that as mutable and inco^stant fortune does oftentimes turn vpsidowne
all things, so he has changed his conditions either by evil counsel that he
has received, or by some light occasion that we know not. So much there is,
that the Lord Galuanes required us to move unto him (it is not yet eight or
ten days ago) the provision for the marriage of him and of Madasime: and in
so doing, to cause him to enjoy her lands with this charge, to hold them in
fee and homage of him and of his crown, the which thing we promised him to do.
By the means whereof, as soon as it was profitable for me to go; I and other of
this company have been with him to make this request: but without having any
regard either of us yt spoke, or of him, for whom we labored, the which is (as
every man does know) the king of Scotlands brother, a wise and as much as is
possible a hardy knight, the which even of late against king Cildadan has not
spared his life, but has done his duty as much as any that came thither: he
has refused us, and burdened us with injury, nothing convenient nor meet for
such a king. And yet at the first we cared not for it, until he said unto us
all (when we made certain demonstrations unto him) that we should search in
some other place those that knew us, or that did more for us than ^e, and that
the world was great and wide enough to do this thing without troubling of him.
Thus my companions, seeing that we being in his service, have always obeyed
him, so as concerning my self, I am very well content in this case, not to
fail but to depart out of his country. But yet because this leave (as I do
think) touched not me only, nor those that he spoke unto, but to all other the
which are not his vassalles: I thought it meet to cause you to understand
the matter, to the intent ye might think upon the things that were to come.

The Oration of Angriote of Estrauaux, to draw the other to leave (as Amadis
did) the kings house. In the same Chapter.
MY lords, it is not yet long ago since I knew the king, and for the little
knowledge yt I have had of him, I never saw a wiser, vertuouser, or a more
temperate Prince than he in all affairs: And therefore I am in doubt that ye
communicatio^ which he has had with Amadis and his Lords that were present,
came not of his own fancy, but yt he was induced to do it by some envious and
evil person, that has persuaded him to be miscontent with them. And because I
have seen within these nine or ten days Gandandel and Broquadan speak
oftentimes unto him, and that he listened unto them more than to any other, I
doubt that these are they that have ^rued this matter: for I have known them
of long time for the most envious of all the world. Therefore I have even to
day taken deliberation to fight against them, and to maintain, that falsely and
mischieuously they have set the King and Amadis at debate: and if they will
excuse them because of their age, they have each of them a son that of long
time have worn harneys, with whom I my self will fight, if they be hardy and
bold to cloak the treason of their naughty fathers.

Amadis Oration to King Lisuard, whereby he leaves his service. In the.2.
book the.21. Chapter.
Sir, if I in any thing have made you a fault, God and you be witnesses,
assuring you, that although the services that I have done you, have been small,
the will that I have had to acknowledge the goodness and honor the which it
has pleased you to show me, has been great in all extremity. You said unto
me that I should go and search in the world who know me better than you,
giving me sufficiently enough to understand the little envy that does let you
that I dwell no more in your Court. But seeing it has so pleased you to
command me, it is reason that I obey you, not that I will depart from you as
from my souereine, for I was never your vassal, nor of no other Prince, but of
God only: but I take my leave of you, as of him that has done me much good and
honor, unto whom I bear my love, and a desire to serve.

Lord Quedragants Oration to King Lisuard, leaving his service. In the self
same Chapter.
Sir, I had never dwelt in your Court but at the request of Amadis, willing and
desiring to be his friend for ever, and seeing that by his occasion I was
yours, by like reason I depart from you for ever: considering that my little
and small services shall have but little hope, seeing that his great services
are so evil recognized and rewarded, having no remembrance of the Obligation
wherewith you are bound unto him, that delivered you from the hands of
Mandafabul, nor of the victory that you won and obtained upon King Cildadan
by his and his parents blood. I could put you in remembrance of the good turn
that he did you, when he delivered you and your daughter Oriane (as I
oftentimes have heard it spoken) from the hands of Archalaus, and not long
since my Lady Leonor, the which Famongomad, and Basigant his son Giants most
cruel of all the world, held as prisoner to have slain her: thus the
ingratitude that you do now use against him, is so great, that it depriueth you
of all the knowledge of truth. And therefore he should no less esteem this
leave so sone given, than the retribution of his services so well accorded and
rewarded. And as for me, I am purposed to follow him, and to go and depart from
your Court.

The Oration of Guillan the thoughtfull, excusing himself that he could not
follow Amadis. In the selfsame Chapter.
MY Lord, you know my affairs, and that of my self I being wholly under and
subject to the will of an other, can do nothing. For the which I suffer
anguishes and pains most strange, the which are the cause that I can not
follow you, whereof I am ashamed, so great a desire I have to knowledge the
goodness and the honor that you (being in in your company) have done for me,
praying you most humbly at this present, to hold and to have me excused.

Amadis Oration to the foresaid Guillan, excusing him that he leaves not the
Kings house. In the same Chapter.
MY Lord Guillan, God forbid that through my occasion you should ^e faulty
to the Lady that you love so perfectly, but I counsel you to obey her, and to
serve her as you have done hitherto, and the King in like manner, being sure of
this, that you, your honor saved, shall be in all points my friend and
faithful companion.

King Lisuards answer to Gandandell and Broquadan, declaring their
insufficiency to govern and rule his realm. In the selfsame Chapter.
I Do marvel that you are so bold and presumptuous to persuade me, to leave
unto you the rule not only of my house, but of all this kingdom, knowing that
you are not sufficient to do it. Think you that the Princes and Lords of this
Monarchy will obey you, knowing the place from whence you are descended? And
if you think and believe to play the good husbands, willing to enriche me by
sparing of money, think you that I may better bestow it, than to give it to
Gentlemen and Knights that are in my service? seeing that a Prince can not name
himself a King, except he have men at his commandment. And if before time I
showed my self liberal to those which at your instance I have chased away, by
those I was maintained, famed and redoubted: and therefore content you with
that that you have done, without any more disguising of things, or else I will
show you that it displeases me.

Amadis Oration to those that would go to defend the right of Madasime,
exhorting them to deliver out of the Kings prison twelve Ladies. In the same
Chapter.
MY Lords, (answered Amadis) the things that be debated with or by ripe
deliberation, come willingly to a good end: and doubt not, that the thing that
you purpose to take upon you, shall not be nor happen to your honor, although
the thing were more in hazard, and of more difficulty than it is, and yet I
will (if it so please you) declare that I do^ think. You all as far as I
see, do taste and labor to set the twelve Damselles at liberty, which at this
present, are prisoners in King Lisuards prison, my mind is that twelve of you
(and no more) be at this enterprise, and so every one shall have one, and the
twelve Damselles shall be particularly bound to twelve Knights, and that the
rest of this company shall stand still to help the incouueniences that may
chance.

The complaint that Orian made when she fel^e hirselfe great with child. In
the.2. book the.22. Chapter.
ALas my friends, now I see well that fortune will bring me to utter ruin.
You know the inconvenience that of late chanced to him that of all the world
I loved best, and now (that is worsse) the thing that I feared and doubted
most, is chanced unto me: for certainly I am with child, and I know not what
I may do, so that I be not destroyed and lost.

Sarquiles Oration to King Lisuard, aduertising him of the dangerous enterprise
and treason of Broquadan and Gandandel. In the same Chapter.
Sir, I am not yet your subject nor your liege man, but yet in recognizing the
nurture that I have learned in your Court, I am bound to save your majesty's
honor. Therefore sir, I advertise you, that three days since I fortuned to be
in a place, where I perceived that Broquadan and Gandandel did not only
conspire (but already have committed against God and you) the most greatest
treson that may be thought. It is sure and certain, that they do purpose to
counsel and to persuade you to put Madasime and these Damsels to death: and as
touching the rest, sir, I trust that all their mischieuousnesse or ten days
be past shall be disclosed. And to set those villaynes in authority, you have
cast away not long since, my Lord Amadis, and many other good Knights out of
your company. I am no more purposed to remain here, and I take my leave of
you to go and to seek my uncle Angriote, whom (if God be pleased) you shall
see shortly here again, and me with him, purposed with force of arms to open
unto those two traitors their unjust and false conspiracy.

The co^maundem^nt of King Lisuard to Broquadan and Gandandel, animating them
to execute the thing that they had promised.
COme hither, you know that oftentimes you have solicited me to put these poor
Damsels to death, persuading me, that it was a just and a reasonable thing to
do so. And that you and your children (if need were) would sustain this
counsel unto death. You have perceived what Ymosil and his companions have
said unto me, the which I find to be good and just, therefore it is time that
you advise you of the thing that you have to do. For by the faith that I owe
unto God, I will license none of my other Knights to fight with them, and if
you provide not for this, you shall be punished, and the Damselles delivered.

Angriotes of Estrauaux Oration to King Lisuard, declaring unto him the
mischieuousnesse and deceit of Broquadan and Gandandel. In the selfsame
Chapter.
Sir, my nephew and I here present, do pray you to caus^ those two villaynes
Broquadan and Gandandell, the which are in your Court, to appear presently,
unto whom I will declare the treason that they have used against you. Sir,
these evil men of whom I speak to you, not having any consideration nor
fear of God or of man, have falsely accused my Lord Amadis and other, of a
thing that they never in all their lives thought on, by the means whereof I
dare well say, you have removed far from you, the best Knights that ever
entered into England: therefore if these traitors dare maintain that they are
not such as I name them, I alon^ by the help of God and the edge of my sword,
shall cause the^ to know it. And if age should excuse them, there is not one of
them but has children wearing armor and harneys of long time, and well
esteemed and taken among the Knights of your Court, against whom I will fight,
if they will keep and supply the place of the^r evil fathers.

Gandandels answer to the King, excusing himself of that, that men said by
him. In the same Chapter.
Sir, answered Gandandell, see ye not the audacitie and boldness of this brave
and injurious man, the which is not come into this Court, but to shame the
gentlemen of your Court? by my troth sir, if you had believed me long since,
as soon as he was entered into your Realm, so sone should he have been hanged
upon the first tree: but seeing that you suffer it and bear it, and hereafter
must not marvel if Amadi^ in his own person come hither to do you wrong. So
much there is, that if I by the living God, were as young as I was when I
began to enter into the service of your brother the King, unto whom I have
done many great services, I am well assured that Angriote durst not dream to
say unto me the least of the injuries that he has spoken before your majesty.
But the gallant knows well that I am old and broken, as much for the number
of my old years, as of the insinite wounds the which I have received
throughout all the parts of my body, in the wars of your predecessors.

The answer of King Lisuard to the foresaid Broquadan and Gandandell,
reproving them of cowardnesse and slothfulness.
COme hither, you have so oftentimes recited and told me, that Amadis and his,
had purposed to betraye me, and to usurp upon me the country of England, and
yet when you should meet, you excused your selves from fighting, and sent your
children to the play, that could do nothing therwithall: yet God is just, and
by as much as I owe him and am bound unto him, it was evil spoken of you, nor I
would never have esteemed you to be such manner of men as you be.

The Oration of King Arban of Norgales to King Lisuarde, inducing him to call
Amadis again to his Court. In the.3. book the.1. Chaper.
Sir, I would think it good (or ever you did this thing) that you should have
the advice of the noble men of your country: for you know that Amadis and
they of his kindred are wonderful good Knights, and very mighty through the
friends that they have. Furthermore, there is not he that knows not how
falsely they have been accused before your majesty, whereof the victory that
Angriote and Sarquelles have obtained within these few days that be past
against the accusers, has given good witness, and if the right had not been
on their side, yet because they are good and valiant Knyghts, they should not
have been so easily dispatched of Candandelles children, nor of Amadis: the
which thing does sufficiently make us to understand and believe, that the
Lord mayntained them in their justification and right. And therefore sir, it
should be best (as I do suppose and think) if it would so please you, to
forget the evil that you bears them, and to call them again to your service,
seeing that it shall not be greatly approved nor allowed, that a Prince should
make war against those, that he may easily and with his honor call again to
his amity and service, considering that doing the contrary, is oftentimes
loss of men, extreme expenses, and diminishing of authority, a thing that
shortly after causes the Lords and neighbors therabouts, to desire and to make
new enterprises, to get them out of subjection, and to enter into a more
liberty than they had before. And therefore a sage and a wise Prince ought at
no time (if it be possible) to give occasion to his vassalles to go and depart
from the fear and reverence that they owe unto him: but must prove and assaye
by all means and ways to rule them, as the good shepeheard by temperate
discretion does with his sheep, winning their hearts and wills more by
faithful love, than by rigor and tyranny. Therefore sir, it is necessary to
quench the fire already kindled, before it be thoroughly set a fire. For
oftentimes after the fault be known, the remedy is to far gone. Amadis is
so humble and so much yours, that if you would send to revoke him, you shall
easily recover him with those that have followed him, of the which you may be
better served than ever you were.

The defiance of Cendill of G^not, made in the name of King Lisuard to Amadis,
and to all other his parents and friends, certifying them, that the King does
declare him self their mortal enemy. In the same Chapter.
MY Lords, I am sent hither unto you, from the most puissant and mighty King
Lisuard my sovereign Lord, in whose name I defy you, and all your parents,
friends or aliance, and from him I declare unto you, that if ever he find you
in England, or in the Isle of Mongase, he will cause you to be destroyed, and
entreated as his mortal enemy. Therefore keep your selves from henceforth if
you may or can, for he has enterprised to invade you, and utterly (if he may
find the mean and ways) to destroy you.

Amadis prays Gandales his old and ancient friend, to go and answer King
Lisuard, and to advertise him that he fears not his threatenings. In the
selfsame Chapter.
MY father, I pray you to go with him, and say to King Lisuard, that I send
you particularly unto him, to aduerauertise him, that I set less by his
threatenings, than he thinks, and if I had known the little thank that he
bears me for^ so many great services as he has received by me, I would have
taken good heed, to have entered so often into so great dangers wherein I
adventure my self, for his wealth and the wealth of his realm, the which
paradue^ture should otherwise not have remained and been so entire and whole as
it is at this present: but I trust in God, that with the time, he shall know
this ingratitude more by force, than by his will. And as touching this, that he
purchases my enmity, assure him that he shall have it, so that he shall
forget the thing that I and mine have done in his defense. And yet say unto
him, that although I alone have conquered the I Will of Mongase, that I will never
set my foot to cause him to leese it, nor in place where I may anoy and
trouble the Queen for the honor of her.

Amadis taking leave of his companions, does exhort them to be virtuous and
strong in battle, excusing himself of his departing, and praying them ^o be
continually united together. In the.1. Chapter of the.3. book.
I Beseech you my fellows and companions to succoure and to help one another,
and to think that the glory (for as much as ye go against a mighty king) that
ye shall get and obtain (if ye overcome him) shall be ye greater. I know well
that there is not he of you all, that is not bound to the wise man, and hardy
knight, the which gives me good hope, that with the help of God, and the good
right of him that does conduct you, ye shall remit and set a poor damsel
disherited in her first goods and estate again. I was never in my life so
enuyed^ to leave so good a company, as I am at this present: but there is not
he, that ought not to have and to hold me excused: and yet it has pleased
God, that the occasion has prepared another mean not to separate us. Of one
thing I would pray you, that is, not to have any discord among you, bu^ to live
together as fellows and friends, otherwise y^ may be sure, that the ruin and
destruction shall fall on your side.

A letter of the infant Celinde to king Lisuard, commending her son unto him,
that proceeded of the love of king Lisuard and of her. In the.3. Chapter.
MOst mighty and excellent Prince, reading this letter, ye may (peradventure)
remember, that when ye traue, led as a wandering knight far and strange
countries, bringing many perilous and dangerous adventures to an ends, fortune
did send and did lead you to my fathers kingdom, the which was lately
departed, and ye found me withdrawe^ into one of my castles, named the great
Rosi^r, where the brave Antifon besieged me, because I disdained not being
equal to me in nobility, and less a friend of virtue, to marry him. And
well he could show it, for he had even then usurped by force and tirannie upon
me a poor Damsel Orpheline, the most part of my country, when that ye at
your coming presented to fight with him, and to sustain the right that I had,
the which thing he accepted, more for the confidence that he had in the
strength of his arms, than for any other just quarrel: unto whom our Lord
showed his just judgment, for you less than he of body, but in magnamitie of
courage greatly exceeding him, vanquished him. By the means whereof, I awhyle
after was restored to all my goods, the which I will hold of you even as
they were yours, and my self also for ever, to whom at that time and hour ye
did so great honor, as to come and refresh you in this my great Rosier, where
afterward you and I devising together among my pleasant orcha^ds, ye gathered
roses, even as we sported us together, and the flower of my virginity, of the
which the place was and is yet very rich and plenteous. Therefore I cannot say
whether love would it should be so, or whether my beauty was the cause: but I
know well that ye had so great power upon me, and that in me was so little
resistance, that before ye departed from thence, ye left me great with this
young gentleman, whom I send unto you, so fair, and of so good grace, that
nature as me thinks, has taken all her pleasure to make him perfect in all
excellency, to deface both our sins, if any sin was committed. Therefore
Sir, receive him as yours, being of the seed royal of you and m^, the which
thing causes me to esteem, that he shall be a prudent man, and retaining in
him self part of the noble acts that are in you, and part of the great love,
in the which he was engendered, on that day, when ye gave me this ring, the
which I send unto you again in witness of the promise that ye made to your
humble servant Celinde king Hegides daughter, the which kisseth the hands of
your royal majesty.

The complaint of Oriane, for the soden departing of her son, foreseeing the
evil entreating that should happen unto him. The.3. Chapter.
ALas little creature, God give thee grace to be so virtuous, and so good a
knight as thy father, and to do thee, if it please him, so much good, as to
send thee even at the beginning a more fortunate prosperity than his was.
Alas I am constrained to send thee away, and to show my self to thee more
cruel, than the Tiger or the Leopard to their little ones. And because I know
not whether thou go, nor when I shall meet with thee again, it causes in
my soul such heaviness, that fortune cannot prepare such danger that does not
present it self before my eyes, yet if I at least ways knew the Nurse that
should give him suck, I would pray her to take care for him, but it may so
chance that she will take little care for thee, and that she before thou have
the power and be able to keep thy self, shall leave thee oftentimes alone,
being occupied about her small businesses, and devising with her neighbors of
small matters, unprofitable fables, and lies in the danger of beasts: For I
esteem and judge, that she and other likewise shall repent and think thee to
be the child of some simple damsel, and to do, for thee the best she can,
shall be to nourish thee in the feelds among the shepherds, the which
oftentimes cannot so diligently give heed to their sheep, but that the Wolf
and the Lion against their wills do pass overthwart, rauishing the thing that
they think good.

The complaynt of the damsel of Denmark, after that she had lost Orianes
little son, the which she esteemed should suffer much evil. In the.3.
Chapter.
O Lord God, how has it pleased you to suffer that this little creature
should perish, the which never offended you? Ah, ah, certesse I am well worthy
to be greatly punished, of my own will, his misfortune might fall upon my own
person, for my life is to me very noisome. Alas little infant, your father
being as little as ye are, began to prove the dangers of this world, and yet
our Lord of his great goodness preserved him: but your misfortune and evil
honor is far stranger than his was: for notwithstanding they cast him into
the waves and surges of the Sea, yet Gandales met him in a good hour, and
afterward (as every man does know) he took him up: but thou little poor one
art fallen into the mercy of a brute beast, that shall have no more pity upon
thee than his natural inclination does command him, and so shall ye end
your days before they have had in a manner any beginning.

Nascian speaking to her sister of the little infanto found between the teeth
of a Lion, does pray her to have it in singular recommendation, and to help it.
It is sure that our Lord preserving it from so great inconvenience, has
preserved it to his own service. And therefore my sister, my friend she said,
I pray you from henceforth to think upon it, and to bring it up, until such
time as it may be able to receive such little doctrine a^ I may teach him:
afterward ye shall bring him again, and if it please the Lord to lend him
long life, I hope that he shall be so prudent a man, as to acknowledge the
goodness that ye have done for him.

The Oration of king Lisuard unto his soldiers, monishing them to fight
strongly for him. In the same Chapter.
TRuly my friends, ye may now see even at the sight of your eye, those that
are the cause why we pass over the Sea to defend the honor of England, and
the country which is ours, as it is manifest by the couenantes that I have had
with Ardan Canille, the grandfather of Madasime, and of the old Giant her
mother, and yet I cannot tell under what color, that they since that time are
entered, and by treason have taken the town and Castle of the burning Lake,
where the Earl Latin was, whom as yet they keep prisoner, and many other
with him, whereby their hearts be so exalted, that they suppose fortune to be
wholly with them, and that she will set them forwards against us even unto our
own doors, of the which they make a matter as though we had not the ways and
means to resist a greater power than theirs. But it will go otherwise, and our
Lord (if it so please him) shall no^ suffer that our reputation, (in the which
we have continually lyned) should be quenched by them, assuring my self that
there is none of you that will not rather dye honorably, than afterward to
live in shame. And I know you for such so long, that I have great occasion to
love and to esteem you, and if I had not such knowledge, yet I know well,
that I was not so soon borne, but that fortune bound me unto you, as well for
the fidelity, the which ye have continually kept unto your princes, as for the
great services that ye have done for me in mainteining our right: and specially
against Barsinan, when that ^e through treason put me into the hands of
Archalaus to make him king, and last of all in the battle that I had against
king Cildadan, as every man does know: the which things cause me to believe,
that having no regard to any particular men that be rebelled against us
(sometimes your friends, and now desirous to pluck the blood out of your
bod^es) ye shall do such diligence following your ancient virtue and fidelity,
that we shall cause them to know, that we are not they that they should come
unto: she which thing we may easily do, s^ing that we are so many more than
they, and that we have the right on our side. Therefore let us go on boldly,
for I see that they aproch and draw nigh.

Galuanes Oration to his knights, exhorting them to take courage, and to
esteem themselves happy, to fight for a just occasion. In the.3. book
the.3. Chapter.
Understand my companions, that the first and souerainst goodness that may be
in an army, is the head ruler, that can wisely order and counsel the thing
that is required to be done, and afterward to have obedience to execute the
thing that he commands Ye have here not only one Captain such as I speak
of, but two^ or three, yea more than twen^ie, the which are so agreeing
together, that there is but one will, one heart and one advice: Seeing then
this first goodness and gift is not denied us, let us draw near to the
second, and cause our fortune to aid us against the most unthankful King that
is upon the earth, the which provoke to destroy our goods, and our lives
with this great and mighty army, that he has caused to come hither to
empouerish and utterly to defloure a poor gentlewoman. But yet he is far
from his count and purpose, for we will help her as long as we have any life in
our bodies, following the thing that we receiving the order of knighthood are
bound unto, and if we chance to die there, it shall be unto us an immortal
glory to have so good occasion to fight and to overcome him^ that ought to be
a just defender of all Ladies: so that the thing that of many might be called
foolish hardiness, shall be as concerning us called virtue and magnanimity of
courage. Boldly let us therefore run in among them without ^eare of death,
or of any danger, having nothing before our eyes but honor. For in such
warlike acts, fortune her self will not be feared nor doubted: and if we be
victorious, in as much as they are more than we, our glory shall be the
greater, and our name the more spread abroad, taking upon us with so great an
heart and courage, a thing almost to man incredible.

Amadis heaviness for Oriane, because that without leave he was departed from
her company. In the.3. book the.5. Chapter.
AH, ah, poor unfortunate Amadis, is it possible, that thou can long endure
and continue in this torment^ Alas, if love hertofore have favored thee, it
makes and causes thee to pay the usury. Why do I say love? it is not love,
nor love is not the cause: but thy misfortune, the which envying thy
prosperity and great ease, has forged and builded a miscontentmente
against the King, utterly to destroy thee, causing thee for to leese the
sight of her, of whom does altogether depend thy ease and only repose and
rest, a thing which is more weighty she thee to hear than a thousand deaths
togither^ Nevertheless one would suffice me, if so much good luck could
chance unto me. Ha, ha, certesse I do great wrong to wish such things, seeing
that I am sure that Oriane should have too great displeasure. Wherefore then
should I desire her evil, considering that she never did me but that was good
and favorable? And if I suffer any heaviness, I am sure that she feels it as
my own soul.

The Oration of Bruneo to Amadis, praying him to give him leave to accompany
him. In the third book the.5. Chapter.
CErtesse my Lord, the young age, and little estimation wherein I have lived
hitherto among the good knights, do press and enforce me to forsake this
present life, and to take a more painful to come to their range and company.
Therefore I pray you most humbly, that if ye find your self disposed to go
and to search adventures, to suffer that I may accompany you, if not, to give
me leave, for I have pointed to depart tomorrow early in the morning.

Amadis answer to Bruneo, excusing himself, that he was constrained to leave
him. In the.3 book the.5. Chapter.
BY my faith my great friend, I have all my life time desired such company as
yours is, being well assured that there could not chance to me but all honor
and good fortune. But the kings purpose and communication that he of late has
had with me not as yet to depart from his country, does constrain me to leave
and forsake your company whereof I am sore displeased. Therefore I pray you to
have me excused, praying God that he will conducte yo^^

King Arauignes Oration to his Soldiers, inciting and provoking them to behave
themselves strongly in the battle. In the.3. book the.5. Chapter.
WHat need is it my Lords, greatly to exhort you to fight well and strongly,
seeing that you are here to do the same, and your selves the authors of this
war, in the which you have chosen me to be your head and principal co^ductor?
the which thing is the principal cause and reason, why that I shall show you
what me thinks and what my mind is, to the intent that after you have
perceived me, you may have before your eyes the cause why you are in so great
number of people gathered together. Certainly it is not to defend your
country, your liberty, your wives, your children, or your goods: But it is to
conquer and to bring under the yoke, a people the most proudest and fiercest
that is this day living, and the which esteem us (being far from them) as
nothing: yet that notwithstanding, I believe that they near at hand dare not
tarry for us, although that you see them march forwards furiously, but that
notwitstanding, if you behold well their countenance, it seems that it
should have more efficacy to move you, and to give an heart to fight well,
than all the words of any man living, yea, although you were in a manner
unprovided and ill appointed. But contrariwise, we are here the flower and the
strength of the most part of all the Ocean Isles, and in such a great number,
that in a manner it were sin to dout of our certain victori^. And more
certainly to assure us thereof, remembering that we are in a strange land, and
very far from our own, not among our good friends, but in the midst of al
those that desire our death, a thing that we can not avoid if we be once
broken: for they have many horsemen, by the which we shall be pursued, having
no manner of mean to retire to our ships. And therefore we must be resolved
either to win or to die: for the necessity wherein we be, is much more to be
feared than their force and might: therefore let every man do his duty, and I
hope or and before the night does divide us, we shall be masters and Lords of
all this country, and afterward redoubted and feared in all coasts of the
world.

King Lisuards Oration unto his Knights, aduertising them of his just
quarrel, and that they for this cause should manfully sustain his part. In
the selfsame book the.5. Chap.
MY friends, the right being on our side, God (the which is just, and in whose
hands are the victories) will if it please him, help us. And if they would
say that they make war upon me, to revenge those only that last invaded this
Realm with King Cildadan: be you assured that they may well find themselves
deceiued^ for knowing, and believing to revenge their injury (upon trust of
some power) their shame oftentimes grows and increases, and do end and
^inishe their days as I hope they shall unfortunately: for there are none of
you so young and unskillful to be in any such conflictes, that is not
experimented, and reputed by themselves a wise and a hardy Knight: They
ground their victories only upon the great number of people that they have in
their camp, people I may say gathered together, and of all nations, the most
part without order, and without obedience, the which seeing us to draw nigh,
shall be astonyed or ever we have abased our lau^ces, and if we may once set
them out of order and arraye^ we shall have even what we will. Let us then
boldly go on, and make them know, that they be not better men than their
companions, of whose burials and sepulchers, our land has been fatted and
dunged, and the Wolves three or four times with their carren carcases
repasted, when they were by your virtue and magnanimity destroyed in battle.

The exhortation of King Perion of France, to Amadis and Florestan his sons,
giving them courage to be strong against their misfortune. In the.3. book
and.6. Chap.
How now, be you astonyed so son^ of the deeds of fortune? are you yet to
learn her moueablenesse? by my ^aith I thought you more strong and cons^ant,
of one thing I pray you, not to give me more anoyance and heaviness than I
have: for your heaviness does cause such passions in my soul, as only are
sufficient to cause me to dye. Therefore quiet your selves, and let us hope in
God, the which is almighty, to draw us out of this place. We must commend
our selves unto him, and have our trust in him only: but who would ever have
thought that we should have fallen into such an accident or chance, by the
only persuasion of a simple Damsel, under ye color of fayning hirself dumb,
after yt we had escaped the dangers of so cruel a battle? Thus my children,
seeing that we can set no order, let us contemning all natural pity that y^e
may have of me, and I of you, take our fortune in good worth.

Amadis answer to Archalaus, the which demanded what he was. In the selfsame
Chapter.
BY my faith Lord Archalaus, when you shall know what we be, I am sure that
you will better entreat us, than we have been as yet: for you being a Knight as
we be, and that has often suffered the mischaunces and turns of fortune, as
we do, shall not find it evil, that we have helped our friends, as we would
do for you in like case: and if there be in us any noble acts, the same
should be a mean to cause you the better to recognize and know whither you
do us wrong or no.

The Oration of Arquisill a Knight of Rome to his companions, not to defer and
delay the Combat and fight accorded and appointed. In the.3. book the.7. Chap.
How now my Lords, shall you forget, and thus lose the reputation of our
Empire? Shall it be published that eleven Knights of Rome have been (through
fear of death) so slouthful, as not to be so hardy to fight with twelve gross
Almaines, inexpert in arms? by God, if I alone had enterprised and taken them
to task, I would not, to die a thousand deaths together defer it. And if you
fear and doubt of him that has destroyed Garadan, suffer me to fight with
him, and prepare your selves toward the other: for I ensure you, if our
hearts be good, we shall overcome them, and recover the thing that they think
to have received already by the mischaunce that happened to our companion, let
us therefore fight with them, and let us all die rather than to delay it,
considering that for us it is much better to choose such an honorable death,
than hereafter to live in perpetual shame, and in so unfortunate a life as
ours shall be. Therefore I pray you my Lords and friends ^o remember, that we
go fight not only to obtain land for the Emperor, or to entertain and keep
the promise that Garadan has made, but for the honor of all the Empire of
Rome: Finally, I have said and prayed you, to suffer me to fight with him that
had yesterday the victory of our companion^ I s^e him go first, and also he
shall be the first that (as I hope) shall be ouerthrown.

The Oration of the Knight of the green sword to King Tasinor, taking his
leave of him. In the.3. book the.7. Chap.
Sir, you are now thanks be to God, in peace, and rid of your businesses,
therefore if it shall please you to give me leave, I am purposed to depart to
morrow in the morning, and to follow my fortune, whither it shall seem and
please her to conducte and to guide me: assuring you sir, that whersoeuer I b^,
I shall remain and be your humble servant, as the goodness and honor that you
have done and showed me, ^oth ^ynde me.

Amadis sorrows seeing himself absent, and so far from his lover Oriane. In
the.3. book the.7. Chap.
ALas my lover, when shall I see the time, that I may yet have the good fortune
to hold you in my arms? Ah, ah, love, you have lifted me up to the greatest
honor and fortune wherein any faithful lover at any time may be. But what? In
as much as this my glory had none like it in favor, so much the more it is
turned concerning me, into tribulation and anoyance, feeling my self to be so
far from her that I most desire to see and to hold. And the thing that does
most torment me, is the fear least that my absence be the cause that she
forgette me, or that she besides me have a new love. After this, he suddenly
reprehended himself, and said: Alas, whereof should this foolish opinion come?
Ah, ah, my lover, I find you too steadfast and constant, and also I know well,
that I have faulted and sinned against you: for my pain and great fidelity
have so oftentimes given me good hope and assurance, that I am to blame to have
any doubt of you. Furthermore, as I know well, I never thought but to obey you,
and shall do all my life long, thus you shall have no occasion to will me evil,
nor to desire any vengeance upon me, if you think not to be offended that I
love you more fervently and constantly than any other could do. Yet I can not
tell whether love will punish me or no, because I have disdayned all other,
and given my self so much to you, and have evil entreated many, and
rigorously refused them. But I know well, that my thoughts be so familiar in
your heart, and your great beauty so caracted and printed in my soul, that I
must hold and believe for a troth, that with the time my pains shall be
quenched, either by my end, or by your accustomed faythfulnesse.

The little Oration of Amadis, being sore wounded by Andriague, the which does
turn him to God, to have pity upon him. In the.3. book the.10. Chap.
AH, ah, Lord God, that to redeem me tokest human flesh in the Uirgins
womb, and afterward iuduredst so grievous and so abominable a Passion, I
beseech thee to have pity on my soul, for I know well that my body is but
earth.

Amadis giving thanks to Master Elisabet, does thank him for his good
entreating. In the same Chapter.
AH my great friend said the Knight, I may well say, that next unto God you
are he to whom I am most bound, delivering me from the great danger that I was
in. Also I do assure you, that as long as I have a soul in my body, you shall
have a Knight of me ready to do for you, without reserving of any peril or
danger, considering that you have done so much for me (not knowing me but for a
simple Knight, nor having in all his goods but an ill, broken and an vnnailed
harneys) that there shall not be a day of all my life, that I shall not assay
to recognize it.

Master Elisabets answer to Amadis, excusing himself to ^^m of his
thankfulness. In the selfsame book the ^10. Chap.
MY Lord said Elisabet, you shall say what pleases you, but so much there is,
that I esteem my self more happy than other like unto me, in as much as I
have saved the life (next unto God) of the most gentle Knight, that ever did
bestride noble horse, the which thing I dare say openly, for I have seen you
take in hand, and make an end of things unto all men incredible. Likewise I am
well assured, that from henceforth many unto whom injury and wrong has been
done, shall be sustained by you, the which should otherwise remain without
any hope. And thus being the cause of such goodness, I shall hold and think me
better recompensed, than if I had all the treasure of the world together.

Amadis answer to the Emperor, the which would have retained him in his Court,
giving him thanks for the favor that he bare him. In the.3. book the.11.
Chapter.
Sir, said the Knight, you have already done me so great honor, that I believe
as long as I shall live, not to be in my power to do you service, that may merit
the least of the goodnesses I have received of you: yet I am so far from my
liberty, being submitted into the bondage of one alone, that I ca^ not nor will
not disobey him to please you withal, being sure that doing the contrary,
death shall not suffer me to be yours long, and shall deprive me for ever to be
his no more.

Amadis Oration to the Emperor, taking his leave of him. In the same Chapter.
Sir, you have done me so much honor and goodness, that every where I shall be
your servant, and ready at all times, and as often as it shall please you to
use me, to obey you. And for as much as I am appointed, following the thing that
I have promised, to be shortly in the Marches of Rome, I beseech you most
humbly to give me leave to depart.

The answer of the foresaid Emperor to Amadis, graciously giving him the
leave that he demanded. In the same Chap.
MY great friend (quoth he) if it were possible that you might soiourne here
any longer, you should do me great pleasure. But seeing that your words have
so bound you, God forbid that I should give any occasion to you or to any
other to falsify or to break it.

Grasinde speaking to Amadis, otherwise called the Knight of the green sword,
does praise him for keeping of his promise. In the same Chapter.
Believe Knight of ye green sword, that if I have had in time past good
estimation of you, that now I have much better, seeing that so faithfully you
have kept promise with me, being returned from your journey, or ever yt it be
past and ended: the which thing makes me believe, that you seeing you have not
fainted in that, will do likewise in this, that I have purposed to put you to,
ensuing the purpose that we had together a little before you took shipping to
go into Greece.

Amadis sorowing the absence of Oriane. In the.3. book the ^1. Chapter.
ALas my lover, the long absence of your person, has given me so great
passions and sorrows, that if it had not been for fear of the displeasure you
should have had for my death, I had been buried long since, and deprived of the
greatest goodness that could have cha^ced unto me, that is, to have the sight
of you. Ha, my eyes, are you not to blame thus to draw out (by force of
weeping) the little humor wherewith my heavy heart does nourish it self,
considering the returning to her, for whose service only, my spirit is content
to be resident and remain in this painful heart? also if you should have no
hope to see her again, yet you have had more goodness (through the favor
that she has showed you in times past) than ever you deserued^^ And
furthermore you may be assured, that the stablenesse of her is so constant,
that for any accident or chance that shall happen unto her, she feeling in her
heart my fidelity can not vary, and such, that I had a great deal rather die
a hundred thousand times, than to lose her good grace.

Gandalin goes about to turn his master Amadis from sorrow and heaviness,
wherein he saw him for his lover Oriane. In the.3. book the.12. Chapter.
YOu are (que Gandalin) a strange personage, thus to punish your self, when
you should comfort your self and take a good heart, considering that we be in
the way to return to my Lady Oriane, that causes all these sycknesses: and
as I think, you should do well, to draw you from those thoughts, that thus
do cause you to die. For it is hard, if ye fall not then into sickness, when
ye shall have most need of health: and so ye prepare a worse infirmity and
sickness than was before, of the which ye shall afterward repent you at
leisure.

The Oration of Grasinde to the knight of the green sword, to draw him to her
amity. In the.3. book the.12. Chapter.
Understand knight, that a year before ye entered into this country, I being
in a company that the Duke of Basle prepared and made in his own house,
whereunto all the fair ladies and damsels of the country were called and
inuite^: even as we were in the midst and force of our good theere, I cannot
tell what moved my brother the Marquis of Salander (whom ye know full well)
in whose guard and keeping I was then, when he said with a loud voice before
the assistance, that my beauty was so excellent, that no other of the company
ought in nothing to be compared to me, and if there were any knight, that would
hold and sustain the contrary, that he was ready to fight with him. Yet
either because he was ^eared and redoubted, or it may be that the opinion of
the assistence was such, no man would say against it. By the means whereof, I
bear the honor away above all the fair ladies of Rome, whereof I had such
pleasure and contentation, as ye may esteem: and if by your means I may go
further, and come to that that my heart has since desired^ I shall esteem my
self the most fortunates of all the world.

The lamentation of Bruneo of Good Mer, the which being in the pray and
custody of Amadis, fell into the hands I cannot tell of what trayters, the
which wounded him very sore. In the.3. book the.12. Chapter.
AHah caytife unfortunate Bruneo of Good Mer, now thou see well, that thou
must needs end thy days with affectionate desire, by the which thy faithful
heart has been so long afflicted. Alas Amadis of France, my good Lord, ye shall
never see your faithful companion Bruneo. For seeking you, as your well-beloved
sister Melicia commanded him, he is fallen into the hands of traitors, that
shall sley him, without having of aid or succoure of any of his friends. Ah,
ah fortune, the enemy of my good hour, thou have set me so far from all
remedy, that I have not the mean only to make any man to understand how to
revenge me, the which thing should be unto me such a comfort, that my spirit
with better will and contentation should depart out of this wretched and
miserable world. Alas Melicia the flower and glass of all the most perfectest
of the world, ye shall leese this day the most faythfullest servant, that ever
had Lady or Damsel: for he never thought in his life, but to obey, please and
to serve you. And by my soul, if ye consider it well, ye shall find (it may
be so) that this is an extreme loss for you, being assured, that ye shall
never recover any other that is so given unto you, as was your Bruneo, the
wyche does feel even now that the light of his life does go out, and his
afflic^ed heart to leese his strength, with the which (to remember you only) I
at other times have had means and ways to do many high acts of arms, and of
great cheualrie. Thus I recommend him unto you, desiring you to favor him, and
to entreat him, as one that never fauted in his faithfulness. Alas death that
take me away, thou do show thy self too sharp and too rigorous toward
me, causing me to lease all my goods, my pleasure and my joy: not that I will
expressly blame tha^, for depriving me of my life: but for that thou have not
s^ffered me or ever I died to accomplish the thing that Melicia had greatly
charged me withal, the which thing was, to ^ind her brother Amadis. Alas, this
was the first commandment that ever she made me, and shall be (as far as I
see) the last: whereby I feel my torment to double. For if I had had a mean
to have satisfied her, I would have thought my travel well bestowed. But what? my
lover, ye shall leese me or ever I have had ye power to recognize the graces and
the favors that ye have done for me and showed me^assuring you by my God, that
I would never have feared death, but well to have finished and ended my life,
loving you with great affection. But yet my evil hour has deprived me of so
great goodness, causing me to fall into the peril and danger wherein I am.

The same man (continuing his complaynt) does say. In the.3. book the.12
Chapter.
Ah my great friend Angriota of Estrauaux^ where are ye now, and how have ye
forsaken me, having so long time maintained this company together, and when
need is, ye leave me without any aid or succoure, not that I will blame you.
for I my self have been the cause to separate us this day to our great
misfortune, the which shall also separate us one from another for ever.

The Oration of Oriane to Florestan, declaring unto him, that the absence of
him and of Amadis has caused great harm to many damsels. In the.3 book
the.12^ Chapter.
IN good faith my Lord Florestan, it is long ago, since we saw you in this
country, whereof I greatly mused, as well for the good will that I do bear
you, as for the need that many poor creatures have suffered, the which were
wont to find and to have succor of you, of Am^dis, and of many other that
have followed him. Cursed be there that are cause of so long a separation. And
believe that I speak not this without great occasion, for I know a poor
Damsel that is very near to be dishorited, because she has not one to
defend the wrong that men have done her. And if Amadis were ^ere again, and
likewise the other which are far from hence, she might be sure that her
right should not as it is, be taken from him but seeing they be abse^t, she has
no better hope nor no other recourse but unto death.

Florestans answer to Oriane, certifying her that Amadis makes good cheer,
and that his name is daily diuulgate thorough his fortunable conquests. In
the.3. book the.14. Chapter.
MAdame, God that is merciful, does never forget those that put their trust in
him, and if it please him he shall not begin with the damsel that is so
desolate. As touching my Lord Amadis, be ye assured that he is in very good
health, searching continually strange adventures, and in such wise, that for
the great feats of arms that he does in far countries where he is, his
renoume does diuulgate it self in all the coasts of the world.

King Lisuards Oration to Galaor, concerning the marriage of Oriane and the
Emperor, desiring him to give his advise. In the.3. book the.14. Chapter.
MY great friend, I have always known so great fidelity in you, and have
found it so profitable, that I often times have believed your counsel, and am
purposed never to conclude any matter of importance without it. Ye know the
honor that the Emperor does me, and the embassade that he newly has sent
unto me, desiring me to give him my daughter Oriane to be his wife. And ye
shall believe me, I think that the Lord in this thing does much for her and
me: for he is at this present the most mighty and redoubted Prince of all
chi^tendome. And being thus well alyed with him, I from henceforth shall have
no neighbor, nor enemy that shall dare once lift up his horns to hurt or to
envy me, and I shall be more feared and obeyed, than ever was any king of
England. Furthermore, it shall be in a manner impossible to provide better for
her, than she shall be, being the wife of such an Emperor: and thus Leonor
shall remain after me sole Lady of my lands and countries, the which
otherwise might be divided and a thing very hurtful. But yet I am purposed to
do nothing without the advice of the Lords and knights of my Court, and
specially yours, the which I pray you (by the amity that ye have always borne
me) to tell me freely and frankly, and without any dissimulation.

The answer of Galaor to king Lisuard, the which does tend to dissuade and to
turn him, by the reasons that he brings in from the foresaid marriage. In
the.3. book the.14^ Chapter.
Sir, ye say, that marying my Lady Oriane to the Emperor, ye shall provide so
well for her, that it should be impossible to provide better. The which thing
seems to me clean contrary, for she being your principal heir, and to send
her into a far country to cause her to leese her realm, the which is hirs
already, ye shall make her poor, without men, and in subjection to a people
not agreing with the manners and conditions of this country. And if it seem to
you, that she to be the Emperors wife, and to bear the name of an Empress
shall be in more authority in time to come, by God Sir ye do abuse your self,
and here is the reason thereof. Suppose that it may chance her to have male
children by the Emperor her husband, if she remain widow, the first thing
that her son shall do unto her, shall be to cause her retire and to have the
rule of the Empire alone, and if he marry, it will be worse, for the new
princess will be inferior to none. And therefore it is most sure, that my Lady
your daughter shall fall into a thousand inconveniences and extreme sorrows,
having forsaken this country, (the which certainly is her native land) to live
in a strange country, from her parents, subjects and servants. And as
conce^ning ye say, that thorough his fame you shall be succored, feared, and
redoubted: truly sir, ye have (thanks be to God) so many friends and knights
at your commandment, that without the aid of the Romans, ye may easily if
ye think it good, extend your limits: and I believe that in the stead to have
any support, they shall rather assay to bring you to ruin, and to destroy you,
than (as ye esteem) to aid and succor you, for they will have no egal unto
them, nor none greater nor above them. And furthermore this is certain, that
they would demand nothing more, than to have an occasion to set you in their
Chronicles, to your confusion, and their glory, under the shadow of some little
favor that they have borne you, the which thing should be the greatest evil
that might happen to you and yours. And also Sir, what reason should it be, to
put my Lady Oriane your daughter and principal inheriter so far from you, to
advantage so much the princess Leonor, the which is the younger: by my soul,
for a righteous king, and that is taken throughout all the world for an author
of justice, ye shall make peradventure the greatest wound in your renoume yt
ever did prince or mighty king. And God never give not only to you the will,
so far out of reason, but also to the poorest knight of your court,
beseeching you sir most humbly, to believe, that I would not have bin so
foolish hardy to declare unto you so freely the thing that I thought good, if
ye had not expressly commanded me: and also because I am minded and appointed
to keep unto you (all my life) the fidelity that I have promised, as he that
does feel him bound unto you, for the goodness and favor that ye have done
for me.

Oriane complaining to Florestan, that her father would marie her to the
Emperor against her will, prays him to speak to her father. In the.3.
book the.14. Chapter.
ANd believe (said she) that if he continus in his opinion, that the first
news that he shall have after my departure of me, the same shall be of my
death: for what soever shall chance, if he separate me from this country, the
Sea and death shall separate me also, being well minded to end my misfortunes
by the impetousitie and furiousness of the waves, the which shall be witnesses
for ever of my dolours, as they, of the which I hope to find more pity, than
in my own father, parents, country, friends, and servants. And therefore my
Lord Florestan. I pray you in the name of God, to prepare your self to
dissuade him of his fantasy, or else by my faith, this thing shall be unto him
a great charge in conscience, and to me the most strange misfortune into the
which any poor damsel disherited and forsaken of God and man might fall.

Florestans answer to Oriane, excusing himself to her, that he dare not speak
to her father for her, and that he will cause him to be spoken to by other. In
the.3. book the.14. Chapter.
MAdame, ye shall do me great injury, if ye have me not in that estimation,
that I am entirely yours, and ready to obey and to serve you until death: but
to speak to the king your father, as ye pray me, is impossible for me to do:
for ye know the enmity that he bears me, in despite of my Lord Amadis,
forgetting all the great services that he, and all they of his lineage have done
him in times past, and if he have received any by me, he ought not to thank
me, seeing that I did it not for his love, but by his commandment that has
all power upon me, and unto whom I may not, nor I ought not to say against:
the which was the cause that I of late was in the war of the seven knights,
not to aid those of England, but only to conserve and keep the right that ye
have there, as she y^ one day shall be, if it please God, Lady ^ Queen. And as
concerning the rest, I will obey you, and shall cause king Perin to understand ye
thing that ye have told me and other my friends, to assay and to find remedy
in your affairs, and I trust they will in such sort provide for you, that ye
shall have an occasion to content you, assuring you, that I will tarry in no
place, til that I be in the enclosed I Will, where I shall find the Prince
Agraies, the which has (as ye know) a great desire to do you service, and also
for the love of Mabile his sister. There we shall advise us together of the
thing that we must take upon us, without sparing of any thing that is in our
puissance and power.

The Oration of the Earl Argamo^t to king Lisuard, touching the marriage of
Oriane, tending to turn him from the marying of her to the Emperor. In the.3
book the.15. Chapter.
MY Lord, seeing it pleases you, that I speak before this company the thing
that I think of the Emperoures marriage with my Lady Oriane your daughter, I
beseech you most humbly to receive of me the thing that ye shall understand in
good part: for it is no less treason to dissemble good counsel toward his
Prince, than to offend him in his proper person: therefore believe that I
without dissimulation shall tell you mine advice, notwithstanding that often
enough I have particularly declared it unto you. Sir ye know that my Lady
Oriane your eldest daughter ought to succeed you, and to be by reason
inheriter of the lands that God and fortune has given and committed to your
custody, unto the which by right of nature she has more just title, than ye
ever had, for they fell unto you only by the death of king Fala^g^is, the which
was but your brother, and she is your own daughter, and the eldest. Therefore
consider with your self, that if he had done on your part as ye apoint to do
to my Lady Oriane, ye had not been now so great and so mighty a Lord as ye
are. Wherefore will ye chase her away, to call my niece Leonor into her place,
considering that (as I believe) she never offended you? And if it seem unto
you, ye marying her to the Emperor Patin, ye shall make her a great Princess,
and very well to provide for her: truly sir, you are far from your account, for
you know yt having children together, if she outliue ye Emperor, she shall
remain but ye simple dowager of Rome, in place to be after you Lady and Queen
of this Realm: and furthermore, do you esteem that your subjects will hardly
consent there to: by my soul I think, that if they said yea, that it should
be perforce and against their wills, and therefore so shall it not please God, I
say no otherwise unto you than my conscience does urge me, being yet assured,
that for any thing that may be persuaded you, you will give no place but to
your own fantasy. Thus I beseech you most humbly to pardon me, considering
that I would never have spoken so far, without the express commandment
that you have given me.

Grasindes letter to King Lisuard, declaring his greatness unto him, and
praying him to give her and the Knight of Greece, a salfe conduct to come in
safety unto him. In the.3. book the.15. Chapter.
RIght high and magnificent Prince, I Grasinde fair above all other fair
Ladies of Rome, give you to wit, that I am only aryued into your country, in
the guarde and custody of the Knight of Greece, expressly for this cause, that
as I have been judged and taken for the fairest woman of all those of Rome, and
following this glory, the which has so contented my heart, that when I am so
esteemed above all the maidens of your Court, then shall my spirit remain as
satisfied of that, that it desires more than any other thing: And if there be
any Knight that for the love of any one particularly, or for all together will
say the contrary, that he take deliberation of two things. The first to fight
with the Knight of Greece, and the other that he may have of the damsel such a
Coronet as I wear, so that the victor in a sign of a triumph of the
victory, may make a present to her, for whom he has fought. And if it
please you sir to grant me the thing that I desire of you, you shall send to
me by this Damsel and to all my company, but especially to the knight of
Greece a safe conducte, that he receive no outrageousnesse nor injury, if it
be not of those against whom he shall fight, and if he overcome the first, let
the second, the third, and the fourth come, and all they that will prove him
one after an other.

The Oration of the Earl Argamont to King Lisuarde, declaring the misfortune
that shall chance unto him and to my Lady Oriane, if he marry her to the
Emperor. In the.3. book the.15. Chapter.
Sir, have you not marked the glory of these Romans, the which irreverently
have been bold before you to do injury to the Knights of your Court? what may
they do in other places think you? by God, seeing that they had so little
discretion, I fear greatly that they will lightly esteem my Ladi^ Oriane,
incontinently after that you have lost the sight of her. And that
notwithstanding you have already (as I have understood) accorded and agreed
unto them, I can not perceive whereof this your fantasy does proceed,
considering that never Prince so sage and wise, did ever forget himself so
far. And it seems that you have a certain envy and will to injury and
provoke fortune against you, and to unbind misfortune that has been so long
bound at your gate: have you forgotten the graces that the Lord has done for
you? do you not fear at al his fury? is not fortune mutable? are you to know
and to learn that she when she is envied and weary to do him good who^ she
has lifted up, does not afterward chasten him with rods, but with cruel and
diverse torments a hundred times worsse than death? Pardon me sir: for the faith
and fidelity that I bear you, does bolden me to say thus unto you: for you
know how that these worldly things are transitory and perilous, and that
the glory and renoume that men get by long travel in this life, is oftentimes
put out and buried through little and light occasion, if fortune do disfauor the
person, so that if there rest any help in ye place of praise, he shall be blamed
only, that could not entertain and keep the good fortune wherein he was
before. Therefore sir, think (I pray you) upon the fault that you did not long
since, putting far from you so many good Knights, as Amadis, his brothers,
parents, and friends, by the which you were feared, honored, and redoubted
throughout all the world: and not being yet out of this evil, you will enter
into a worsse, the which thing makes me believe that God has forgotten you,
because you first forgatte him: for if it were otherwise, you would take their
counsel that have a desire to serve you faithfully. But seeing that I see, I am
content to discharge me of my fidelity and homage that I owe you. And return
to my country, to avoid the sight (if it be possible) of the just complaints
and strange tears, that my Lady Oriane shall make when you (as you have
promised) do deliver her. And to do this you have already sent to seek
Mires^^ur, the which has constrained me to tell you the thing that you have
heard and understood already.

Amadis Oration to the Earl Argamont, showing him that for his love he will
save the life of a Roman whom^ he has overcome. In the.3. book the.16.
Chapter.
FOr the honor of the good King and you, I will save for this time, the life of
this presumptuous Roman, yet if any other of his companions fall in like
danger, they may be sure yt they shall pay the amends for him: for I never heard
speak of so extreme glory as of theirs, by the which they make a matter and a
custom to dispraise one Knight, to advance themselves: And furthermore I pray
you to say unto your King, that for the goodness that I have perceived in him,
I never had will to disturb him, nor to do any thing wherewith he should be
displeased: but I pray him that he will suffer me, if any other present
himself to fight, to follow my victory, that hereafter they be not so
prompte to speak and to say evil, following the fashion of their Emperor
Patins doings, the which is accustomed daily to threaten, and most commonly to
be beaten.

O^ians complaint to King L^suard her father, assuring him that if he marry
her to the Emperor, she shall sone die. In the.3. book and.17. Chapter.
ALas my Lord, behold in pity for the honor of God, your daughter so greatly
desolate, and be no less favorable unto her, than you have been all your life
time to the most simple Damsels, that asked and desired your help. Ah, ah, my
Lord, when Archalaus led you away as a prisoner, that wa^ under the title of
your great goodness, to go and to help her, that had required you. And is it
possible now, that forgetting that virtue, that has been always familiar with
you, you will do worsse to me than ever you did to any other living? I have
learned that you will send me to the Emperor of Rome to be his wife, but if
you constrain me to that, you shall sin too greatly, for that shall be
against my will, and I am determined that death shall sooner take me.

Oriane does yet complain of her fathers cruelnesse, to marry her to a person
whom she knows not. In the.3. book the.17. Chapter.
Sir (quoth she) or ever you send me far from you, I pray you advise your
self of the evil that shall follow, for Rome shall never see me, yea the Sea
shall never deliver me from this pain, so shall you be the cause of two
euilles together: The first of the disobedience that I shall commit against you,
and the other of the homicide that your daughter shall do on her own person.
And believing by this means to make aliance and amity with the Emperor,
(esteeming me thus destroyed for the dispite of him) he shall have just
occasion to will you evil, and not he only, but all they that in time to come
shall hear it spoken, and so, whereas you are renoumed throughout all the
world to be a Prince benign and merciful, ye shall be called vnpitifull, and
more cruel than any other may be: pardon me sir, the heaviness that presses
me, does constrayne me to say all that I think: and if ye see that I speak
unto you to irreuerently, take of my indiscretion what vengeance it shall
please you: for ye cannot give me so great pain and torment as that is, the
which I see is prepared for me, depriving me of your presence.

The Earl of Argamont, Oration to king Lisuard, intending (as before) to turn
him from the foresaid marriage. In the 3. book the.17. Chapter.
MY Lord, I would hold my self but too fortunate, if I had not an occasion to
tell you that reason does bind me, knowing you to be a wise and a virtuous
Prince, easily to discern the good with the evil: nevertheless, the sorrow
that my Lady your daughter has made vnt^ me not long since, has constrained
me to put you in remembrance of the thing that I at other times have told you
of her, and I pray you as much as I may possible (or ever she depart far from
you) to think ripely and without affection upon it. For notwithstanding, a
wise man does not commonly make a fault governing himself by reason, yet when
he presumes so much of himself, that he will have no counsel but of his own
head, he falls often in more danger than does the less advised, the
experience whereof has been seen at other times in many Princes. My Lord, you
see the extremity in the which my Lady Oriane is, and if you think well
upon it, you shall easily judge the inconvenience that may fall to her person
through too great desperation, whereof within a while after you shall be sorry
all the days of your life. And besides all this, you may be blamed, not only
of strangers, but of your own subjects, and hereafter be odious unto them,
whereof of there may come and arise many chauces and misfortunes. Therefore
believe their counsel, that desire your profit and the honor of your Realm,
for so doing, you can not chance amiss: and although it should chance
otherwise, yet you should be excused, and they bound to find remedy. And
furthermore you know well, that the fault which is done by counsel, can not be
otherwise named, but a fault wisely made. See now my Lord why and wherefore I
desired you very humbly, (using fatherly pity) to con^ent these Ambassadors
by some other mean, than with the price of your daughters blood.

The Oration of the Damsel Grasinde to King Lisuard, declaring unto him the
cruelty that he bears unto his daughter Oriane, and the damsels of his
Court, minding to marry her to the Emperor. In the.3. book the.17. Chapter.
Sir, hitherto you have been taken for the most esteemed Prince of all
Christendom, a lover of honor, and of all virtue, and above, a all protector
of Ladies and Damsels, doing and showing them so great goodness and graces,
that they have had great occasion to praise you more than any other that
lives: and now losing their hope that they had in you, they see themselves
rejected from your great goodness, knowing how you entreat my Lady Oriane
your daughter, disinheriting her of the goods, that of right after you should
pertain unto her: whereof they marvel greatly, considering how it has been
possible that your benign nature might so lightly be turned into so great
cruelty, as that now they never hope to have any thing of you, that shall be
to their advantage and comfort, using such manner of fashions and doings toward
her, unto whom pity and fatherly love, besides the title and the name of a
King, whereby you ought to be a mayntainer of right (doing justice to each
one) has bound you. And believe me sir, that it may happen worsse unto you, as
well for the il ensample that you give the people, as for the abundance of
weepings and hard lamentations of my Lady Oriane, the which are before God,
requiring vengeance, and so that if you take not heed, the end of your reign
shall not ensue and follow the beginning thereof, in the which you have prospered
as much, as any other King or Prince that we know. Sir, I will say no more
unto you, for I will go after these two Knights that have tarried very long for
me.

Amadis Oration to those of the closed Isle, showing them the great wrong that
King Lisuarde did to his daughter, willing to marry her against her will, with
other Princesses and Ladies of his country, provoking them to revenge this
wrong and injury. In the.3. book the.17 Chap.
AS far forth as I see, the things are much changed in England, since we
went and departed from thence, and the King has an other manner of
fantasie-than he had in times past: for I have seen him more prompt and ready
to help and to succor Ladies, tha^ to his own affairs: And I now be marvel
what moves him, thus so fare with my Lady Oriane, seeing there was never
child more obedient to father as she continually has showed her self. And now
as Angriot and Brun^o do recite and show, he has against her will, and all the
Knights of England, joined her to him whom in all the world she hates above
all other, whereof I have such pity, that if you will believe me, and help, we
shall succor and aid her, and set her at liberty. But I will take nothing in
hand without you al: ye ought to remember the oath that Queen Brisina caused
you to make in the City of London. We all did swear not to suffer any wrong
at any time to be done to any Lady or Damsel that required us: now then
shall we suffer her to be thus ill entreated and captive, of whom at other
times we have received so great honor and favor? Shall the Damselles of her
company be taken perforce, and banished for evermore out of their own
country? by my God, if we should suffer it, we were worthy to receive blame,
without having of any mean or excuse to save us, and we shall fall in the
reputation of the increased number of the Knights unfortunate. Therefore
advise you together what you will that shall be done, for as touching me, I am
well purposed to defer and leave off a voyage that I had taken in hand, as I
have by Gidalin certified and told not long since my cousin Agraies, Florestan
and other. And with these ships that I have found in this Haue^, to prepare
me to break the enterprise of king Lisuard, and to save these poor Damsels,
among whom I know not a more sorrowful, except my Lady Oriane, tha^ Olinda,
whom the King (using his new cruelnesse) will marry with all constraint and
violence to Salust Quide, the which has demanded and required her. But I
would feign know by what authority he will now thus entreat those which are
not his subjects, nor of his countries: specially my cousin Mabile, whom the
King her father sent into England, not to be confederate at Rome, but only to
dwell with the Queen, and to keep Oriane company, the which loved her so, as
two young Princesses might bear familiar amity together: and I marvel that
all his country be not already revolted and turned against him, or at the
least wise, that no knight has set him self forth by arms to say against and
to resist this his foolish fa^tasie: but there is none as yet that has
prepared to do it. Therefore my friends I pray you al, that following the
ancient custom, which has been diligently observed among the wandering
Knights, to take heed that no man do them so great wrong, nor entreat them
so evil. Doing this, we shall get honor and praise more than ever we gat
before, without the which, in what sort soever it be, we may be blamed. Tell me
therefore what you think herein, that we following the conclusion which we shall
take, may set an order to execute the same.

Agraies Oration to his companions, wherewith he exhorts them to cleave to
Amadis mind and conclusion. In the.3. b. 17. cha.
I Cannot tell who he should be that would slack so gentle an enterprise,
seeing that or ever ye my Lord and cousin arrived and came hither, we were
gathered together in this place to provide for the same, and now that we find
you so conformable to our wills, I am sure that there is none of us that
thinks any other thing, but that fortune does call us to perform it and end
it, promising us certain victory, being pensife and sorry, for the favor that
she has borne thus long to king Lisuard, the which at this present in no wise
does know himself: and that it is so, what has he to do to send my sister
against her will into a strange country? has the king my father given her
unto him, to do his pleasure with her? ye know that a little after our
departing out of England, I sent to the Queen for her, but she refused me
that, sending me word by Gandales, that she would see her entreated and
nourished as her proper person: Is this the good entreating that she has kept
for her, at the last to destroy her? has Mabile no another place to convey her
self unto, but to the Emperors house? Is not the Realm of Scotland rich
enough to nourish and to bring her up? by God, this manner of doing of king
Lisuard is so vnfortunable and so far out of reason, that I had rather die a
hundredth fold (if it were possible) than not to be revenged: and already I have
sent to my father to provide therefore. In the mean while I pray you all my
Lords to aid me, and you specially whom this injury does touch in a manner
as well as me, being done, not only to my sister your cousin, and nigh parente,
but to Olinda and other, of whom following the thing that we have promised and
sworn (as my Lord Amadis has said) we ought to be the protectors and
defenders.

The Oration of Grasind to those of the enclosed I Will, praising their enterprise
going to succoure Oriane and her damsels. In the.3. book and.17. Chapter.
BY my God, your enterprise is high, and worthy of very great laud and
praise, considering that besides the good that ye do to them that ye go to help
and succcoure, ye shall ensue and follow the other good knights (the which are
of this country or strangers) so that from henceforth men shall not suffer
following you, that any man should do wrong to any Lady or to any other damsel.
And therefore ye shall so indet them, that both they and these that be, and that
shall come a hundred years and mo hereafter, shall thank you.

King Lisuards Oration to my Lady Oriane his daughter, exhorting her to allow
the marriage to be good, that he has undertaken to make of her with the
Emperor. In the 3. book the.18. Chapter.
MY well-beloved, ye have always showed your self obedient to my will, without
any contradiction, and will ye not continue still, as reason wills you? ye
melancoly your self (as far forth as I see) for the marriage that I have
found out for you, whereof I do greatly marvel. Esteem you that I would once
think to do any thing that should not turn to your honor and profit?
Think you that I am of so evil a nature toward you? I swear unto you by my
faith, that the amity that I bear you, is so certain and sure, that I have no
less heaviness for your departing from hence, than ^e have. But ye know that
it should be impossible to provide for you so well as unto my self: Therefore I
pray you, using your accustomable wisdom, to make better cheer, and to
rejoice your self of the goodness that is chanced unto, being the wife of the
greatest prince of all the world. And if ye do that ye shall (besides that ye
shall be esteemed) receive and comfort your father, the which is as heavy of
your anoyance, as nothing more.

The answer of Oriane to king Lisuard her father, declaring unto him the great
wrong that he does her, to marry her against her will. In the.3. book the.17.
Chapter.
MY Lord, ye have the^ as far forth as I see, resolved the marriage of me and
the Emperor: It may be that ye have made one of the greatest faults, that any
Prince can do: for first of all I will never love the husband that ye give me,
and I am well assured and certain (as I have declared unto you not long since)
that Rome shall never see me, willing rather to fall into the mercy of fishes,
than to dwell in a place whereunto I have no desire or affection. Now I cannot
think what has induced you; or persuaded you to do this, but the love that ye
bear to my sister, and the desire that ye have to leave her your sole heir,
and me, the most miserable damsel of all the world, but God that is just will
not suffer that your intention so unreasonable shall come to effect, but rather
shall send death unto me, if it so please him.

Amadis Oration to his companions, admonishing them to take good courage to
succoure in so great need, so many noble damsels. In the self same Chapter.
MY companions and friends, were it not for the assurance that I have of the
virtue and magnanimity that is in you all, I without doubt would refrain to
put in adventure the battle that we see is ready, if we would take it in
hand. But yet I knowing you to be such as ye are indeed and also the just
occasion for the which we are entered and have taken the sea, I think that we
should not delay it, but to cast away all fear, to deliver from captivity so
many desolate damsels, the which call unto us to succoure and to help them, by
the only obligation and band that we have to defend their liberty. Therefore I
beseech you let us so lively set upon these ships, and in such sort, y^
setting these ladies out of danger, their co^ductors shall never bring news to
their Emperor.

The complainte of Queen Sardamire, for the Prince Salust Quide, complaining
of the euilles and miseries that were to come. In the.4. book the.1. Chapter.
ALas, fortune does now show that she will go not only to the ruin and
destruction of us miserable captives, but of the Emperor, and of al his
Empire. Ah, ah, poor prince, evil luck has meetely well runned upon thee:
Alas, what loss, and what heaviness shall they have for ever, that loved
thee, when they shall know thy sodein end: I cannot tell how thy master may
support it and bear it: but I believe that he shall not so soon hear the
news, but that he shall die through great anger (having a good cause) for the
loss at once of so many great vessels, and good men: and specially for you my
Lady (que she to Oriane) whom he desired much more, than any thing of this
world, and for whom from henceforth shall be moved so strange wars, that
needs it must be for many good knights most cruelly to finish and to end
their days, the which thing cannot be slacked, if thou Emperor to much hated
of good fortune, do not show thy self ye most faintharted Prince that ever
was borne of mother.

An exhortation of Mabile to Queen Sardamire, to dispose her to learn
patience in her adversity, nor to be astonished at fortunes inconstancy. In
the.4. book the.1. Chapter.
IN good faith my Lady, it becomes (as I esteem) a princess so wise, as ye
have been always reputed, to fall into such extremity: for the virtue of a
wise person cannot be known, but when tribulation comes sodeinly upon him.
And further more, you that do bear the title of a Queen, ought by good
reason to be more constant than a simple damsel should be, or any other person
unworthy of the place and kingdom that ye possess. Do ye not know that
fortune is mutable, and that she will take away her favor from whom it pleases
her, and call it again when it seems good unto her? So then, seeing that the
Emperoures army is defeated, and your self at this time to be in the hands
of the knights of the enclosed Island, it follows well, that ye should take
this chance patiently, and bear it wisely, when that ye cannot amend it: be
you also assured that ye are in the power of those, that shall do you all the
honor, service, and good entreating that they may devise. And if the Prince
Salust be dead, what remedy? ye cannot call him again with your weeping,
these be the common turns and chances of war, to those that seek the^. And
therefore madame, if it so please you, be no more heavy, but using your
accustomed prudencie and wisdom, take the things so, as they may chance and
come.

Queen Sardamires answer to Mabile, declaring unto her, that ^he has a just
occasion to be heavy, for the inconvenience that she is fallen in, and that it
may please her to consent and to bear with her in her affection. The.4. book
the.1. Chapter.
ALas (quoth she) it is e^sy to him that is in joy, to comfort (as ye do) the
person that is overwhelmed with displeasure. Nevertheless if ye self the
heaviness that presses me, ye would peradventure lament me more than ye do:
yet I know that ye say the truth, and that it is impossible for me, so at this
time to command and to rule my self, to believe your counsel. Therefore I
pray you for the honor of God, that excusing my imperfections, ye will aid me
your self, and all these other Ladies also, to lament my evil hour and
mischaunce irrecuparable.

The replicatio^ of Mabile to Queen Sardamire, declaring unto her, that to be
heavy for the thing that is happened, is not the mean to help it. In the.4.
book the.1. Chapter.
MAdame (said Mabile) if ye for our heaviness of the thing that ye pray us
for, might be the better, I swear unto you by my faith, that there is not she
in this company (as I think) but would with good heart employ her self: but
ye know that when the thing is d^ne, the counsel is taken: thus ye may know,
that of necessity ye must make an end of your wepings, be it with the time,
or rather by your prudencie and wisdom.

Amadis Oration to his companions, declaring unto them the thing that he had
understood by Oriane, which tendth to this, that king Lisuard had changed the
mind which he had to marry her to the Emperor, furthermore praying him to
prepare him self to succoure her in her great trouble. In the.4. book the.3.
Chapter.
MY Lords, yesterday my Lady Oriane sent unto me, praying me that we should
find some means to restore her to the good grace and favor of the king her
father, and to deliver him (if it were possible) of the fantasy that he has
to marry her to the prince of the world, to whom she bears little amity or
love: for otherwise death shall be to her more agreeable. And therefore I
thought it good (after that I had spoken with some of this compan^
particularly) to understand generally of you al, what ye think: for seeing
that we have been companions to set her at liberty, it is very reasonable we
should be to maintein her: but first or ever we enter any further into this
matter, I pray you to have before your eyes, that even now your renoume is so
known thoroughout all the world, because of the high chiualries that ye have
done, that there is this day no King, Prince, nor Knight, of whom ye are not
fear^d and redouted, knowing that to obtain laud and praise immortal, ye
have not only little regarded the great riches and good entreating that ye
might have had in your own houses, but also the blood of your proper and own
hearts, the which ye have not spared to cause the most hardy and bold to feel
ye edge of your sword, to the great danger of your persons. Whereof the wounds
that ye have in diverse parts (the marks and witnesses of your noble acts) may
give such faith and testimony, that fortune hirselfe is bound unto you:
whereof she willing to recompense you, has put into your hands and g^uen you
this glorious victory that we have had over the two greatest Princes of
christendom. Not that I will speak of the destruction of their people only,
being of little merit toward us, but for the succor that ye have showed to
the most wise, gentle and virtuous Lady of the earth, the which was at the
point (most wrongfully) to suffer a worse entreatment, than may be thought. And
thus ye have done right great and agreeable service unto God, executing the
thing, to the which ye ar^ expressly called, that is, to suc^oure and to help
the afflicted from wrongs that men without reason cause them to suffer. And if
the Emperor and king Lisuard, if it so like them, will be angry and wroth,
seeing that the right is ours, God y^ which is just, will be with us also: and
in such sort, that if they of themselves know not what is reason, and believe
by their power to overcome our force and strength, I promise my self and hope
well, that we may so resist the^, that as long as ye world shall be a world and
continue, there shall be a memory and a remembrance thereof. Therefore advise
every one of you, what he shall ^hinke best to be done, either to make an end
of the war that is begone, or to make a mean for peace, delivering my Lady
Oriane to the king her father, even as she desires: for as concerning me, ye
shall understand, that I will no another thing, but that which shall please you,
nor my fantasy in this ^hal be no another than yours, knowing you to be such,
and your virtue to be so great, that to die for it, ye would not go from ye
magnanimity of your corages, nor suffer ye thing whereby our honor (be it never
so little) should be abased or diminished.

The Oration of Quedragant to Amadis answering that he foresaid, in the which
he declares that upon ^ust occasion they enterprised against the Emperor,
and that it is needful in all sweetness to advertise king Lisuard, least he
should be miscontent. In the.4. book the.3. Chapter.
MY Lord Amadis, it is very certain, that the enterprise that has bin made
upon the Emperor was not for any enmity that we bare him: but only to keep
our faith, as al good knights should, to sustain and defend the wrongfully
afflicted, and specally all good Ladies, of the which all we should be
protectors. And therefore I am thus minded, first or ever we begin this war,
that we send to king Lisuard and to cause him to understand the occasion that
moved us to assayl^ and invade the Romans, and as quietly as may be, if he be
miscontent, to pacify him: declaring unto him with all graciousnesse, the
injury and wrong that he did to my Lady his daughter, disheriting her under
the color to marry her with a strange Prince, the which thing is not
agreeable unto God, nor to none of his subjects, and therefore if it be his good
pleasure, to receive her to his grace and favor, and to forget ye envy (if he
hear her any) offering under this condition to restore her unto him, and no
otherwise. And if he refuse it, and disdain the duty that we put our selves
in, that then we declare resolutely unto him, that we doubt him not, and that
we if he make war upon us, be ready to defend us. In the mean while, it is
necessary that we fortify us with all things tha^ are requisite ^o a thing of
such importance as this is: at least way if he purpose to invade us, that he
find us not unprovided: although he will be (as my mind gives me) more ready
to peace, than to any other thing: but yet that should not cause us t^ be
slack to make us ready, and to send to our friends and alies to pray them to
aid us when we shall send them word.

The Oration of Oriane to Agrayes, thanking him for his benefits, and praying
him to labor for peace between king Lisuard and Amadis. In the.4. book the.3.
Chapter.
MY cousin, notwithstanding I have great hope in the wisdom of your cousin
Amadis, and in the good will that these knights bear me, so me thinks that
I have good reason and cause, to have in you a special fid^litie, as well for
the obligation, in the which I find my self bound to the king your father,
and also to the Queen for the good entreating that they made me in Scotland,
as for that they delivered me your sister Mabile to keep me company, by whom
only next unto God, I do live: for why, without the comfort that she
oftentimes made and gave me when my misfortunes were most grievous, I had been
buried long since, and deprived of this world. And although that at this
present I have not the mean to recognize another to them, nor to you, how much
I am bound to you, yet I hope with the time by all means to endeuer me
thereto: And in the mean while ye shall not (if it please you) he miscontent,
that I familiarly do cause you to perceive the greeues that I suffer. And to
begin, I pray you, that ye (leaving) off the wrong that my father has done
you) will to your power make means to have peace between my cousin and him:
for I doubt not (seeing the ancient and old hatred that they have together, and
the occasion that ye all have to will him little favor) but that full honestly
the things begone shall come to no other end, than to a great ruin of the one
part and other, if it be not through the resistance that ye may do, using in
this thing your wisdom and good counsel. Of the which thing I pray you
again, as well to avoid such inconvenience, as not to make me suspect to
strange nations, the which may hereafter doubt of my innocence, and bespot
my good renoume, the which is to me of such consequence, as ye may judge and
esteem.

Agrayes answer to Oriane, excusing him self unto her, and promising her to
satisfye her mind as much as he may posssible, and to find peace in time
oportune. In the.4. book the.3. Chapter.
MAdame (quoth he) as touching the good entreating that ye received and had in
Scotland, the king my father, and the Queen in that did nothing but that it
beco^med the^ to do: and I am sure that they have you in such affection and
love, that in things whereunto their power may extend, they will empl^y it and
do it for you, as for their best parent and ^^ie. And considering that you do
say of my sister and me, the effect shall daily bear witness of our good will
that we hear you, beseeching you to believe, that you may commau^d us, as
those the which desire your wealth and honor, as much as their own. And as
touching that you have to cause me to forget ye injury that the King your
father has dnoe to me, and not only to me alone, but to all my parents and
friends, he you assured Madame, that the wound is so great, that it will
bleed as long as I shall live, knowing the ingratitude that he has used
toward us, denying my Lord Amadis, me, and many other good Knights, the
request that we made unto him, to give my uncle Galuanes the Isle of Mongase,
the which had deserved it and better: considering also that it was conquered by
the virtue and noble acts of him, that prayed him: but yet for the honor of
you, I am content to diss^^ble yt matter, and to force my self until then to
defer for a time, the just occasion that I have to will him ill, specially
because he so straungely, and after he had received of us so many great
services, chased us from his Court, as though we had been his mortal enemies.
And to show you that I will wholly prepare me to please you, I promise you
Madame, to assay to do to my power, the thing that you desire of me: but it
were not reasonable that it should be done so promptly, for if I should now
begin in the word and communication, the things being thus disposed to war
in place to encourage so many good Knights as be in this Isle, I should put
the most part of them, (hearing me speak of peace) in fear, presuming that I
(it might be so) held such a purpose, as though I were the first that were
afearde. Also I should do two evils together, yt which after this might turn
to the loss of us all, and to me alone great dishonor. But I having your
fathers answer, shall pray my companions to do as ye have devised and
counseled: in the mean while, you should (as I do think) be heavy as little
as you may, and take the time and fortune most patiently, and as constantly as
you may possible.

Amadis Oration to Grasinda, offering her all pleasure and good will. In the.4
book the.4. Chap.
MAdame, I am maruellously displeasant, that I had no better opportunity to do
you in this place the honor and the service, that you merit and deserve: but
the time so evil to that purpose, does take away the occasion, therefore I
excusing my self, do pray you not to take or impute a fault of a good will.
For in times past you have bound me unto you, that there shall be no day of
all my life, but I shall feel me your debtor, what service soever I may do
for you. And because it is now long ago since you did depart from your
country, it may be that the long abiding here in this country has wrought
you some displeasure, I would therefore very greatly desire to know your
deliberation and mind, that I might (if it were possible) have some mean to
obey you in the thing that should please you to command me.

The answer of Grasinda to Amadis, thanking him for his good will and
affection that he bears her, and that she will gather men to succor him in
his affairs. In the.4. book the 4. Chapter.
MY Lord Amadis (quoth she) I should be of a poor and of a very slender
judgment, if I knew not certainly the company and favor that you did show
me, and that greater honor than could have chanced unto me. And the good
entreating that you had (as you say) in my country (if any such was showed
you) is now but recompensed: but to put you out of pain, I will show you
what I think: I see many good Knights assembled for to help this Princess,
the which altogether for the amity and good estimation that they bear you,
have put their hope and conduct upon you, ^o that it shall be impossible for
you to put them from you without your great blame. And seeing that such a
charge is wholly set and laid upon you, ye must travel to send on every side
to recover people to help you, so that the honor of so great an enterprise
may remain with you, and by the means and help of your friends be yours, of
the which I esteem my self the first. And for this cause, I intend to morrow
to send master Elizabet into the parts of Rome, to gather as many men as he
can, as well of my own subjects as other, and as shortly as he may to ship
them, and to co^uey them hither. And in the mean time I shall keep company (if
it so please you) with these other Ladies, if they will do me the honor to
receive me, trusting not to forsake the^, until this war begone, have taken
another end.

Amadis letter to the Emperor of Constantinople praying him to help him in his
wars. In the.4. book the.4. Chapter.
Right high and excellent Prince, the knight of the green sword (whose proper
name is Amadis of France) does most humbly salute you. And therefore sir, I
traveling the countries after the destruction of Endriagne, it pleased you to
receive me into your City of Constantinople, where after the honor ye did
me, and had gently received me, ye of your liberality offered to aid me in
favor of the services that I had done for you, and to give me succoure when
need should require it (through the reduction of the country, the which ye
named afterward the I Will of Saint Mary.) Now the occasion is come, whereby (if
it so please you) ye may accomplish and fulfill your promise, with the most
just quarrel that is possible to be had or taken, as master Elizabet shall
show you, whom I pray you sir wholly to believe, for his sake that does kiss
the hands of your majesty.

Amadis Letters to Queen Briolania, praying her to give good heed to the
thing that he writes, and to help him, fol^owing her good will. In the.4.
book the.4. Chap.
I Believe Madame, that after you have perceived by Tantilles your Steward, the
cause that has moved me to send so diligently, that you should favor the
thing that he shall tell you from me, being well assured, that using your
gentle nurture, you will not fail me no more than ye believe that I would be
ready to put my foot in ye styrrop for you, where necessity should offer
it: And because he has been present at the things which after my return into
this country have chanced me, and that I have given him charge to cause you
to understand them at length, I will not trouble you, to put you to the pain
to read any longer letter: but I shall pray you^ (after you have believed him)
to have me continually in your grace and favor, of the which the same Amadis,
(as long as he shall live) as yours, desires to have a good part.

Amadis oration to G^ndalin, aduertising him of the good confidence that he
has in him, and for this cause to go to king Perin! to advertise him of his
affairs, to the end and intent to help him. In the.4. book the.4 Chap.
GAndalin, thou art he, that has evermore had the keeping of my most secret
and privy affairs, for the great amity that we from our first years have had
together, as if nature of her own self had called us into one fraternity.
Thou know that my honor is thine, and that thine does touch me as mine
own. Thou see the affairs that I am in, and of what consequence they be
unto me, also the conclusion that by all these Knights has been taken, too
busy and to call upon our friends and alies to have mighty succor, to
sustain the force of king Lisuard, if he assay and attempt to assail us. By
the means whereof, I have already prepared letters to many Princes, of whom I
trust to recover a good and a great company of men. And notwithstanding thy
absence is grievous unto me, yet I trusting more in thy diligence, than in any
others, have thought to send the to King Perion my father, the which has
known thee long, and whom thou shall cause to understand better than any
other, of what importance this war is, if King Lisuard take it upon him: for
as thou may say unto him, it partly touches him, in as much as this unkind
King has done and showed so great di^fame to all those of our lineage, as to
drive them out of his court, after he had received of them an infinite of
great services. Thou shall reci^e unto him by small pieces yt thou known, and
have sone, and the necessity wherein thou did leave us, and that
notwithstanding, thou shall yet assure him, that I fear no power, having so
good right with me, and so many knights: and that I had not made so great an
enterprise, (...) it had not been, that since God would call me, to the order
of cheualrie, I have thought nor minded no other thing, but to keep the estate
of a knight, defe^ding to my power the wrong yt men did to many, and specially
to ladies and Damsels, the which ought to ^e preferred above al persons, and
for whom I have oftentimes put my body in hazard and peril of death, having no
other hope of them, but to please God, and to augment my name in this world,
the which was the only cause that last moved me to absent my self so from
these c^ntries to go and search (among strange nations) those that had need of
my help, where I have had many perilous adventures, the which thou have seen,
and may report them unto him. Also I coming to this Isle, was advertised how
that King Lisuard (forgetting the hono^r of God, the right of men, the counsel
of his, and the instinct of nature that every good father does commonly bear
to his child) would as it were by a certain manner of extreme cruelty,
drive from his countries my lady Oriane his own daughter, and principal
inheritour, gy^ing her in marriage against her will to the Emperor Patin.
Whereof she made her complainte not only to those of the Realm of England,
but required also aid and succor of all knights that bear arms, as well by
letters and messages as other ways, praying them with her hands joined
together, and abundance of tears, to have pity and compassion of her misery.
And so much she could do with prayers and humble Orations, that the Lord of
all things, has looked mercifully from heaven upon her, gyuing the address and
help to the knights that are now in this place, to assemble them as it were
by a miracle, where I found them (as thou know) purposing to adventure
their lives, to set her and the other that perforce accompanied her, at
liberty, considering that doing otherwise they in time to come should have
been blamed, giving occasion to many to presume, that cowardice only had turned
back this aid so greatly recommended, and for persons of the quality that
they be. By ye means whereof the conflicte and battle chanced upon the
Romans, ^uen such as thou have seen it, of the which we have many prisoners,
and the ladies out of their hands. But to make a means for their appointment
to King Lisuard, Quedragant and my cousin Lorian of Moniaste departed lately,
with an express charge and commandment from us all, to beseech him take the
thing that we have done in good part, and to receive to his good grace and
favor my lady Oriane, and those of her company, being yet well minded (if he
will not receive this offer) audaciously and boldly, by the means of the aid
of our good friends and alies to defend us against him: of y^ which number (
Gandalm) thou shall say unto him, yt all we together do esteem him the first
and chiefest, praying him most humbly that he will ^^ccor^s when need is (...)
th^^ the Queen my mother also, and kiss her hands in my name, and say (...)
that I pray her to send hithe^ my si^ter Me^^tia^^ (...) company with these
other ladies, with whom she may see ^earne m^inie things. But or ever thou
depart, know (...) of my cousin Mabile, whether it will please her to send
any thing thither, and ther^with that thou a^ay^ to speak to O^iane, the
which will not be so strange to thee, that thou shall not understand of her
in what estate her health is, and the good will she bears me.

Amadis letter to King Tafiner of Boeme, praying him to succor him, in his
great affairs. In the.4. book. the.4. Chap.
Sir, if ever I did you any service, that any time contented you, the honor and
the good receyte that I received of you, and of yours all the time that I
soiournd in your Court, have caused me to remain and (as long as I shall live)
to be ready, not to spare my person, to obey and to save you. Therefore I
beseech you most humbly not to esteem that this thing which has caused me to
dispatch this knight and bearer unto you, is to have any recompense:
Nevertheless, I remembering the honest offers that you made me at my departing
from Boheme, I have boldned my self to send him unto you, to require you
effectuously to help me in a certain affayre that is nigh me, of the which he
shall certify you, beseeching you sir, to believe him as my self, and to
command his dispatch as soon as it shall be possible, to put him out of pain,
that for you would hazard his life, the which is Amadis of France, surnamed
in many places, the knight of the green sword.

The device of Orian to Gandalin, uncovering to him her heaviness, and that he
would find means she might speak with Amadis whom she loves so well. In
the.4. book the.4. Chapter.
GAndalin my friend, what think thou^ of fortune, the which is to me so
contrary, that it depriueth me of that person of all the world, whose
frequentation^ I love most, being so nigh me, and I wholly in his power. This
notwithstanding we can not have the means privily to speak together without
offending my honor and that greatly, whereby my heart endures such pain, that
if thou knew it, I believe certainly, thou woldst have more pity on me tha^
thou have: the which thing I pray thee show him, to the in^e^t that complaying
me, he may rejoice of the great affection, that daily increases in me, to
will him well: also that he find some fashion or mean, that we may see one
another, repayring to some part with his companions under the color of thy
voyage, and of my comfort.

Gandalins answer to Oriane, aduertising her, that she be not deceived in the
singular love that she bears to Amadis, for his amity is steadfast, as he
daily does show in all his acts. In the.4. book the.5. Chapter.
MAdame (que Ga^dalin,) ye have good cause to bear him such amity, and to
remember also the remedy, the which he desires above al things; for if ye
knew the extremity wherein I have a hundred times found him, ye would not
believe with what power love does rule him: I have seen him dye a thousand
tim^s, remembering the favors that be past, the which ye have showed him, and
as often times by the remembrance of them to recover life. And I have seen him
among ye great dangers of ye world do seats of arms caling upon you to
succoure him, so that it is not easy to be believed, that any knight might have
in him so great valiantness. Therefore Madame, I pray you to have pity on
him, and to entreat him as he deserves: assuring you, that there was never a
more faithful knight, nor more yours than he is, nor there was never Lady that
had such power upon a man, as ye have upon him: for in your hands they may
entreat of his death, or of his life, even as it shall seem good to you.

The Oration of king Lisuard, to the Queen his wife, declaring to her the
wrong that they do unto him, taking the Romans that conducted his daughter,
and yet that she dissembled the matter as much as she might, and so doing, he
does assure her to provide therefore. In the.4. book the.6. Chapter
MAdame, for things of small consequence that happen by accidence and chance,
men have some oc^asion to show passions and anger: but yet as it proceeds of
a small matter, so it ought to be forgotten with small remedy. But when one is
offended by some certain person, not only in person or goods, but in his
proper honor, the^ it stands with reason to be mela^c^ like, and to assay by
all means and ways to provide for it, and in such sort, that we taking
vengeance of him that did the offense, give knowledge to every one of the
displeasure that men have received by the greeuousnesse of the matter. Nor I
tell you not this without a cause, ye have borne and have had (following ye
nature of mothers) an heaviness and a sorrow too much apparent, for the absence
of your daughter, and for all that I esteem my self fortunate for the hope
the which I have that it may be soon forgotten. But the poison is found in the
tail, and such, that the thing which is now happened, touches me so near,
that I shall never be in rest till I be satisfied, even as I desire. The
Romans which co^ducted your daughter are destroyed, the Prince Salust Quide is
slain, she and all other taken prisoners by the knights of the Island
enclosed, ye which are esteemed fortunate for such a victory, having done (as
they think) more than ever any other did in England. And forasmuch as the
renoume shall fly throughout all the world, it is now very requisite and meet
that ye dissemble, using more wisdom than passion: doing this, ye shall be
greatly esteemed, our enemies astonyed, and I greatly contented with you:
trusting in such sort to provide, that your honor and mine shall be kept
entirely.

The Queens answer to king Lisuard, somewhat excusing the enterprise done by
the knights of the enclosed Island against the Romans. In the.4. book, the.6.
Chapter.
MY Lord, ye have taken as it has pleased you ye displeasure that I have borne
and suffered for the separation of your daughter and mine: but as touching the
favor that they of the enclosed I Will have showed her, if you well consider the
time when ye were a wandering knighte as they be, ye would hold them for the
most part excused of their enterprise: do ye think that they understanding ye
heauinesses that she made, and also the common brute that was throughout all
the la^d, that ye against her will would marry her to the Emperor, that the
same has not moved them to help her, considering they have nothing more
commended unto the^, than the aid and succoure of Ladies and Damsels, of whom
they are required? much more then by good reason of your daughter, that knew
the^ and esteemed them of long time. Believe me my Lord, that they be not
wholly in fault, and ye shall know in the end, that their intention was not
to trouble you, presuming peradventure that ye were importunately driven to
make this marriage, and against your will.

A letter sent by Oriane being in the enclosed I Will, to the Queen her mother,
by the which she declares unto her the troubles and torments that she received
upon the Sea, and how that the knights of the enclosed I Will, taking pity on
her, have succored her, and that it would please her to appease her fathers
anger, and counsel the Ambassadors (whom they send to the king) how they
shall do, to be well received. In the.4. book the 7. Chapter.
MAdame, in as much as ye are already advertised (as I beloue) of my misfortune
such as it has bin, so it seems to me to stand with good reason, to make you
partaker of my sorrows: and for the beginning of this letter to pray you most
humbly to consider, how my misfortune has persuaded me after that ye banished
me out of your country, from the king my fathers presence, and from yours
also, a thing to me almost unsupportable: but ye not co^te^t therewith, I was
brought by ye tempest, (ye Romans which co^ducted us being overthrown) to
the enclosed I Will, by those yt knowing the wrong that me^ did unto us, have
hazard their lives to keep and to let us pass any further: And because I doubt
that such a thing cannot be pacified between my father and them without great
effusion and sheeding of blood (except you Madame take the care thereof) I
thought good to send this bearer unto you, praying you for ye honor of God,
to take compassion of your daughter to greatly desolate, and to do so much
with the king, that she may return unto him, and be in his favor, not having
offended him, except he has taken displeasure, that I have obeyed him too
much: for in that thing only I hold me culpable and faulty, and no otherwise.
And to advise you of that that remains, how that they, in whose power I and
my women are at this present, will send Ambassadors to him, as well to know how
he takes the succoure that they have made me, as to pray him to have pity
upon me: as I have charged Durin, to give you knowledge before their coming,
whereunto (Madame) ye shall help me, if it so please you, and also to make peace
and an end of this great war through evil fortune now begun, the which is
in this your most humble and obedient daughter Oriane.

The Oration of Quedragant to king Lisuard from the knights of the enclosed
Island, by the which he shows him the office of a king to receive an
Embassage: and that he ought to excuse the enterprise of the knights of the
enclosed Island, and to receive the Lady Oriane his daughter into his court, and
into as great favor as he did before. In the.4. book the 7. Chapter.
Sir, it is a very laudable virtue and worthy of commendation among kings and
princes, to understand and with great patience the thing that the Ambassadors
of strangers are charged to say, and to declare unto them, putting from them
all passions, so that they, if the Embassage that is made unto them does
content them, may receive the more joy, and the Ambassadors better received and
favored: and contrariwise, if they speak things that displease them, that this
notwithstanding, they know how to dissemble their choler, and to give them
gracious answers, for the respect of the estate that they are called unto. Sir
I beseech you to pardon me, that I have used such deuastiations unto you,
swearing to you by my God, that I have not done it for any doubt that we have
of the assurance that it has pleased you to give us, but greatly to praise the
virtue of so good a Prince, that so liberally has granted us the entrance
into his country. O sir, the occasion of our coming to your majesty, is by
the commandment of the best knight that we know, Amadis of France, and
generally of all those that are with him in the enclosed Ale, the which do send
you word by us, that passing over lands and strange countries, searching for
adventures, as other wandering knights are acustomed to do, specially to
succoure and help the feeble, whom men do use outrageously and without reason,
they have bin advertised by many, that ye sir, following rather a light and a
disordinate will than justice and equity, would (not believing the counsel of
any of yours) disherite (with great injury and wrong) my Lady your daughter,
marying her to the Emperor Patin against her will: and in very deed taking
no compassion of her, nor of her tears and weepings, and less regarding the
end of such an enterprise, and that your subjects were not therewith content, ye
have delivered her to those that demand her. And because such unjust ways are
not only displeasant unto God, but also to those, that hear men speak
thereof, he has suffered that we should set a remedy, and that the Romans
which conducted them, and the Ladies and damsels should come into our hands,
the which defending themselves against us, were destroyed, and some slain,
and all other taken prisoners. And as for the Ladies, I do declare unto you,
that they at this present are in the enclosed I Will with a good and a great
company of knights, appointed and minded to show them all the honor that may
be possible: for their intention was never to trouble you nor them also, but to
maintain equity, and to keep them from force and violence, even as you your
self made them swear at Windsor. And therefore they pray you, that preferring
virtue and reason above al passion, it wol^ please you to receive my Lady
Oriane your daughter, and from henceforth to entreat her, not as a stranger,
but as a father ought to entreat his daughter, not putting her thus away from
you, nor from your country, whereof, if it please God, she shall be after you
Queen and Lady: and if you feel any injury, nor will not incline to their
request, they pray you that for their sakes ye will not deny her your good
grate and favor, but that ye, she reigning as she was wo^t to do in your court,
may assay hereafter if ye think it good, to take such vengeance of them as ye
may, assuring you sir, that they be purposed and intend, if ye assail them, to
defend themselves. Therefore advise you, if it please you, to make us an answer,
for ye have in your hand either peace or war.

The answer of king Lisuard to Quedraga^t, declaring the great wrong and
injury that the knights of the enclosed Island have done him, and that he will
not receive them to his favor, until they have made amends for the injury
that they have done him. In the.4. book the.7. Chapter.
MY masters (quoth the king) forasmuch as virtue does very seldom accompany
temerarious orations, or bold answers, and that another the one nor the other
are sufficient to encourage the minds of the weak hearted, I will not make many
words with you, but using more patience tha^ I should use with you, it shall
suffice you to declare that I know well enough, that the enterprise that has
bin done by those of the enclosed Island, was more executed by presumption, than
by the magnanimity of courage (whatsoever ye have said now) in such wise, that
forasmuch as ye esteem to have gotten honor, yet every man of good judgment
should blame and rebuke you: for why, it is no great matter to trouble or to
destroy them that take their journey without suspicio^ or fear, and specially
when they think to be among their friends. And as touching the demonstration
that ye have proposed here, tending to call my daughter Oriane again, without
putting her far from me, ye are not they unto whom I must give account of
the things that I do, but to God only, the which has constituted me (after
him) the soueraygne in this land, for to govern and rule the same, and the
people that does inhabit it. Therefore I am not minded to enter into any
treaty of peace with them, until they have recompensed me of the injury that
I have received: then I will advise me of the thing that they request me of,
and not before.

Grumedans Oration to the Ambassadors, declaring that he is very sorry for the
trouble that is chanced, and that peace can hardly be entreated. In the.4.
book the.7. Chapter.
BY God my good Lords I am very sore displeased for this new trouble: I had a
continual hope, that I should see you one day as welcome to the court, as ever
ye were: but now I do well assure my self, that the peace which was hoped for^
shall come very slowly, without the help of our Lord, the which does know the
heart of Amadis, whom I would never have thought to be in the enclosed Island:
for we had news, that he was lost four years since, and I wonder how that he
so readily and in time is come to the succoure and help of my Lady Oriane.

The Oration of king Arban of Norgales to king Lisuard, upon the enterprise of
the war against Amadis, and that he should advise himself well, wisely to
conduct it, and if he could, rather to practice a lucratiue peace, than to put
himself in the peril of war. In the.4. book the.8. Chapter.
Sir, seeing that ye are resolved to make war against Amadis and those of his
league, and that ye have not found their offer good that they have made you, ye
must so advise you to conduct it, that the glory may continue with you: for
notwithstanding we hold for certain, the victory to be in the hand of God, the
which does give it, when and to whom it pleases him, and commonly after the
merits of persons, yet we must not before we take it in hand, leave off
diligently to provide for all things requisite and necessary there unto, and
that without dispraysing of your enemy, and esteming him su^ficient to put you
to much pain, if fortune do favor him: considering that oftentimes a man
trusting too much to his right, or in his strength, comes to ruin and total
destruction by him that thought (through too great presumption) the victory to
be due unto him. And yet if ye consider well with whom ye have to do, I think
that a profitable peace should be for you as honorable, as a war that is in
hazard, and that may turn to a great consequence. Ye know that Amadis and the
other of whom he is supported, are all good knights, and men of great
courage, and al of the aliance of kings and puisant Princes, the which will
never fail, them to die for it. And on the other side and part ye know, that
the most part of your subjects, never took nor found that deliberatio^ to be
good, that ye took in a manner by your self upon the marriage of my Lady your
daughter to the Emperor, whereof this war is now moved. And thus ye may be
sure, that whatsoever countenance they make, they in a manner would be content
that ye had the worse, because ye followed not thryr fantasy, notwithstanding
that I doubt not, but that there is none of them but will serve you faithfully.

Arcalaus Oration to King Arauigne, inducing him to make war and to run upon
King Lisuard, and upon Amadis, in such such places of theirs, where they might
be best offended without succor, and to make war there, where they be most
let and troubled. In the.4. book the.18. Chapter.
Sir, a four days past I certainly understood, that King Lisuard and Amadis
of France (two the most greatest enemies that ye may have) are in such
quarrel and strife, that there is no hope that ever they shall have peace
together, they gather great companies of men to fight and to give battle,
whereof there cannot ensue and follow but the final destruction of the one or
other, and peradventure of both together. And because the occasion does now
call you, as well to revenge you of the loss that you have had by them in times
past, as also to extend your limits and borders, making your self peaceable
King of England, I think ye should defer no longer to gather your people
together, and to call for all your friends, that whilst they be let, ye
may easily enter into their country, being far off from their aid and
succor: and if it chance that they meet together and fight, then not gyuing
the Uictor any leisure to refreshe his men, ye must suddenly take him, and give
him so sore a battle, that neither of them both escape. And ye shall
understand sir, that the occasion of their enmity does proceed, because that
King Lisuard sent his eldest daughter to Rome, giuyng her in marriage to the
Emperor: but Amadis of France, one of them that caused himself to be named
in the battle, that we lately lost, the knight of the serpents, the which had
(if ye may remember it) the gilded harneis, with many other, met the Romans
upon the field whom they invaded, and finally destroyed and flew the Prince
Salust Quide the Emperors nigh knisman, the other taken prisoners with the
Ladies and Damsels, the which they have carried and conveyed into the enclosed
Island where they retain them as yet: and yet I cannot well declare you the
cause why they began^e this war, but I am sure that King Lisuard to revenge
his injury prepares the greatest army that he can, and that Amadis in like
case has sent into all parts to gather men to defend him if he be assailed.
And therefore Sir, during this trouble ye shall have (if ye will) a mean to
give them both ye greatest overthrow of all the world, taking them unawares as
I have told you. And to the end and intent that ye may at your eye, know the
victory to be certain, I will do so much that Bersimen Lord of Sanguese, the
son of him that the King caused to be burnt at London, and likewise all those
of the lineage of Dardan the proud, whom Amadis destroyde at Windesor, shall
come and help you, with the King of the profounde and deep I Will: and thus
being with so great a number of good knights, ye shall not need to doubt but
that ye shall come to your intent and purpose.

King Arauignes answer to Arcalaus, by the which he is purposed to follow his
counsel. In the.4. book the.8. chapter.
My great friend, quoth Arauignes, ye tell me great things, and although that I
had purposed not to tempt fortune any more, showing me so little favor in times
past, so it should be great f^lly (as me thinks) to leave those things which
b^ so many means offer themselves to augment my honor and great profit: for
if in such a case y^ enterprises guided by reason come to the issue that men
desire, he receives such fruit of his labor, as he deserves. And if it
chance otherwise, me^ at the least ways do e^ecute the thing, to ye which
virtue does hind them, to maintain their authority, the which ought not so
greatly to esteem ye misfortunes which are past, that they when the hour
presents it self, should delay to receive it, not losing their courage, nor
continuing all the rest of their life as fearful, and faint hearted. Seeing
therefore that I am in these terms, I will believe you, praying you (whilst that
I shall prepare my army) to order the rest, and to go to Barsinan and the
other, and to cause them to join with us.

Agraies Oration to the knights of the enclosed Isle, upon the enterprise of
the war, inciting them to show themselves virtuous and strong in the
business that does offer it self. In the fourth book the.10. chapter.
MY lords, I cannot tell how that we with honesty may delay to take upon us
this war, seeing the just occasion that we have, and that our enemy even now
makes as though he would come to find us: but yet who so will believe me, he
shall neither get, nor obtain the honor: but yet let us do our diligence to
assemble our strength, and let us go into his country, and cause our selves to
be known for such men as we be: for once if we suffer them to come hither, we
shall set the^ in such a pride, that he (which of his nature is presumptuous)
shall think to have already the upper hand of us, and so we shall be in diverse
manner of sorts ill esteemed, giving occasion to many to doubt as much of our
right, as of my lady Orianes, for who^ we are fallen into these matters. As
touching my self, I swear unto you upon my honor, that if it had not been for
the instant and great prayer and request that she made unto me to have peace, I
had never consented that they should have sent any Ambassadors into
England, being so outrageously used as we be. But feyng that our enemy does
declare so much unto us, I am quited of my promise, and resolved never to
enter into amity or aliance with him, until he has felt how greatly we may
anoye him or help him, seeing that we have the ways to recover as warlikemen
of war, as they be which he shall bring with him. Thus my masters I am of
this mind, that we prepare our selves to war, without any longer delay, and
that we as soon as our aid is aryued, go straight to London (if he come
forwards to fight with us) to give him battle.

Amadis Oration to Agraies upon the resolution of the war, being ready to
do his duty, and to follow Agraies advise. In the.4. book the.13. Chapter.
MY cousin, I as yet have seen none, but that is ready to do that you have
said, and if any have ^ebated the inconveniences that may commonly chance in
war, that is not yet to say, that they will exempt themselves, but to
provide for the same, as reason would they should. And as concerning that they
think it good we should enter into King Lisuardes land, nor to give him
leisure to come and find us here, I have been ever of this mind, if the rest
of you my Lords and good friends will the same: for by this means he
(perceiving that we aproche so nigh unto him) will change p^raduenture his
opinion, and shall require us to do the thing that we in times past most
humbly desired him.

The Oration of Guillan the pensife to the Emperor of Rome in the name of King
Lisuard, declaring unto him the taking of his me^, and of the lady Oriane, and
that ther^ore he is purposed to make war against the knights of the Isle
enclosed, and that it would please him therefore to aid him. In the fourth
book, the.13. Chapter.
Sir (said Guillan) King Lisuard my master does send y^a word, that for to
have your amity, and perpetual aliance, he was well content (following the
request that ye caused to be made unto him by your Ambassadors) to marry the
lady Oriane his eldest daughter and principal inherit or unto you: and in
deed after many difficulties avoided among the princes, Lords, and subjects
of his Realm, he delivered her into the hands of those, that have power by you
to receive hir^ but it chanced that Amadis of France and other his mates with
a certain number of ships spied them, and in such sort assailed the^ in a
strait, that after they had ^ought a lon^ space, the Prince Salust Quide was
slain, and all the rest of your men were led as prisoners into the enclosed
Island, where that as yet my lady Oriane is detained, and the Queen Sardamire,
and other that were in this company. But yet afteewardes thinking to pacifi^
the fault that they had done, they sent Ambassadors to his Maies^ie, offering
him many good parts and offers, the which he would not receive, before he
understood your will and pleasure, for as much as the injury that they have
done him, does touch you as much or more than him. And therefore he has
commanded me to show you, that if ye be minded to take vengeance on them,
that he will bring a great army into the field, if ye of your part will do
the like, being assured that if your strength be once joined, you and he shall
easily bring them to such a point and reason as ye shall think good.

The Oration of King Lisuard to the Romans, setting before their eyes the
great wrong done unto their companions, and that they should therefore seek
to be revenged against their enimyes, and not to lease their courage in so just
a quarrel. In the.4. book the.19. Chapter.
MY masters and great friends, ye have seen and proved in these two meetings,
how that fortune has showed her self our enemy, and in such wise, that in
giving us the wors^ she has triumphed by the death of my good brother the
Emperor your master, and of many other valiant knights, the woyche in effect
(revenging them upon their ^nimyes) would have come to the thing that they
become unto ^ because that this was the fairest experience that they could do
by their virtue and strength, to obtain the glory whereunto they breathed. And
to come thereunto, they thought it less than nothing to put their lives in
ioperdie, and that it ^^s much better to dye valian^ly defending themselves,
than going back to escape. And because they would fall into no such
dishonor and shame, they had rath^r through great magnanimity of courage to
endure and suffer fortune, than to obey fear: not because I will in al^^ thing
re^^ke those that escaped, knowing the great diligence that they pu^ themselves
to, but to pray you ^ll, that preferring your honor above the heaviness that
ye may have of the loss of your companions, y^ will assaye (the truce
failing) to reauenge them, fighting strongly with them, that are too provide of
their vi^orie. I am of this mind, that we shall put our selves in l^sse
dangers, and less ^aza^de our selves, till w^ may have upon them that they
have had upon us, nor that to have less courage to assail them, or to defend
us, if fortune do continue to diffaine ^s: considering that if we all die,
that it shall be unto us an immortal glory, and one Sepulcher the most
honorable that we can wyshe for or desire: for all the earth in general is
the very place, where the bodies of noble and courageous men shoul^e be
laid, whose memory is not conserved and kept only by Epitaphes and
inscriptions, but by the renoume of those that publishe themselves among
strange nations, that consider more in their minds the greatness and heygth
of courages, than the thing that fortuned unto them, considering that
cowardnesse accompanied with shame, is more grievous and di^pleasant to a man
that has a good and an entire heart, than the death that chaunc^th by
manfulnesse, with the hope of public glory. That thing my great friends
makes me believe, that ye not degeneratyng from your predecessors, shall do,
that ^h^ world^ may know the great virtue and constancy that is in you, and
that in tho death of your Prince, all yours ^ not joined and contained.
Therefore I pray you to tell ^e the deliberation where to ye intrude, to the
intent that I following your resolution, may take counsel on my part to set in
order the thing that shall be necessary, assuring you by t^^ word of a King,
that if I should die a thousand deathes^ I will not depart from hence, until
I have an end of my enimyes, or they of me.

Nascian the hermites Oration to King Lisuard, aduertising him that he is not
so nyghe him without a great cause and occasion: and furthermore he shows him
that he should not go about to marie his daughter Oriane to the Emperor,
because she is joined to another, and gives him the reason why. And by this
means he entendeth to turn him from the enterprise of war. In the.4. book
the.19. Chapter.
Sir, ye have good cause and reason so to think: for certainly my great age
and estate where unto it has pleased the Lord to have called me long since,
does well excuse me to be among this bloody people: yet considering the evil
that might have happened if I had deferred my enterprise, I have not feared to
travel my body, trusting to do agreeable service to God, and healthful to
your soul. Understande syr^ that being a few days since in the hermitage
where by chance I waited for you, and when you and I communed togethen of the
strange nouriture of Esplandian, I then knew the occasion of the war that ye
have begone against Amadis and his, and nevertheless I am sure that ye can,
not do nor perform the thing that ye have enterprised, that is, to marry my
Lady your daughter to the Emperor of Rome, for the which too many ill
chances are already chanced, not only because they are not agreeable as well
to the greatest as to the least of your Realm, as oftentimes they have caused
it to be told you, but for another reason sir, the which was hyd from you, and
manyfes^ to me: against the which by the law of God, ye cannot say the
contrary. That is, how yt my lady Oriane is already joined in marriage to
another, wherewith our Lord has been well contented, and it was his pleasure it
should be so. Sir, this is it, why I said unto you, that the thing which was
hid from you, was manifest to me, as I shall even now declare unto you: for ye
cannot know it of any other, ^ut by me. Sir, the self same day that I by your
commandment was to seek you in the forest, where to give the longer pleasure
of hunting to the Ladies that were there with you, ye caused your pauilions and
tents to be spread and set up, I brought unto you (I know not whether ye
remember it) the yo^g Esplandian, the which ye represented to the Lioness,
that had given him suck even from the beginning: and on the self same day I
heard my lady Orians confession, wherein she declared unto me, that she had
promised Amadis to marie him, when he delivered her from the hands of Arcalaus
ye enchaunter, unto whom ye had delivered her a little before that the Damsel
(by whom ye were enchaunted) set you and your estate in more danger tha^ was
possible, from the which Galao^ retired and delivered you. And believe sir,
that it is very like that our Lord God has consented to this marriage: for
why? Esplandia^ is come forth, of whom Vrgande the vnknow^ has told so many
maruels the which ye know. And therefore ye ought not to be displeased, seeing
that Amadis is a King^ son, and esteemed in all places one of the best and most
gracious knights of the world: wherefore sir, I counsel you, showing your
self such as ye have been always, to save the honor and conscience of my lady
your daughter, and that making an end of this war, ye call her again, and
entreat her from henceforth, ^s reason would ye should: thus doyng^ the Lord
will be contented with you, the which otherwise may be angrye for the effusion
of so much human blood, the which ye hitherto caused to be shed without any
occasion.

The Oration of Nascian the he^mit to Amadis, wherein he admonishes him, to
put al his affairs to God, by whose means he has avoided so many dangers
and evident peri^, and that he as much as he might should seek for peace of
King Lisuard. In the.4. book the.19. Chapter.
MY son, before ye shall understand and perceive the cause that has moved
me to come and see you, I will set before your eyes, the great obligations for
the which ye are ind^tted to our Lord, that from henceforth ye may be the more
inclined to do the things that may be agreeable and pleasante unto him, I
believe ye have oftentimes heard, and assured it, that from the first day that
ye were borne, ye were delivered to the waters of the Sea, and set in a little
bote, without any other defender or keeper than God, by whose goodness, ye
fell into the hands of such, as afterward have so elevated you, that ye are
come to be the most accomplished knighte, that men do know at this present: for
why, the Lord has given you the power and force to fight, and to overcome
diverse Giants, monsters, Tyrants, and very cruel beasts, whereby your
renoume is extended in all quarters of the earth: And seeing he has provided
you of so great grace, it is reason that ye should know him as the sovereign
Lord, and to take pain to give him thanks, humbling your self before his
face, or else all his favors that he has lent you, shall turn to your shame
and rebuke. My son, ye may see how old and how caduke I am, so that nature
does almost fail me, and yet I fear not to take upon me this long journey to
come to you, because I (being in my hermitage) have perceived the discord that
is between you and king Lisuard, with whom I have spoken of late, and do find
him such, as a good Prince should be, the servant and minister of God, and
pressed (if there be no let in you) to give an ear to peace, the which ye should
not refuse, as well for the quietness and rest of your conscience, as of your
body. And to the intent ye should not disguise your fantasy, I may assure
you, that I know more of your affairs than ye think, for my Lady Oriane
has told me in confession, the secrets of you both.

Amadis answer to Nascian the hermit, wherein he recognise^^ his fault, with a
promise to amend. In the.4. book the.19. Chapter.
MY Father, if I served the Lord after the graces that he has showed me, I
should be the fortunatest knight of the world: but I a sinner as I am,
preferring sometimes my pleasure above his glory, fall and do amiss, as other
men do, whereof I am displeased and sorry, and hope (knowing my fault) to do
better from henceforth, tha^ I have done in times past: praying you most
humbly not to fear, or to defer to tell me the thing, that ye shall see I
ought to do to please him, for in as much as I may possible, I will obey you.

Nascian the hermits Oration to king Perion, Amadis father, soliciting him to
procure peace. In the.4. book the.19. Chapter.
Sir, I beseech you to believe, that considering the estate that I of long time
am called unto, and the great age that I am in, I would not have departed from
my wood and forest, to come among so many men of war, if it had not bin, that
my long tarying, might have caused an evil, whereof the Lord might have bin
angry, not only with and against you and the people that is gathered together
in these two feelds, but also against many other, that could not do with this
discord that is between you and king Lisuard, with whom I have spoken already,
and have so well converted him to peace, that he is ready (as I have told your
s^nne Amadis) to receive it, and has remitted me wholly unto you: Therefore I
beseech you sir, (giving up your passions to the profit and ^ranquilitie of so
many people) not to disdain the thing that is offered you, and that you your
self should purchase and labor for.

King Perions answer to Nascian, where he ^heweth the grea^e ^ault committed by
the king, and yet that notwithstanding, receiving Oriane into the court with
his favor, he is ready to m^ke peace, providing that he marry her not against
her will. In the same Chapter.
MY father (quoth king Perion) God ^e my witness of the displeasure that I
have had for the things that be past, with the loss of so much good people,
and how willingly I would have taken another way, if king Lisuard would have
perceived it: but he did always at hand show him self so high, that he
(whatsoever we said unto him, setting the matter forwards by our Ambassadors,
specially for the estate of my Lady Oriane, who^e he would have disherited)
regarded it not, presuming so much of him self, that by the aid of the
Emperor of Rome, he should draw unto him all the world. By the means
whereof, he refused not only to put this that we deferred into justice, but
disdayned to hear it spoken of. And yet if he will now submit himself to
reason, I have such a hope in mine, that they will follow mine advise, the
which has always aspyred to shorten these discords, which proceed not but
by the things, whereunto he is bound to his own blood by the right of
nature, and so, that if he will repeal my Lady his daughter to his good grace
and favor, and not marry her to any personage little or nothing agreeable not
only to his people, but to all those that does know him, or that shall hear
it spoken of, we will render her to him again, continuing his good friends,
if he desire it, or to such as he wills.

The Oration of king Perion to the principal of his army, wherein he recites
unto them the purpose of Nascian: and that they should not be so affectionate
to war, not to procure peace, if it may be obtained: and he gives them the
means how to have it. In the same book the.19. Chapter.
MY masters and great friends, even as we be bound to put our goods and
persons in danger, not only for the defense of our honor, but also to
maintain equity and justice: so are we bound to leave off all passions and
hatred, and to reconcile our selves to our enemy, when that of him self he
presents the peace. For notwithstanding that wa^ at the beginning may be
conducted and made without sin and offending of God, yet for all that, at the
end, if by fantasy and little knowledge, we remove far from reason, the
thing that at the first was reasonable, does convert it self to justice: nor
ye shall not think that without a cause I hold you with this purpose: Nascian
the holy man (whom the most part of you does know) came to me not long since,
as ye might have seen, to assay to set and to make peace between us and our
enemies, whereunto king Lisuard is ready to harken, if there be no fault in us,
and yet I would give him no resolute answer, until I had first known your
mind and deliberations: for it seems to me very reasonable, that as ye have
made your selves partakers of the travel and strife, so ye should be also of
the rest and tranquillity: and therefore I pray you, that every one of you
without dissimulation do say that he shall think best, and afterward God as
touching the rest, shall counsel us. And as concerning me, following the
advice that Nascian has given me, I shall find it and think it good, that we
choose two of our knights, unto whom we shall give all and full power, to
determine with those other two that king Lisuard shall name, all the
differences for the which this war took his beginning, notwithstanding yet
that I alone will not be believed in this case, but follow the advice that ye
shall find proper and meet for the wealth of all together.

The answer of Angriot of Estrauaux, to king Perion, the which does praise him
for his good counsel, that following the same, it shall be more reasonable to
obtain peace^ than to sustain the danger of the war. In the selfsame
book the.19. Chapter.
Sir ye have bin chosen the head of this enterprise, as well for the dignity
of a king, which is in you, as for the estimation and favor that every man
bears you, by the means whereof ye may resolve the affairs of this war,
as ye shall think best. But yet seeing it is your pleasure that I first before
all other shall say and show mine advise, it seems to me (I speak under
correction) that if the peace be offered us by our enemies, that we should
accept it: for it cannot come at this time, but to your advantage, having not
only the ouerhand of him, but also my Lady Oriane as yet in your puissance
and power, for whose sake we have brought this host into the feeld. And as
concerning too name two of our companions to accord (as ye say) all
differences, I know none more meet for this business, than sir Quedragant,
and sir Brian of Moni^st, the which at the beginning had in a manner a like
charge, when they were in England, to excuse us to king Lisuard for rescuing
of his daughter, taking her out of the power of the Romans: and I believe
that willingly they will take the pain, if they be appointed to finish this
matter.

Arquisill being asked of king Lisuard of his deliberation and mind, does
answer, that he with his men is ready to obey him, and that it shall be more
expedient to purchase peace than war. In the same book the.20. Chapter.
MY Lord, if the Emperor were now alive, we that were his vassals, should be
constrained to serve him as well in war as in peace: but being departed and
dead, ^s he is, with the end of his life, the power that he had to command us
is ended, and yet we will do for you at this time, as for him, so that our
service (as touching us) shall in no wise be slaked, as long as ye shall think
it good to use us: yet if king Perion will draw to peace, I believe that they
which love your honor (as they ought) will continually counsel you to accept
it, so it be not too hurtful unto you. Ye may know by the sight of the eye,
that fortune at this present is not yours, and at length peradventure we shall
yet have worse than we have had before.

The king of Suesse his resolution, upon the former purpose, having for a
conclusion, that the goodness of peace is to be preferred above the trauelles
of war. In the.4. book the 20. Chapter.
MY Lord (quoth the king of Suesse) if peace may be entreated with your
enemy, I counsel you not to refuse it, seeing that the most part of your men
be hurt, and sick: yet at the least way, make a good long truce, and in the
mean while that it continues, ye may make your self strong, and afterward
begin again, if you think it good.

King Lisuards answer to the king of Suesse, by the which he declares that he
desires but peace, and does promis to send men to make it. In the.4. book
the.20. Chapter.
IF it be possible for me (quoth the king) we shall be no more in this pain
and trouble: ^or king Perion has chosen on his party two of his knights to
accord our differences and strifes, and I will name two other (quoth he to king
Arban of Norgales) that is, you and Guillan the pensife, that understands the
things, and how they be past over and done, because he was continually and
daily present. In the mean while I will send Nascian again to king Perion, to
pray him to return and to remove his camp one day more backwards, and we
shall depart from the town Lubanie, for the time that the communication of the
peace shall endure and continue.

Amadis speaking to Arcalaus the prisoner, that asked him mercy, said that he
had not deserved it, seeing he would not have mercy upon himself, yet
repenting him, and renouncing the evil, he would pardon him. In the.4. book
and 23 Chapter.
Mercy (quoth Amadis) I cannot tell how thou woldst I should give it thee,
considering that thou could never give it to thy self; for if it had bin so,
thou would have made an end (long since,) of so many cruelties, as thou have
done and exercised. Notwithstanding if thou will repent thee, and with a good
heart promis me to return no more, I will pardon thee.

Arcalaus answer to Amadis, the which said, that his nature could not incline
to repent, if the necessity that he is in constrained him not. In the.4. book
the.23. Chapter.
I Think (quoth he) that it should be for me too hard, yea verily impossible:
for the custom has known so to overcome me, and accustomed me to take
pleasure to do ill, that now I cannot give me to goodness: but necessity the
which is the hard and the rigorous bridle to change all evil custom to
virtue, shall peradventure constrayne my old years (seeing the state that I am
in) to have that in them, that my youth and liberty have disdayned both in
deed and in will.

Arcalaus continuing his words, and setting before his eyes king Arauigne,
prays him to be beneuolent to the poor afflicted, that fall sometimes into
the power of their enemies, and that he glo^ifye not himself too much in his
good fortune. In the.4. book the.23 Chapter.
I Pray thee Amadis, behold this unfortunate king the which was not long ago
ready to be one of the greatest princes of the world, and in a moment the self
same fortune that showed hirself to love him, has utterly cast him down and
destroyed him, to whom thou should give good regard: for thou, and all
other, that aspire to great things, are subject to such and like diffame:
And because the victor and the pardoner have commonly noble and courageous
hearts, entreat us now so as thou would that we being in the place that we
be, should entreat thee, that hereafter thou be not reproched.

Amadis Oration to the Romans that were prisoners, upon the treaty of peace.
In the.4. book the.23. Chapter.
MY masters, it cannot be, but that ye have known the end of the war moved in
these countries, by the means whereof, all the princes in a manner of the West,
and the most part of those of the East were in arms: and because that we be
now upon the point of a perpetual peace, I thought it reasonable, that
nothing (notwithstanding ye be my prisoners) should be concluded without your
knowledge: and as well for this occasion I have caused you to come, as also to
pray you for my love and favor, to find and to think it good to choose and
to accept Arquisil to your Emperor, for besides that there shall not be found
(as I have understood) a more nearer to come to the Empire than he, I know
that he deserves it, and for this cause I pray you most affectuously. And
doing this, ye shall shall prepare and obtain two great and profitable good
things, the first calling to the gubernation of so excellent a Monarchy, a
sage, wise, and virtuous Prince, well to keep it, and to entreat you sweetly
and amiably: the other, that for the love of him, I w^l give you (with
liberty) the ransom that I should have of you, remaining besides as long as
I shall live, your particular friend. Therefore advise what answer ye will
give me, that I of my part may afterward advise me how to use my self
toward you.

The answer of Brandaiel the most ancient of the Romans to Amadis the which
declared unto him, that he was ready to obey his will, and that conferring of
this matter with Flamian (with liberty to do so) and other Romans, he assured
him, that all things should be after the will of Amadis. In the.4, book
the.23. Chapter.
MY Lord, true it is that we are your prisoners, and we know full well the
honor that ye do unto us, and the good entreating that we have had of you,
since the time that we arrived and came into the enclosed Island: therefore I
will surely answer for my companions, that there is not he among us, that will
not employe himself most willingly to serve you: but we can not resolve you of
that, that ye labor for the Lord Arquisil, before we have spoken with
Flamian, and other captains of Rome, which are in this army: and therefore we
pray you that we may confer with them, swering unto you, that we for our part
shall so extend our hand, that in all things your will shall be satisfied.

The Oration of King Lisuard to Amadis his son in law, aduertising him to
laud God, for the favor that he has borne him in his great affairs, and
that he most recompense those that put their bodies and their goods to succor
him in his most great affairs. And also that he remember the Ladies, that have
continually accompanied and comforted Oriane. In the.4. book, the.25. Chapter.
MY son, seeing it has pleased God, that with so great honor ye have ended
your quarrels, ye must refer the glory wholly unto him, and that as long as
ye shall live ye be thankful ^o your friends, the which to succor you in
such business, have not spared their own lives, the which do bind you to love
them, and honor them, and moreover to recompense the^ the best ye may possible,
considering that without the aid that they have helped you withal, it is most
certain ye should have been in great doubt to leese, not only your life but
your honor, the which is esteemed a hundred times more. And therefore it is
reason, that even as they have been partakers of the perils and dangers, that
they be now also of the pleasures and conte^tations that ye have received by
the^. So then advise you to favor them in all that ye shall know them to be
affectionated unto, distributing unto the^ the pray that is in your hands,
having the Kings Arauigne, Barsinan, and other prisoners. And furthermore, to
do so much for those who^ ye know to pretend any affection to the Ladies which
are in ye company of Oriane, that they may have like conte^tation as ye have,
marying the^ to those that they do like and love. And for this cause I put into
your hands your sister Melicia, to give her unto him that ye shall esteem to
deserve her. Ye have also your cousin Mabile, the Queen Briolanie, that has
so greatly bound you unto her, Grasinde, and the Queen Sardamire, the which
have had a good part of Orians annoyance and troubles: I do think that they
should also feel of her ease and advancement, I commend the^ unto you,
assuring you, that the greatest pleasure that I can have in my old age and
years is, that your brethren ^alaor, and Floristan were married, that I or
ever I die, may see my self revive again in them by the lineage of you all.
And therefore I pray you to look unto the thing, that I have told you, and as
soon as ye may.

Amadis Oration to his companions offering them a recompense for their trauells
which they suffered in the wars for his love. In the.4. book the.25. Chapter.
MY companions and friends, the great travels and pains that are paste, the
which ye have sustained in this last war, do well deserve, that now ye should
give your selves and your minds to rest and pleasure. And in as much as I am
bound unto you, I assay and prove by all means to cause you to have ye thing
that I shall perceive and know ye have most affection unto, for I by your good
help that ye have given and shown me, have obtained ye thing that I loved
best in all the world, that is, my lady Oriane: Therefore I pray you with all my
heart, that every one of you do presently declare and show me, if he pretend or
have any mind to any of these Ladies and Damsels that be here, assuring you by
the faith of a knight so to labor therein, that with the good contentation and
will of their friends, they shall believe me in that, that I shall desire and
pray them. And furthermore ye know how that King Arauigne, Barsinan. and many
other our prisoners, leaving and forsaking the virtue whereunto they were bound
by the order of chivalry, have exercised, as much as they could, so great
tyranny, that they are not worthy of any ransom, but of great punishment,
for ye greuousnesse of their treasons. And therefore I do think ye should
devise to part and divide their goods among you. And as touching me, I quite
and refuse my part, holding my self a great deal more than satisfied, if I
might find and have the means and ways perticularly to do you pleasure or
service, that might content you.

The Oration of Bruneo of Good Mere, to the Citizens of the town, to the which
the Queen of Dace had brought the^, to succor the^, admonishing them, to keep
the^ good and true, for the just quarrel of their Prince against his enemy. In
the.4. book the.27. Chapter.
LOrds Citizens, the love that ye show to this young Prince your liege Lord,
does bind him very much, as long as he shall live to will you well. The
confidence that he has in you should move you to honor him: ye see that he is
young, and has little means and help, to chase his enemy out of his borders,
the which (as ye know) did murder through treason the last King, your good
Prince, and afterward thinking to usurp his kingdom, he besieged the
principal city, and keeps it so straight, that without your aid it is in
danger to be won and destroyed with those good men and knights that ^re
within it. Therefore my masters the Citizens, now that the occasion does
offer it self, by the return of the Queen your good mystresse, that brings
with her the knights of the enclosed Isle (of the which I am one) propose your
selves to revenge the injury that ye have received by the traitor, and so to
labor, that your liege Lords may be set into their lands again, ensuring you
(if ye will follow me) that I will ^inde a means suddenly to take him and his
army, and to destroy him, by the favor and help of my companions that are
within the town, the which shall not fail to come forth as soon as they shall
see the sign that I will give them,

Amadis Oration to Dragonis, promising him, in favor of the trauells that be
past, to cause the Realm of the profounde Isle to fall into his hands, and to
accord the marriage between him and Estoillette. In the fourth book the.29.
Chapter.
MY cousin, since that ye left us, we have made many marriages of the
principallest knights that be here, with those that they desired long since.
And besides this, King Arauigne, Barsinan, and other our prisoners lands and
countries, by the consent of al, have been parted and divided, and because of
your absence, ye were forgotten: but good as ye shall understand, has
provided. I have presently been advertised by a certain Esquire, that since
our departing from Luban^^, the King of the profound Isle (the which was
wounded and hurt) is departed upon the sea, a few days after he took
shipping, thinking to return and retire: and ther^ore I shall cause his Realm
to fall into your hands, and so ye shall have by this means Estoilletti to your
wife, whom ye have loved of long time, and well worthy, being fair, wise and a
virtuous Princess, issued of a king of two cot^s, and as well loved of Oriane,
as any other that I know. I think that a man (for your contentatio^) cannot
better satisfy you, tha^ to make you joyful of the thing that ye love and
esteem more than your self.

A complaint of Darioletta for Amadis, the which was besieged on every part by
her occasion. In the fourth book the.23. Chapter.
ALas caitife and unfortunate that I am, should it be that by my occasion the
best knight of the world should die? How shall I dare from henceforth appear
are before the king his father, and the Queen or any of his friends, knowing
the evil that I have purchased him? Ah, ah, unfortunate, and more unfortunate
than I can say, if in times paste I was a mean to save his life, by the
invention of a cradle wherein I put him when he was cast and delivered to the
mercy of ye waves and surges of the sea, now clean contrary I have a^aunced
the end of his days, when I most trusted to have had aid and support of him.
Alas, had I not my understanding and wit well advised, when I found him by the
sea side, and would not suffer him so much as to return to the castle
Apolidon, to take his leave of my lady Oriane, from whence he might have
brought some other knights by whom he might have had some help? But what? who
should receive punishment but I to much hated of good fortune, and that has
done a deed of a light and of a too evil forecas^ing woman.

Belan does sharply reprove his son Brunor of treason, and that he, against
his fathers promise, besieged Amadis. In the.4. book the.34. Chapter.
INfamous villain, durst thou falsify my word in the thing that I have
promised? wretch that thou art, what honor or what gain can thou have of
such an evil turn and deed as thou haste done? seeing it was not in thy
power to revoke my life, if death had called me, and less, to have excused
thee of treason, ending that thou have begone so unwisely against the knighte
that is entered into my land and country, under the surety and assurance of
my faith. Art thou hitherto ignorant, that I for nothing that ever should
chance unto me, would not do contrary to my promise? but to my power keep
it, esteeming it more than thee, or my own life: by the faith that I owe unto
God, it lets very little that I cause thee not to be hanged at the corners
of this place, to be an ensample to such naughty fellows as thou art,
enimyes to truth and virtue. Take, take me this villain, and bind his hands
and his feet, and that afterward they do bear him to the knight, saying
unto him from me, that I send him the traitor that has offended him, and me
much more, and that I pray him to take the vengeance for us both that he has
merited and deserved.

The Oration of Belan to the chiefest of the army, presentyng, himself in
Amadis name, knowledging that unjustly he would have warred against him. In
the fourth book the 37. Chapter.
MY Masters, if ye marvel of my coming to you so greatly unprovided, I my
self have marvelled of that, that I know has chanced unto me, being since
the time and age^ of my knowledge in continual deliberation to ^lea and kill
him, whom I love and esteem this day as my self: and thus it is not to be
doubted that the executions of men's wills are more in the hand of God, than in
the power of those that will execute them, as I by my self have experimented,
for there is none of you (as I believe) but knows me to be the son of the
valiant and doutie Giant Madafabul, the Lord of the Isle of the tower Vermeile
whom Amadis slew in King Cildadans wars, when he caused himself to be named
the fair Tenebreus. And for as much as natural reason did incite me to take
vengeance, the contrary has chanced, for he with his own hand has
overcome me and destroyed me.

The lamentation of Queen Brisene, for King Lisuarde which was lost, declaring
the mobilites of fortune. In the.4. book the.38. Chapter.
Deceitful and fearful fortune, the hope of the miserable and cruel enemy
of the prosperous, have I now occasion to praise me of thee? for if in time
paste thou made me lady of many Realms, obeyed and honored of so many
people, and above all marriedst me to a mighty and a virtuous King, in one
only moment thou have caused me to leese him, thou have taken from me all the
overplus of my honor and goods, seeing that upon him hung all my joy, and
honor, an^ my life. And therefore I know well that thou reioysest to make me
pay the interest of my pleasures, the which in time paste thou have lent me.
But why do I complain me of thee, having of so long time perceived and known
that this is thy fashion to do? at the furdest death shall make an end of all that thou can invent to hurt me, and having this hope, I will comfort my
self, and of thy self shall have the victory.

The consolation of Grumendan to the Queen Brifane bei^^ too much discomforted
for the loss of King Lisuard. I^ the.4. book the.38. Chapter.
BY my trothe Madam, ye do wrong thus to take the things to the worste, seeing
that I have heard you recite a hundred times, that the ^^ertue of prudencie
and wisdom cannot be known in any person, except he be solicited and ve^^ed
with tribulation and affliction: so then the counsel that ye were wont to give
to other, is now more than necessary for your self. And is it but now or to
day that ye know that fortune has two daughters: the one of many is called
good, and the other evil. If the good have accompanied you unto this time, and
that the evil does visit you in her pla^e, arm you (as a virtuous princess)
with the armor of constancy and wisdom, to defend you against her, and ye
shall see that she will be annoyed to follow you, and shall leave you: or else
I foresie as touching you, two accidents and chances nighe at hand, and
irreparable: the one, of the perdition and loss of your self, and the other
of the king, if at his return he do find ^ou dead. To say that he is
lost, are but words, for he cannot be so hidden, but we should ^ither see him
or have some news of him whether he be in this country, or in any other: nor
his prison or captivity can not be so strong, but by the aid of your
subjects, and the favor of your friends and aliance, he may be dely^^red,
and very shortly, if it please God^ And thus I beseech you Madam, that leauyng
of the things that to you are hurtful, ye seek for new counsel and comfort,
to come to that, that as concerning this maybe necessary.

A le^er from Queen Brisane to Amadis, praying him to succoure king Lisuard
the which was prisoner. In the.4. book the.38. Chapter.
MY Lord my son, if in times past the estate of king Lisuard your father has
bin defended and augmented by your means, it is now a better time and season
than ever it was to employ your self (seeing the ruin that is prepared) to
keep and to conserve him in his entire estate, for not long ^ince, some of his
enemies (as it is very like) have conveyed him and imprisoned him, so that
never a one of us can tell where, nor wherefore: the which thing causes me to
esteem, that without occasion of any greater enterprise, they have not
premeditated or forethought this treason. And for as much as this thing
touches you (next unto me) more than any other, I have well willed to
advertise you by Brandonias this present bearer, the which has seen and
understood all, and shall tell you the passion and trouble that I am in,
better than I can write it unto you: wherefore I pray you to believe him as my
self, and to advise you of the rest.

Vrgand does comfort O^iane much troubled for the loss of her father king
Lisuard, the which was taken, exhorting her to patience, and to put all to God.
In the.4. book the.38. Chapter.
MAdame (quoth Vrgand,) I pray you not to discomfort you so: know ye not that
the more that men be called to great rooms, the more they be subjects to
receive great tribulatione? for notwithstanding we be all of one mould, all
bound to vices and passions, equal to death, yet the Lord omnipotent has
made us diverse in the goods of the world, giving to one authority, to other
subjection, to some poverty and misery, to other abundance and prosperity,
and all as it pleases him. And therefore madame, compassing and comparing the
goodness that ye have had, with ^^e evils and troubles that ye are in: the
dolor and heaviness, with the pleasures and pa^times which are past, ye shall
have no cause, so to complain you, but to thank the Lord, seeing it is his
pleasure. And as touching your father, I know long since what should happen
unto him, but yet I could not remedi^ it: for it was so ordained by the
prescience and for knowledge of God, the which shall suffer him (with the time)
to return^ to his country as well content as ever he was.

The complaint of Matroco, upon the body of Arcalaus his uncle, whom Esplandian
had slain. In the.5. book the.5. Chapter.
ALas Arcalaus my good vn^le, how hard is the loss of you to me, in what place
soever it should have chanced: and by a more stronger reason in this my
castle, where I thought to make you good cheer and long. Alas aft^r ye had past
the flower of your age, and so many dangerous chances, and infinite perilles,
should it come and chance you upon the end of your old years to receive such
a death in my house, the which I esteemed a sure place not only for you and me,
but for all my parents and friends. What vengeance may I take at any time of
this traitor that so greatly has offended me: seeing that if I should put him
to death a hundred times upon a day, yet it is less than nothing in respect of
the evil that he has wrought me. At least ways if it had bin Amadis of
France, so renoumed among men, or one of his two brothers, or else al three
together, my dolor might somewhat have swaged, for the evil that I should
have caused them to suffer. But what? I must needs eue^ by reason fight with
one, and seeing the force that he continually has done, he should already
esteem himself ouercomde. What glory should I then obtain of his victory?
Certesse even such, as if I had beaten or ouercomde a simple woman feeble as
^he is of nature. And so he unworthy of my presence, shall (if it chance that I
make but a countenance only ^o outrage him) increase in glory. Yet chance what
chance may to my honor, or otherwise, he must needs die.

The Oration of Esplandian to his people being in the mountain defended,
fighting against king Armato, to encourage them to fight strongly, considering
that it is for the glory and liberty of a christian name. In the.5. book the
26. Chapter.
MY friends, we be not at this present entered into the adventures of England,
where men fight more for fantasy, or vayneglory, than upon any just occasion:
but this war that we make against the enemies of our faith, does call us, not
only to do our duty, but to defend the honor and liberty of a christian
name. And therefore I pray you my companions, that every one of us do purpose
to cast fear behind, and to prefer virtue and manhood above all
inconveniences that may chance unto us, assuring you (if we so do) that before
it be day, king Armato and his army shall well feel that we be not so sleep^e
as they think.

The Oration of king Lisuard to his vassales and friends, showing the
goodness and pleasures that he has received of Amadis, and for this reason
and cause he gives up unto him his crown and his Scepter, and the right of
his realm, and that they for this cause should be his faithful and true
vassales. In the.5, book the.28. Chapter.
MY good vassals and friends, first and or ever I make you understand and
perceive why and wherefore I have commanded you to come together, I will show you
part of ye dangers and fortunes wherein I have bin since the death of my
brother king Falanges and since it has pleased the Lord to call me to the
gouernemente and rule of you and of this realm, in the which (as I think)
there are yet many living, that can remember the danger, into the which ^oth I
and my countries as we thought should have fallen, when that by the means and
subtlety of Arcalaus the enchanter, I was put in the power of those that long
before had conspired my death, of the which my son Amadia has delivered me.
And nevertheless awhyle after (by evil counsel) I made sore war against him,
the which being raised (as every man does know) fortune envying my rest,
prepared after that, such a banquet for me, that without him being king
Arauignes prisoner, I had bin lost for ever. And this yet has assonyed me
more, for when I esteemed me certainly out of all such misfortunes, a worse
than the other chanced me, the which I thought well, considering the place I
was brought unto, to be the consumination of my troubles, and of my life
togyth^r. But yet the Lord loking with pity upon me, sent my little son
E^plandian into my heavy prison, from whence as ye all might have bin
advertised, he delivered me. Now ye see that I am old, and all white, being
already threscor^ and ten years of age, the which thing causes me to think,
that from henceforth it is time and season to forget worldly things, and to
return to God, that has bound me so greatly unto him. And for this cause, I
am purposed from henceforth, to leave Amadis my son to be your king: unto
whom even now I give over my crown, my Scepter, and the right that I have in
this realm, praying you all as much as I may possible, that from this time
forth ye be unto him faithful and obedient, as ye have bin to me. And
although he be married to my daughter, if I knew him unworthy to rule you,
believe me (my friends) I would sooner have chosen one to succeed me, that had
bin less unto me than he is, but the^ is none of you, that knows not his
merits, and the line that he descends of, the which may this day name
himself one of the most noblest, and most fortunate of all the world as
descending of the Troyans, whose memory shall never, pe^ish, he is a kings
son, the inheriter of the kingdom of France, and at this present your Pri^^^
and Lord, I leave you him with my daughter your Queen and lawful princess,
retayning to my self no other thing, but the only castle of Mirefleur, where
that the Queen and I (by Gods help) shall finish our days religiously, serving
our God, as we be bound.

The Oration of Cormellie to Esplandian, the which was sore astonyed of the
thing that Leonorine sent him word of, aduising him not to take in evil part
the answer that Leonorine had sent his father, and that the dissimulation of
the love of Ladies ought not to be taken as a refusing, in as much as it
signifies most often perfyte and entire amity. In the 5. book the.33.
Chapter.
HOw now my Lord, be ye astonished of so little? by my ^oule now I know well
that the affections and love of men do greatly differ from the passions that we
simple women endure when we fall into this extremity: and know you wherein? ye
men do commonly take pleasure to open the thing that ye love, be it by word or
by countenance: and oftentimes ye feign moreover that there is no such thing,
and (that is worsse) the more that the Lady or damsel the which is loved be
of a good house, and of great merit, so much ye more ye do glory, whereby men
know, that not only ye bear them affection, but that ye are loved, and that
she bears you good will above al other: the which is very contrary to the
nature of women, I mean of such as may name themselves wise: for why, the
higher that the parents be, the more fear they have that me^ should perceive
their amorous passions, and in such sort, that ordinarily they deny with word,
gesture, and countenance, the thing that they have most printed in their heart
and mind. And not without cause, considering that the thing which ye turn to
praise (as ye think that your love is made manifest) does bring unto them and
their honor a certain spot, the which oftentimes they cannot well deface. So
then it is more than necessary to observe this modesty and constancy in us
(not that I will restrain my self to this law) seeing that all my glory and
felicity does hang and depend^ upon you, and so, that I desire no greater
thing in this world^ than that the love and service that I bear unto you were
published every where: to the intent that they which, shall have knowledge of
your great valor, and of my little merit, may know even then what is in me, to
be yours as I am. Thus my Lord, if seems to me that ye should take in good
part, and greatly to your advantage, the purpose that Gastilles has written
unto you, that ye were bound to my Lady Leonorina, and in the presence of the
Emperor: for I answer you upon my honor, that both your affections are
reciprokes, and that she has spoken very wisely, using such dissimulation. I
say not but that she had some occasion to be miscontented, considering and
seeing the words which I at other times have brought her from you, but that is
easily amended: And if the amity and love that she so long has borne you
should be utterly broken (as I think it be not) another more nor less than a
bow that is broken, and peeced together again, the which is more stronger in
the place that it is mended in, than in any other, so you being present and in
her company, shall bring together and amend that ye shall find broken: and
shall make her to be much more yours than ever she was. And therefore I would
counsel you, that obeying her, ye go unto her, and eue^ to morrow, if it be
possible.

A letter from Armato the king of the Turks, to all the princes of the Orient,
commanding them to bring together their force and strength, to chase the
Christians out of his limits, and to conquer the Empire of Constantinople. In
the.5. book the.45. Chapter.
ARmato called by the prescience of our gods immortal ^o the government and
rule of the great kingdom of Turkey, Frontier and bulwark of the Paganes
law, to all his Califfes, Kings, Sondans, Admirals, and gouernoures of the
lands that are in the parts of the Orient, greeting. At my retourning out of
prison whereof we are now delivered, I thought it good to give you knowledge,
that not long since, there is come out of the North country (as men say) into
these coasts a knight of the line of Brutus the Troyane, unto whom our gods
have permitted for our unrighteousness (as it is very like) to conquer the
mountain defended, putting to death Matroco and Furion, two knights esteemed
among the best of all the Orient. And that they do, that is far worse, daily
increase the number of Christians, and labor to exterminate and destroy our
holy law. To withstand this, we have taken arms upon us, and prepared a strong
and a puissa^t army, thinking at the least, to drive them out of our limits.
But yet after that we had kept a long siege before the mountain Defended, and
had brought it to such extremity, that they which were within had no more
vitailes, he of whom we doubted most, and the first that enterprised this
war, found a mean (by the favor of a vile palliard, one of ours, called
Frandalo) to enter in, and by cautell and subtlety to take us, in such sort,
that our army was destroyed, and we remained as prisoners in their hands,
where they kept us for the space of a whole year most strayghtly: during the
same, our affairs fell from ill to worse: so by treson and craftiness, they
be in possession of Alfarin and of Galatia, two of the best havens of our
realm. The which they should never have done, without the help and succor of
that traitor and unfaithful Emperor of Constantinople. And now they gather so
much people, that without your aid, we be in danger to fall into their mercy:
a thing that shall be of great consequence, seeing that we be (as ye know) the
frontier and rampire of you all. Therefore we pray you and admonish you in
our Gods, that as well for the defense of our Law, as for the utility of all
the country of the East, ye assemble your strength in so great a number, that
we may chase and drive away these Christians from our borders, and conquer
the Empire of Constantinople, unto the parts of France and England, the
which shall be unto us easy and profitable.

Esplandians letter to the Emperor of Rome, showing him of the great army of
the infidel potestates, sent and prepared to destroy the Christians, and that
for this cause he must give help to a thing of so great importance. In the same
book the 47. Chapter.
MY Lord, the danger that I s^e prepared for all christendom, does co^strayn
me to send Enil unto you, by whom ye may understand at length the great
strength and puissant army, that all the kings and potentates of the East, the
enemies of our faith have prepared at the persuasion of Armato king of Turkey,
to come to destroy not only the Empire of Greece, but to press further,
until they have clean extermined and quenched our faith and belief. And for
as much as they whose place and room ye hold, have bin evermore the true
defenders and protectors of our Religion, and also because the case does touch
you so nigh, I think (my Lord) that ye should spare nothing that is in your
might and power, but assemble your fores in all extremity, and prepare your
vassals to help that good prince, the which is the borderer (as ye know) to
you, and to all the potentates that hold of the law of Jesus Christ. I have
written likewise to the king my father, and to the most part of all other
Christian Lords, unto whom I send Gandalin. And because I have charged Enil
to show you the rest, I will send you no longer letter, but pray you to
believe him as my self.

An injurious letter of Rodrigue the great Soudan of Liquie, to the knight of
the great Serpent, threatening him for his enterprise, and that he should assure
himself to be destroyed, and that he would combat and fight with him. In
the.5. book the.48. Chapter.
ROdrigue the great Soudan of Liquie, a friend of the gods, mortal enemy of
their enemies, defender of Pagane law, to thee that do call thy self knight
of the great Serpent, gre^ing. Know thou, that the occasion which has caused
us to pass over so great a sea to come to these marches, has been upon hope
to revenge the outrages that my uncle Arma^o King of Turkey has received of
thee, and of thy companions, never doing thee displeasure. And for as much as we
hold our selves sure of the ruin of that evil Emperor, that does favor thee
in so many evil and damnable enterprises, and as a few days since, he and
his did pass by the edge of our swords, so should I be sorry, that this
misfortune should first chance ^o thee, until I made a proof of thy person
and mine, because of the renoume that is of thee through all the world. Thus
advise thee if thou will accept the combat or fight of us two alone, of ten
against ten, or a hundred against a hundred, or in a more great number if
thou think it good. Swearing unto thee by all the gods, that they whom thou
shalt bring with thee for these affairs, shall have no more displeasure than
my proper person, if it be not of those, that shall be ordained to fight with
them, following the couenauntes that we shall make. Therefore make me an
answer worthy and meet for thee, and so that thy honor be not defiled.

Norandel and other his companions letter, for an answer to Rodrigue,
accepting the combat and fight that he offered, with the assurance of the
field. In the fifth book the.48. Chapter.
THe knights and servants of Jesus Christ; being now^ present with the
Emperor of Constantinople, for the defense and augmentation of the Christian
name, to thee Rodrigue Soudan of Liquie, condign greeting. Thou have sent to
the Knight of the great Serpent, a Damsel who is called Tienna, the which has
delivered us certain letters which were sent to him, the sum whereof
contains two things: in the first thou doste complain of the enterprises
that he has made upon King^ Armato thy uncle: The other, the desire that thou
have to prove thy person against his, or a great number against a greater if he
thought it good. But in as much as the Knight which thou demaundest is not
present here, nor in place to make thee answer, we have advised to satisfy
thee for him, and to accept the offers that thou have made him, assuryng thee,
that there is such a personage in this company, a Kings son and nine other
with him, that shall fight with thee, and with the like number of thine, if
thou will appoynte and give them the surety of the field, nor we will not
fail to be in the place established and appointed.

Letters from Rodrigue Soudan of Liquie, and Calasia Queen of Californie, to
Amadis of France, and his son Esplandian, to accept the combat and fight,
to know the virtue and s^rength of the best combattant. In the fifth Book the
52. Chapter.
ROdrigue Souden of Liquie the mortal enemy of the enimyes of our gods, and
Calasia Queen of Californie, a region rich of gold and precious stones more
than any other, we declare unto you Amadis of France, and King of England, and
to your son the knight Serpentine, that our defense and coming into this
country has been caused and stands upon two points. The one is the hope of
the ruin and destruction of Christentie, and the other to assay and to cause
you to leese the renoume that men give you, to be two the best knights of all
the world: for we think our selves such, that if ye will take this combat in
your own persons to ours, we shall cause it to be evidently known, that our
valiantness is no less than is yours. And to the end that the glory of
those that wyn may be manifest, they that be overthrown, shall remain in
their power, to dispose them as they shall think best: advise you therefore to
make us an answer by this our messenger, whom we have charged to declare unto
you (if ye refuse this) that from henceforth we shall have a just cause ^o
attribute unto us the superiority of all the praises and favors that fortune
hitherto has borne you, and hereafter to esteem you less, than in times past
ye have been esteemed.

The Emperor of Constantinoples Oration to Amedis and other his friends, to
advise and to take counsel upon the marriage of his daughter with the young
Esplandian, unto whom so doing. he does promise the rule of the Empire. In
the.5. book the.54. Chapter.
MY brethren, Lords and goodfriends, the obligation wherein I am bound unto
you, is so great, that althdughe it has pleased the Lord to make me Emperor
of all Greece, yet I know well, that it is not in my pour to satisfye you,
not holding all the honor and goods that I have (next unto God) be it in
particular, or general, but of you. I am now three score, al horie, and very
caduke and feeble, through the pains that I took in my youth, following the
feats of arms: I have but one daughter, the which is the staff and hope of
my old age, whom (as I have deliberated with my self) I do purpose (if ye
think it good) to marry to the valiant knight Esplandian, and by the same
means to remit the Empire and the rule of all my country unto him^ And to
live the more solitary, and to separate my self from the world, I have also
concluded with my self to retire with the Empress my wife to the Monastery
that I caused to be builded, and there religiously to recognize God, and to do
penance for the faults that in times paste I have committed. Therefore my good
Lord and friends, I pray you, if ye all agree to this, to declare it unto me,
and you first of all my Lord and brother Amadis, whom the matter touches, as
from the father to the child.

The Oration of Lisuard to the Emperor of Trebisonde, praying him to show him
the knight which he armed of late^ to receive at his hand the feats o^
knighthood. In the.6. book the.6. Chapter.
Sir, the high renoume and your great goodness, known through all the world,
have moved my companions and me to come to your court not only to do you
reverence, as the greatness of your majesty does merit, but have esperance
and hope to hear news of a young gentleman, the which ye have (as it is told
us) made knight not long ago, at the request of a Damsel that brought him unto
you. And for as much sir, as I never had intention to receive chivalry of any
other hand than of his, and that my age does seem to have done more than it
has done yet, I most humbly do pray you to tell us that ye know, that after I
have found him, I may have of him that I hope for and desire above all things.

Melies letter to the Emperor of Trebisonde, auanting her self to ouerrunne
and win the Christians, and to constrain them to believe the Pagans law. In
the.6. book the.7. Chapter.
MElie lady above all Magicians, enemy to the law of the Christians, and
curious to augment day by day the law of our gods. Thou shall know Emperor of
Trebisonde, that Constantinople shall be shortly besieged by thr^e score and
seven Princes of the Pagan faith. Where I personally will be to take my
pleasure to see it burn, and the evil men that do possess it, and him
likewise of whom all Christenti^ should hope to have favor as of his refuge
and principal aid. But it shall happen far otherwise: for she unto who^ thy
daughter is delivered, has put her in my power, and in so sure keeping, that
neither Amadis her grandfather, nor yet her father Esplandian (although they
were vnbewitched) should have no mean nor ways to succor and to help her.
And yet that is but little, in respect of the thing that I intend to do, for
by little and little I shall have the rest of you, to dispose you after my own
will and pleasure, constraining the overplus of the vulgar people, be it by
love, or by force, to turn to our faith: and have you no doubt of this, for
all this shall chance and that easily.

Frandalo making reverence to Perion, does offer him his service. In the.6.
book the.12. Chapter.
Sir Cheualier, I am wholly yours, so that ye may command me, as him that
desires to obey you, for the honor of King Amadis, and Esplandian your
brother, whose friend and well affectioned servant I am.

A cursed letter of the infant Melia to the Emperor of Constantinople,
foretelling him that he shall receive much misfortune, and destruction. In
the.6. book the.12. Chapter.
MElia Infant the most cruellest enemy of Christianity, to the Emperor of
Constantinople, ruin and intyre malediction. Know thou that shortly thou shall
feel misfortune, the which by mine occasion is prepared for thee, and such as
never the like was spoken off: for with thy own eyes thou shall see the death
of thy people, the destruction of thy country, a strange martyrdom of him whom
thou love best in this world, and finally the end of thy life in misery. In
witness whereof, this sword shall hang in the air over thy great C^^tie,
until that a prophecy of Apolidon that remains to be fulfilled, have his
effect. Then it shall vanyshe away, and shall be seen no more.

The Oration of Alquise to the Princess Gricelleria^ from his Knight Lisuard,
from whom he presents her a Prince, and the children of the King of
Jerusalem, and does pray hi^ for his love to entreat them well. In the.6.
book the.14. Chapter.
MAdam, your knight (the which far passes al other in valiantness and in
great goodness of arms) does salute you, as her whom he desires to serve
all his life, in witness whereof he does send you by me the thing that he
has conquered and gotten, since the day and time that he departed from you,
to his very great displeasure and heaviness. That is, this gentleman, a very
doutie Prince among the Pagans, and of good right, for he being at liberty
may commaund^ in the country and land of Liquie, no more nor less than the
Emperor your father does in his. And these other are the King of Palestines
children, brother and sister, the which he does pray you to receive, and
dispose as your own. And also he charged me, to assure you, that entreating
them graciously, and as he esteems of your goodness, he shall be singularly
well pleased, for and because of the place they are issued out of, and the
conquest that he has done and had of them at his beginning.

The letter of Perion, called the Knight of the Esphere to the Princess
Gricelleria, certifying her of the great love that he bears her, and also
that he feels him self very fortunate, that he was sent to a lady of so high
a price, unto whom he is ready to obey. In the.6. book the.14. Chapter.
MAdam, I know not how I may satisfye the great goodness^ that ye granted me
upon the day that ye accepted me for yours: seeing that the best knight of the
world should not think him sufficient to serve so great a lady and Princess.
And I then poor dum man that has done as yet no act of Chivalry, being come
to such honor, is it any marvel then if my heart has desired to take
things in hand whereof (with reason) it has esperance and hope to continue in
this high place, putting far from him all fear and peril of death, by the
continual remembrance that he has of your good grace: the which has so
captiuated my liberty, that my eyes have been incheined with the bands of
your fortunable presence, even since the day that they saw the brightness of
your divine face. But this prison is hidden in such liberty, that it causes
me to live, for the envy that I have to obey and serve you for ever, assured
that otherwise my soul (troubled because of your absence) should not remain
one hour in this body, passioned and troubled for the great love that he
bears you. Thus Madam, I beseech you command the thing that pleases you I
should do, and having pity upon your poor slave, send him, by this Damsel
which is faithful, your will, believing her as touching the overplus of the
thing that she shall tell you. From him that does kiss the hands of your
highness in all humility.

The answer of the Princess Gricelleria to Perion called the the knight of
the Esphere, wherein she declares that she is glad that she has received his
letters, revealing unto him her amorous passions, and recommendeth unto him the
Damsel Lisuart, praying him to bring her out of danger. In the ^. book
the.21. Chapter.
THe great pleasure that I have received with your lette^^, and the presents
the which ye have sent me by this damsel, have renewed in my heavy heart the
annoyance and troubles, the which my soul suffered through your long absence.
And believe me my friend, that were it not for the continual presence of your
person, the which I have in the eyes of my understanding, it were impossible
for me daily to resist so many assaults the which love delivered unto me, even
the self same day that ye came mute and dumb into this court, not speaking
one word to me, nor to no other: but the hope that I have that ye will shortly
return (as this messanger has assured, me) does give me a certain force and
strength to suffer this that I endure without any releasement. Bu^ for a
conclusion, and to the intent that with more occasion ye may come to see me as
I trust, I pray you to keep your self nigh unto the Emperor my father: the
which will not fail (as I think) to bring you with him, his affairs being
paste and ended. In the mean while I would desire you to assay^ and prove by
all means to draw and deliver the fair damsel Lisuard out of danger: being
certain, that if ye will do so much for her and me, that ye shall come to
your honor, as the most favored of fortune, and of high chivalry, that is
this day among those that wear arms. For the which thing I pray you as much
as I may possible for the wealth of my sister, the which is so affectionated
unto her, yt she cannot live if the Lord do not comfort her of the heaviness
that she has taken, from the day that she lost her out of her sight, for night
and day she dies through love and desire. And because I have charged Alquise
to tell you the overplus. I pray you believe her as coming from her, the which
is more yours than her own.

A letter from King Armato to the Emperor of Trebisond^, presenting him the
combat. In the.6. book. the.22. Chapter.
ARmato King of Perse, the mortal enemy of the Christians, the servant of our
gods, and principal protector of their holy law, to the Emperor of Trebisond
condign salutation. Know thou, that to have the City of Constantinople with
this country at my discretion, I not long ago am come to the field,
accompanied with such a puissance, as every man knows. And because I
understand that thou art newly come to help my enemy, I thought to send and
present to thee the co^bat, which art the principal defender of the Empire of
Greece against me, that am the principal that does pretend his ruin. Nor
excuse not thee by thy old years, for if thou have touched fourscore of thy
age, I even at ^he hour when thou wast borne, had knowledge of my nurse. The
combat that I pretend to have of thy person and mine, is only to get honor, and
to prove with the dint and stroke of the spear and sword whom fortune does
favor most of thee or me: therefore a^uise thee to make an answer that may be
for thy honor.

A letter of Grifilant the Lord of the I Will Sauuagine to Amadis the king of
England, praying him to enter in like manner into the camp of batell to see and
behold who shall obtain the victory. In the.6. book the.22. Chapter.
GRifilant Lord of the I Will Sauuagine, servant of the Gods of the Sea,
affectionated and given to the ruin of the unfortunate Christians, of whom
thou Amadis king of England art buckler and protector: Nevertheless that has
not named me so much to the desire that I have to prove my self against thee,
as the high cheualrie, whereof thou art renoume^ throughout all the parts of
the world. But seeing that the principal occasion that moved me to come forth
of my country has bin not only to help the mighty king of the Turks, but
to get laud and reputation by arms, and that fortune has so much favored me,
to have brought me to the time and place, where I have a mean to fight with
thee: I pray thee, that we may enter into the field one against the other,
assuring thee that if my Gods will grant me the victory, I shall esteem my
self the most fortunate knight that ever was borne, and that most rightfully,
having the upper hand of thee the head and principal of all cheualrie. And
although the contrary should chance unto me, yet I should not be the less
esteemed among wise men: for it is sufficiently well known, what manner of men,
and how many redoubted personages thou have overcome: and if the worst fall,
the honorable death that I shall receive, shall be a great quietness to my
mind, being assured that my life cannot endure, being purposed to spare my body
little or nothing for the me^ings and combats that shall be from henceforth
between our men and yours. Grant me then ye thing that I demand, and so
doing, thou shall do for me, and for thine honor.

Letters from the Queen Pintiquinestra to the Queen Cala^i^, admonishing her
that she will fight with her. In the.6. book the.22. Chapter.
PIntiquinestra Queen of the people that have no heads, to thee Cala^ie, that
do command the strong Isles of Califor^nie, salutations, such as I desire fro
thee. I advertise thee, that to cause my valiantness to be known to those
that mos^^ continually do haunt arms, I have of late left my country, and am
come to this camp and field, where I have certain knowledge, yt thou art
newly come to defend him that would entirely destroy us. And because thou art
esteemed ready to fight, as much or more than the best knight of the world, I
have persuaded my self, that if I may overcome thee in the camp of battle,
that this honor should be unto me immortal. Now (as me thinks) the match is
well made, of a woman, to a woman, both prete^ding one thing, that is, the
glory and renoune of valiantness. Therefore advise thee if thou will prove thy
force with mine, so that from henceforth, me^ may judge, who has better right
to wear the crown of a Queen, and the government of women, that can win men
by love and by arms.

The Emperor of Trebisondes Oration to his knights, upon the agreement of
the combat, aduertising them, that he is resolved to go and fight with his
enemy. In the the.6. book the.22. Chapter.
RIght virtuous knights, I b^ing well assured, that ye always have had so good
and so entire hearts, and honor in such recommendation, that ye were never
astonyed for any peril or danger that might happen unto you: I pray you
effectuously to think upon me, what I ought and will believe of you, that is,
that for to die a thousand deaths, I would not so far forget my self, that
my old years should be defamed, or to say better, put in doubt, be the
reputation never so little that I gat when I was young, and better and more
disposed than I am now. Certes my hears are white and gray, but the heart is
young and disposed, and the will as good as ever it was. Armato demands
combat, he shall have it, he says that he is a friend and an augmenter of his
law. I am the most humble servant of Jesus Christ, the which shall help me, if
it so please him, and as I trust in him. Therefore I pray you as much as I may
possible, not to contend or resist any more, whether I should enter into this
combat against my enemy or no, for my resolution, is to win, or to die, and
let God do what shall please him.

The Emperor of Trebisondes letter, answering together Armato, Gri^ilant and
Pintiquinestra, to advertise them, that they accept the combat, being assured
to obtain the victory, considering the just quarrel of the Christians. In
the.6. book the.22. Chapter.
WE, by the grace of God, Emperor of Trebisond, Amadis king of France and of
England, and Calafie ye Lord and ruler of the Isles of Californie, where gold and
very precious stones do grow in great abundaunce, aunswering in like manner to
the three letters that you Armato king of Persi^, Gri^ilant Prince of the I Will
Sauuagine, and Pintiquinestra the Lady of the people without heads, have sent
us, certifying you, that our journey into these borders of the East has bin
for the defense and increaseme^t of the law of Jesus Christ, in whom we
believe, and also to destroy those, the which are against him. Thus after we
had received your letters, we have bin content to agree to the combat that ye
demanded, with such weapons as ye shall choose: for as concerning the camp,
we mean and purpose that it shall be before this great City, trusting that
our only God, (in whose hand are the victories) shall give us it over you, to
the confusion of your Idolles, and great damage and dishonor of your persons.
And for as much as this damsel has charge and power by us to tarry and to
rest with you, as for the overplus, we have remitted it to her. Thu^ much there
is, that we swear unto you, and do promise in the faith and word of a king,
that for ^he time of the combat, none of our camp shall move to do you any
injury or hurt, providing that ye do the like on your side, whereof we will
have assurance and promis by oath, as reason does require.

Amadis Oration to his men, upon the refusing of the peace demanded of the
Paganes, exhorting them to fight strongly. In the.6. book the.26. Chapter.
SYrs, it is certain that this cursed and reproved people are descended into
these marches, more to offend our religion, and the faith of Jesus Christ, than
the country of Greece, or the people of Constantinople: and for this cause I
think it best, (seeing that fortune has borne us so good a face at the
beginning) that we should not put her far from us, but by the aid of God to do
so much, as to drive those knaves unto ye wells and founta^^es of Tartarie,
and furthermore not to grant them any apointment, or truces as ^hey demand,
for if ye hearken unto them, ye shall certainly not only give them leisure to
assure themselves, but leaving off, they shall recover new force and strength:
setting as much by us, as by bathed hens, or villanes without shame, and full
of cowardnesse. And this I would greatly allow, that we without dissimulation
should go and visit them even at their own c^bbans. And if ye would allege
unto me, that they are a greater number than we be, there is an answer, that
the most part of them are sick, in anguish, and destroyed through famine and
hunger, and moreover, we fight for the faith of Jesus Christ, in whose hands are
the victories, yt which does assure me that he will be with us, and that we
should not doubt.

The letter of the infant Onoloria, to the knight Lisuard, taxing him of
dissimulation and of fancy. In the.6. book the.30. Chapter.
Seeing that your unfaithfulness (the most ungrateful man that is among the
living) is now so manifest as concerning me, that no excuse, be it never so
well cloaked, can cover the fault of your heart: I forbid you from henceforth
upon the pain of your life, to be in no part where I may see you, or once to
have any news of you: for why it was not for me the which am of such a house
as men know, and to whom ye should have come, to use dissimulation under the
color of service: the which thing does cause me greatly to marvel, that ye
were so folish and hardy to tell me the thing that ye told me before ye
departed from this town, and to send me word of that, that ye charged Alquise
last of all to show me of your part. Prove therefore from henceforth to
deceive the simple damsells, not extending thus your nets to abuse great
ladies, the which resemble me, and complain them of you, having a good mean
and occasion to cause you to be put to death, were it not, that by the death of
so unfortunate and so miserable a person as ye are, your lightness might be
discovered, and my honor had and put in doubt.

A letter of Sulpicie king of the Sauuagine, to Amadis king of England,
offering him the combat, under the conditions employed by the foresaid letter.
In the.6. book the.51. Chapter.
SVlpicie king of the Sauuagine (by the death of our uncle Grisilant of good
memory, whom our Gods do entreat with Ambrose and Nectar) Garfant and
Bostrosse our v^ry dear and well-beloved brothers, will thee Amadis king of
England to wit, that we having the Gods of forces, and means to revenge as
well the death of our foresaid uncle, as the usurpation that thou have made us
for the Castle of Roch, where thou have left one to govern named Sarquil^s, the
which since thy departure, has gathered together a great number of
Christians, that are entered into our country, whereof have ensued many and
infinite murders, and yet may chance hereafter. But to resist and to avoid
this, we have thought to present unto thee the combat of us three against
three of thine, upon this condition, that if we be victors, thou shalt revoke
Sarquiles, restoring our Castle into our hands, and all that has bin since
usurped: and if we be overthrown, the rest of our country shall also remain
under thy obeisance, and we shall leave it unto thee frank and free, never
more to quarrel for it: the which thing we would not put under fortune so
variable, were it not for the good right that we have, and the wrong that thou
do unto us. And to the intent thou should not go back from so reasonable
things, we swear unto thee, and promis in the word and faith of a king, not to
fail in one point: and furthermore to give thee surety unto all, and against
all, except us three, if thou will come, or send hither^f no, we shall apoint
us to go unto thee, or to some other place, that thou shalt devise, providing
also, that thou use unto us, like faithfulness, as we present unto thee.

A brave answer of Mirammolin to Brian of Moniastes herald. In the.6. book
the.59. Chapter.
Herald return to thy master, tell him that I have not trauerst the seas so
much, nor taken in hand the conquest of Spain, to retire and draw my self
back with threatenings: when I was but a little one, they made me aferd with
Woolues, but now that I am a king, commanding men, I fear not the threatenings
of those that I trust to overcome, and shall have at my discretion and
commandment before it be night.

A letter from Vrga^d of Cognue, to the knight of the burning sword,
foretelling the thing that shall chance unto him, the which is a certain
affliction scantly able to be borne. In the.7. book and.19. Chapter.
VRgand of Cognue, greeteth thee knighte of the burning sword, know thou, that
to retire to another place out of prison, thou or ever it belong shall enter
into a more and a greater captivity, where never slave was put, and thy soul
and body shall be so afflicted, that this same sword, the which has oftentimes
saved the place that thou art issued of, shall thorough pierce thy body, and
within a while it shall be pluct out by his hands, that thinking to save
himself, shall restore thee a life worsse than a thousand deaths together,
and this martyrdom shall endure unto the time that thy fathers house being at a
point to fall down, be helped and saved by his first possessioner: and believe
me, for it shall so come to pass, as I have foretold thee. And to the intent
thou may credit it, understand, that to save thee from one mis^ortune into
the which thou should fall this day fighting with ye knight of Quay, I gave
thee a white sh^eld, and did ask thee the gift that afterward thou did
grant me, and did keep it, whereof thou should thank me, because that
without my providence, thou should have fallen into a repentance as long as
thou had lived, as by the time thou shall know better, and rather travel not
thy self, to think to know nothing, for that should be but lost pain and
labor, as well as to search it of me: let it suffice thee, that I know thee
better, than thou know thy self, and for the hope of a help and succoure,
that I trust once to have of thee, I did bear and show thee such favor. Go on
with the residue of thy enterprise without delay of any occasion that should
present it self, perceiving that it is the will of him, whose man thou shall be
in time to come.

Zirfee being praised by the knight of the burning sword, does answer, that he
did but his duty, seeing that the property of noble men is to do noble acts.
In the.7. book the.30. Chapter.
IN good faith sir knight, ye give me great praises, for the thing that has
not deserved it, and the which I could not but do, without leaving off three
principal points, the which all required of mine estate, whereof the first is
to know in time of adversity the pleasure that we have received of our
enemy, causing every man to know, that he, whom a man may graciously
recompense in season, has also a mean and a way to revenge injuries suffered
during his misfortune. The second does show it self in all civil season and
of pity, after as the case does offer it self. And for the third, not to
trouble the mind at no time, for the noyances and troubles that chance, but
that reason and discretion may continually have dominion and rule. And these
three points are notoriously necessary to all noble men, continually to
maynteine ^irm^ly and vnmouably their high and great estate: for virtue that
does not perish, causes a man to be much more noble and exalted, than all
the corruptible goods of fortune and subject to her passions and mobilitie:
seeing also that often times and too much they are given to such as never
deserve them. But it goes far otherwise with virtue, for he alone does
obtain it, that does a deed worthy to have it. Also men by virtue only
ought to be esteemed and honored, yea and reputed more ritcher tha^ if they had
all the riches of the world: because that the true riches which perish not,
are the renoume of the good and the noble acts of a virtues man.

The Oration of Maudan to the King, requiring his pardon for the treason that
he had committed, promisyng, so doing to obey him more than ever he did. In the
seventh book the 46. Chapter.
Sir, ye may see in me, how that fortune does play with such evil men as I am:
nor it was never seen, but that one sin draws unto him another, and the
second many more, in so much that at the last they blind men so well, that
(thinking to go the great way) they fall into the dytch that they made,
whereout afterward they cannot draw themselves. The which does now manifest
it self in me, that (envying the honor that ye did to the knight of the
burning sword) found and invented the thing that I told you of him and the
Queen, to drive him from your court, to have and to obtain his place. Well, I
was cause of that great evil, and I know that I merit an exceeding great
torment, yet Sir, I beseech you (preferring pity and mercy, above ye rigor
of your justice) that it will please you to pardon me, causing every man thereby
to know that my sin and fault is grievous, and your clemency and goodness
very extreme and great, the which shall turn to your great laud and praise, I
and mine remaining for ever bound to serve you more than any other of your
subjects, in as much as ye shall pardon and forgive me more, than all other.

The Oration of Queen Baruca to the King of Saba her husband, praying him to
receive her into his good grace, and not to be no more so light to believe
without hearing of both parts. In the.7. book the.46. Chapter.
MY Lord seeing this my innocence is open and known, I beseech you to receive
me into your good grace as I was before, and to remember another time not to
believe so lightly without using your power upon the accused, or ever ye hear
his iustificatio^s: considering how ye have proceeded rigorously, not only
against my chastity, but against my honor, and the honor of the house that I
come of.

The Oration of Magadan King of Saba to the knight Amadis of France, excusing
himself that he received him not as he deserved, praying him not to take it in
evil part. In the 7. book the.46. Chapter.
MY great friend, if I had known you as well yesterday, as I do at this
present, I would have borne and showed you more honor: but the grief that I
had of the evil words that were told me o^ the Queen, caused me to forget all
courtesy, yea and my own nature, the which is to receive all strangers that
come to my court graciously. So I pray you not to take this fault in ill part,
but to excuse it, and with this charge, that from henceforth I will take pain
and labor to amend it.

The Oration of the Duke of Buillon to those of his lineage, provoking them to
take vengeance for the death of his son, and to recover their honor so
abused. In the.7. book the 48. Chapter.
MY masters, my good friends and alies, ye have seen and known the dishonor
that the Emperor our Prince has purchased, not only to me, but to you all,
as well in particular as in general: and in such a sort, that having no regard
to us, which are so great and mighty, he (as every man does know) has only
caused him most villain to be taken, that next unto me, might have called
himself the head of your arms, and Duke of Buillon, whereof I have so great
dolor, that I die a hundred times in a day. And as concerning you his good
parents, I believe certainly, that nature does so prie^^ you, that your heart
does blede, and that this wou^d shall blede and continue as long as you or yours
shall have the name of gentlemen: but yet if ye will follow mine advise, we
shall not defer the time of vengeance so long: but I shall give you a mean to
recover our honor so greatly abased, that shall turn you to glory and great
profit.

The courteous Oration of Branzahar Prince of Clarence, to the knight Birmartes,
that would fight with him because he had slain his people. In the.7. book
the.54. Chapter.
KNight, thou have now gotten so great honor, that the glory thereof shall
remain with thee for ever: and although this thing was against my will and
mind, and that my heart could not content it self, for the loss of mine that
I loved so well, and whom thou have slain: And although I am called to revenge
them, yet considering that this their misfortune chanced by thy only
valiantness, doing the thing that thou should do to get a name among wise
men, I could not refrain my self but to use courtesy to thee wards, as
reason commanded me, seeing thee to be weary, without a sword and a horse. So
that if I had the better hand of thee (being provided and well horsed as I am)
such a victory should rather turn me to blame, than to any glory. By means
whereof, I love much better to be on my feet, and being equal in arms, to
let fortune rule and extend her hand to whom of us two it shall please her.

Birmartes brave answer to Branzahar the Prince of Clare^^^, where he prayseth
more his courtesy than he does wonder of his greatness and force: but yet to
avoid blame, it is expedient for to fight. In the.7. book the.54. Chapter.
PRince, your courtesy has more astonished me, tha^ the greatness of your body,
and the might of your members great and boystous, for the magnanimity of
hearts does not consist in the mass of the flesh, but in the propernesse and
strength of the person, the which does love honor, and does desire to make his
remembrance perpetual, not by bravery and pride, but doing his duty with
few and sweet words, and rude execution, in such sort, that I finding in
you the one of these two points, that is courtesy, I doubt not that the
second be far of: considering that very syldome or never they leave each
other, no more than the fire the heat, and the heat the fire. Therefore if it
were to me honorable or reasonable, I would sooner and more willingly make
amity with you, tha^ pass over with advantage to prove our persons one
against the other: but having no order, neither you, nor I cannot refuse the
combat that is offered, in so much as it should be an injury for you to leave
off the enterprise that ye have begone, and to me great blame, not to follow the
fortune that this beginning as every man may see has given me. So then, let
the victory be as it shall please fortune, and him have it that can get it.

A letter from the knight of the burning sword to Magadan, wherein he excuses
him of his departing without leave, and does labor to enter into his grace and
favor, seeing he was found without fault. In the seventh book the.16 Chapter.
RIght high, right mighty, and right excellent Prince, if the things that be
to come, were present to men, as they be unknown unto them, few men should
find themselves deceived, and fewer evil men that might by falsely reporting
things unto them deceive them. But such secrets being out of our power, certes
we should fear more the malice of men than death it self, that causes a man
to die but once. For the death that ensues and follows these traitors and
evil men, does not only take away life, but the immortal honor that every
virtuous person might obtain and get, converting and turnyng his good renoume
to shame and blame, wherewith they feed the ears of them, that harken unto
them. And of this (victorious King) ye may now judge much better than of any
other, being at the point to fall into the reputation of an unjust King, being
in will and mind so wrongfully to put the Queen to death, through the false
accusation that was reported to you of her, and of your faithful subject and
servant the Knight of the burning sword. Not sir, that I will excuse me of
the fault that I did, absenting my self from your court, following the
counsel that Maudan gave me: for where my innocence was, pain could have
no place. And furthermore, not leaving my honor doubtful by my flying away,
I should rather have submitted my self to your punishment, (knowing your
virtue and my justice) than fearing your fury, and followyng the death, the
which I deserved not, to render my self suspecte of the fault. But the gods
(as I understand) have suffered the truth afterward to be discovered by him,
that had charged it, and that the Queens honor, and mine was recovered by the
invincible valiantness of Amadis the King of England, ye which sustaining my
right, slew the traitor in the plain field of battle, before your majesty.
And nevertheless sir, if there yet do rest any sparckle of evil will
against your humble servant, I beseech you to forget it, and partly to take
and to receive me to your good grace and favor, perceiving that I have a
desire to return to your excellency, to whom I would already have come, if it
had not been for the promise that I made to these three Kings assembled, not
to leave the^ until the war taken in hand against two other traitors were
ended. Therefore it may please you to excuse me, kissing the hands of your
highness in all humility.

The Oration of Abra to her brother Zair Soudan of Babylon demanding whereof
his anoyance does proceed, to give him a remedy. In the.8. book the.2.
Chapter.
ALas my Lord, from whence may this accident proceed? I pray you not to hide
the occasion any more from me, swearing unto you by the faith that I owe you,
that if there be any thing, wherewith I may give you any remedy, I will not
spare my life for you: for why it can not continue, seeing you suffer as ye do.

The Oration of Abra to the Princes and Lords being in the Soudans Zair her
brothers court, declaring unto them the vision of the foresaid Soudan, and
persuading them to take in hand the combat against the Christians. In the.8.
book the.2. Chapter.
EXcellent Princes, and great Lords, it seems that fortune does present to you
all, one mean and way (serving our gods) to augment their law, and to make
less and diminishe that, by the which they are misprysed. And to declare unto
you, that I speak not without reason, ye shall understand that the great God
Jupiter and Mars appeered (one of these nights past) to your good Prince Zair,
whereof the evil does come that noth hold and trouble him. And they have
threatened him very sore and reproved him, seeing they called him not to such a
highness, to let the faith of the christians to increase, and not to ^are for
that, in the which he lived. And because he would not wholly fall into their
indignation, bad to command you incontinently to enterprise the conquest of
Trebisonde, or else that we and he should be so well chastened, that proving
the rigorousnesse of fortune, we should come late to repentance. Thus if we
will obey them, executing their holy will, we shall be sure of the victory,
and Zair shall mary Onoloria the Emperors daughter of whom I spoke unto you:
of these two shall come so complet a knight, that ye sun is not brighter among
the stars, than his renoume shall be from the Orient to the Occident among
men. And this is (Princes and Lords) the cause, for the which the Soudan your
sovereign King has caused him to be called for this day, purposing as
touching his part, not to show himself any other, than most humble and most
obedient to gods will, trusting that of your part ye will not be tardife in so
good a work, but cause your high valiantness and chivalry that is in you, to
be known throughout all the world, ye shall follow that is predestinate unto
you, of the which I may bear witness, for although I be but a woman yet
should I be very displeasant, that so glorious an enterprise should pass out
of my presence and sight. Thus honorable Princes, make ye together a
resolution upon this, that your king intended to show you with his own mouth,
if the evil that he feels, had not forbidden and let him to speak,
purposing wholly to ensue and follow the inspiration of Jupiter, and your good
advise, trusting in the faithfulness and zeal that every one of you has (as
I think) to the encreasement of his honor, the which shall be your wealth and
advancement.

A letter from Abra in the name of Zair her brother Soudan of Babylon, to the
Infant Onoloria, of whom (being very amorous) he labors to have her good
grace and favor. In the.8. book the.7. Chapter.
MAdam, I pray you as much as is possible, (reading this letter) to consider
how Zair the Soudan of Babylon the king of the Pagan Princes, and the most
mighty Monarch that is this day upon the earth, does find himself so beaten
with the arrows of the god of love, the which being enforced freely to declare
unto you the pain yt he indureth to be yours has conceived this boldness to
write this word unto you, and to cause you to understand, that ye servitude
that he bears was divinely motioned, and by the inspiration of Venus son:
the which appearing one night among all other to me, represented to me the
excellency of your beauty so lively, that he would me, the ruler and Lord
of Lords, and that all my life have been free and without subjection, to
become servant and slave of your good grace, the which thing I require you
most humblye not to deny me: but waying the greatness of my estate, and the
noble blood whereof I take my beginning, to use me as I deserve: assuring you
Madame, that having this favor, I shall esteem it more than if the rest of
the whole world took me for their natural Lord: and yet more if I might
receive some Iuell or some sleue of you to wear, ending the combattes that I
have set forth, to uphold your perfect beauty, the which far passes all the
most excellent that has been or may be for ever: kissing for the overplus a
thousand and a thousand times your divine and white hands with all reverence.

The Oration of Abra Zair sister to the Infant Onoleria, expou^dyng unto her
the vehemente love that her brother do the bear her, the which ought to move
her sweetly to entreat him, and to take pity of his torment. In the eyghte
book the.7. Chapter.
I Marvel (Madam) how it is possible that with so great beutie and wisdom
that is in you, rigor and disdain may have any part. Ye have (as I have
understood) slenderly regarded the letter that the Soudan my brother has
written unto you, and the evil that he suffers in loving you so perfectly,
as he has certified you. I pray you for gods sake to consider, that his life,
if ye use long such cruelty toward him, will be short, and that ye shall
leese (in leesing of him) the best and the most affectionated servant, that
ever ye shall get, and me also, the which has merited more greater punishmente
for the wrong that he has done you, in loving you (if it may be called wrong)
than you him: for why he never thought but to obey and to please you, and I for
to find some remedy for his unmeasurable passion, the which has bin the cause
why I have sent you (by one of my women) the thing that has somewhat better,
(as she has reported to me) contented you.

The answer of Onoleria to Abra Zairs sister, reproving her of her foolish
enterprise, and that if her brother make any further suite, she will cause it
to be revenged. In the.8. book the.7. Chapter.
I Think Madame, that it should sufficiently enough have suffised you that ye
have done already, without charging me a new, and so, that if I have had some
occasion of grief or anoyance against your brother, to have bin on my part too
much forgetful. Now, where ye think to excuse him, ye accuse him the more,
and do cause me to think, that ye doubt that I feel not my self to be the
daughter of so great an Emperor, and to be extract and to come of such
blood, that I had rather never to have bin, than for any thing to defile the
least part of my honor. And therefore assure him that causes you to use such
words, that I, if he continue in this foolish suite, and you in your
importunity, shall advertise such a one, that in aduenging me, shall
complain of you, and of him, even as ye merit and deserve.

The Oration of the knight Birm^rtes, to the Emperor of Trebisond, wherein he
aduertiseth him of the will that he has to fight in the honor and favor of my
Lady Oriane, whom he esteems the most perfect in all things that is in the
rest of the world. In the.8. book the.9. Chapter.
RIght mighty and excellent prince, the representation that I bear of her
that has not her peer in perfect beutie, does remove the fault from me that I
might have received, not doing (at my coming) the honor and reverence unto
you, that your highness merited. And for to declare the cause that moved me to
come to this your court, ye shall understand sir, that I purpose to maintain
and uphold against all men, that my Lady Oriane the Lady of all beauty,
princess of Apolonia, does exceed in perfection all the most excellent of the
world, as I hope to prove by arms, under such condition, that he the which
will assay it, shall be constrained, if he love the daughter of any Emperor
or king, to bear her in picture, as I do this, the which ye see that I, if I
remain victor, may set his tablet in yt range of other, whom I have conquered
and won. And also where I should have the worsse, I should from henceforth
be enforced to leave off my enterprise, without making any mo quarrels for ye
beauty of my lover, to the prejudice of those that have any enterprise.
Therefore sir, now that ye have understood my will and mind, if there be any,
that will furnish and fulfill the conditions recited before your excellence, he
shall find me to morrow without this palace, ready to receive him.

The Oration of Zair Soudan of Babylon, to the Emperor of Trebisond, in the
which he having vaunted his fortunable conquests, does protest that by and by
he will be baptized, trusting that afterward the Emperor will not deny him
his request. In the.8. book the.11. Chapter.
RIght mighty Emperor, I esteem that it is not of late that ye have
knowledge of the kingdoms and great provinces, that I have subdued and brought
to my crown, since the time that the Gods called me to rule the, best part of
Asia. And leading and in my own person conducting my invincible armies these
long iorneis during, I never, showed my self to be tardious nor slothful:
but (having no respect in the peril of heat, cold, nor of long time, nor of
any other danger that presented it self,) I have freely and at will suffered
them all, as the least of my soldiers, and in such sort, that I (fortune
favoring) have made fifteen great kings my tributaries, of the which the most
part have followed and accompanied me into your court, where they be as yet. Yea
I have been taken all my life for the most fortunatest prince that ever bare
Scepter, but all the prosperity that I have received in times past, is little
or nothing, in respect of one that ye shall understand, and whereof I think
that both you and all this nobility shall marvel. It has pleased God the
creator, to have kept me in this your great city, and therewith to give me the
knoweledge of the true faith, that you Christians do observe: and in the which
I do intend to live and die, having no greater displeasure in my heart, but
that I have differred so long to do it. And to the intent ye may see by the
effect thereof, that I speak not in vain, by and by, and in the presence of
this assembly and company, I, my sis^er, and all these princes my subjects will
receive baptism and be baptized, trusting that within a while after (using
your accustomed liberality) ye will not deny me the gift that I shall pray
you to grant me.

The complaint of Zair Soudan of Babylon, for the Infant Onoloria, the which
had left him, to aquaint her with Lisuard. And he complayneth sore of her
unfaithfulness and fault committed by her. In the.8. book the.11. Chapter.
AH, ah, heavy thought said he, that does freese and burne^ my heart, and
aduaunceth the heaviness, which without ceasing does fyle and know my soul
and my spirit. Alas, what should I do, b^ing come so late, and to so evil a
purpose, that another has gathered the fruit, and I only have the sight of
the tree, another has gott^n the spoil, and entier richesse, and I am yet to
enjoy the least goodness and ^ favor, that man may or can esteem. Wherefore
then being deprived (as I am, both of the flower, and of the fruit together)
do I thus trouble my self, and for her that (after the ensample of a she
wolf) does leave me, and choose Lisuard, for disdayning me a servant, to make
her self a servant and a slave, and to give her to him, leesing by this means
the best thing that was in her. For why, a maid to say well, a virgin and
chaste, is like a Rose, being joined to the fair Rosier, receiving no heart,
neither of beast, nor of the injury of the time, the dauning and albe of the
day full of deaw inclining to her favor. And by this occasion and desire, they
do aid and comfort amorous young ladies that do make garlands, nosegays, and
coronets to adorn their heads withal, and to apparel their little tetes, or
round small aples, (planted and set upon their tender s^omackes) do gather and
possess. But she is not so soon taken from hir^ green branch and maternall
nurishment, but that by little and little she leeseth her grace and beauty,
that caused her to be desired both of God and man. In like manner the Lady or
Damsel, leaving the flower of her virginity to be ravished of other, the
which she should keep more dearly than her goods, or her own proper life,
does utterly alter the pricel that caused it to be esteemed, and the good will
of those that bear her good affection and service. But what? It is very like,
that she takes little thought, or none, seeing that she does continue and is
beloved of him, unto whom she has bin so liberal of her body. Ah cruel
fortune, fortune ingrate and blind. Lisuard alone does triumph in abundance,
and I die of necessity. Is it then possible that she at any time will be
agreeable unto me? Should I thus suffer my body to perish and consume, and
furthermore to require so ingrat a person? No no, my days shall sooner die,
than my affection shall at any time return to her again, nor it were no
reason. And yet that evil man which has procured me this injury and torment,
shall pay the shot, causing him to leese (if I may) his life and his honor
together.

A very chaste answer of the Infant Gradafilea to Lisuart, to whom she shows
his lightness, and protests how she would that her conversation should be
chaste with him. In the 8. book the.15. Chapter.
IN good faith my friend (quoth she) ye are (as farfoorth as I can see) greatly
deceived, and therewith ye do me wrong, to esteem and think to diminish my
pain with a certain shame too unfortunate for my honor. I pray you fair
sir, never to have your Grandafilea in such opinion, to think by her, that the
forces and strength of love be sufficient to corrupt her chastity, not her
chaste will, and virtues: these things being only reserved to marriage, and not
for the sensual appetites worthy to be blamed. Also that I now do weep, is not
to see my self frustrate of my intention, but only for the consideration that
I have, that ye shall not as long as ye live, come to the thing that ye have
under the shadow to mitigate and sweetly to ease the evil that tormenteth me
presumed of me. For ye may be certain and sure of this, seeing that Onoloria
only does merit you, that my will shall never have more power upon me, than I
have over it, the love that I bear you continuing with my chastity, and my
certain hope, my desire unexecuted, and my travel in repose and rest: nor
searching no another thing but your continual presence and company, with the
which I shall feel in my self more glory and contentation of mind, than if I
had the entier favors, great goods, and preheminences, that all other kings
and princes of the earth may grant and give me. Therefore I pray you, that
this honest amity, and ordinary love that I desire with you, be not refused
nor denied me: but to suffer me for ever to follow you under this pretext and
condition, that the faithfulness that ye owe to my lady your wife, be in no
wise corrupted, but so certain and sure, as if she ordinarily had you hanging
upon her ne^lie.

Lisuart does praise the excellent answer of Gradafilea, and the great virtue
that is in her, not suffering her self to be deceived by foolish love, for the
which virtue he does very much esteem her, and does declare that he is
ready to obey her demand. In the.8. book the.16. Chapter.
BY God Madame (as far as I may perceive and know by the things that are in
you) the works of God are great and wonderful: and it should be ill and hard
to be believed, without one saw it and understood it, that in the person of a
damsel young and fair, might be so much force and virtue, ye which truly do
merit you the first place among them, whose renoume does as yet live this day.
The which does cause me to esteem much more the constancy which is in you,
than that of the Roman, the which with ioyfulnesse of heart burnt his own
arm. Also the cruelty that he prepared for himself, is not comparable to the
torment that ye have willed, and will suffer for the love of me: for he that I
speak to you of, outraged only in one of his members: and you the example of
all Chastity, have suffered (to save your honor) not your arm only to be
burnt, but through force of love, the heart, and the body where the gentle
soul, and the spirit so perfect does repose and rest. By the occasion whereof,
I promis my self full well, that there was never knight so bound to any Lady
or Damsel, as I am to you, in so much that I may vaunt my self, that fortune
has bin more fortunable to me, than to any of those, bringing me so low, to
exalt me in an instant to so high a degree, preparing the occasion to cause me
to be of the most sage, fair, and chaste princess of the earth so perfectly
loved, and so, that with good right I shall maintain against all, that another
the renoume of Amadis of France my Grandfather, nor the hardiness of my
father, and much less the high acts of the knight of the burning sword (whose
valiantness has already compast the world) cannot reasonably be made egall to
my good hour and fortune, that I rejoicing do feel in me, and with so great
difference of the honorable love of two the highest Ladies of the earth. And as
touching that ye demand of me, said he, whereof I my self should have first
required you, I grant it you with a very good heart, reputing your company so
vantagious and gainful to me, that I will never leave you against your will,
so that force and prison constrayne me not.

Niquea princess of Thebes letter to the knight of the burning sword,
declaring unto him, that being advertised of his virtues and great
valiantness, she has taken affection unto him, and desires to marry him. In
the.8. book the.18. Chapter.
NIquea princess of Thebes, and whom the Gods have aduantaged in such perfect
beau^ie, that no lady nor damsel of this time is to be compared unto her,
gives salutation to the noble, greatly renoumed, and right valiant knighte of
the burning sword. Know therefore that his excellence, of whom I have not as
yet bin seen, nor looked upon by any man living, for my presence is forbidden
them, and my beauty no less prejudicial, tha^ the venomous sight of the
Basiliske. By the occasion whereof, they keep me close in this strong tower,
accompanied with women only, the which it has pleased my father the Soudan to
give and apoynt me. But that notwithstanding, the renoume of your valiantness
and good grace has so flown and so spread it self here, that it has made an
entier and a whole conquest of my heart, for your wealth only, and the hurt of
all other: and yet without altering herein my honor in any thing, marriage only
(keeping the thing that ought most to be kept and commended to all virtuous
Ladies) shall give place to my conte^tation, and to the goodness ye ye ought
to desire, being so favored of fortune, ye she shall cause you to love her, and
to be amiable to her whom no other but you only does merit to serve. Therefore
receiving the hour and time that the Gods have reserved for you, I pray you
incontinent as ye have received and red my letter, to come and see her that no
man could see but to his disadvantage and certain evil, having all that is good
in her, dedicated unto you, and that to join together the paragon of all
beauty, with the excellence of cheualrie. Busando my feeble dwarffe shall tell
you the rest from me, whom ye may believe, (if it please you) as my self.

Niquea the Princess of Thebes advertisement to her dwarffe Busando, to keep
secret that she would show him, because it is the thing that touches her
honor. In the.8. book the 18. Chapter.
MY little Busando, I have otherwhiles promised thee, that t^ou should be the
first that should be partaker of my dolours, and to whom I would show the
cause of my heaviness, and that because of the confidence and trust that I
have in thy faithfulness. I being a servant as thou art, will not from
henceforth keep from thee the secret of my heart, tru^^ing, that putting it
into thy hands, thou will faithfully keep it, without disclosing of it to any
living creature, yet (first or ever I begin) I pray thee to consider, how
sharp and how vehement the force is, that constrained me to tell thee, seeing
that another shame, nor ye greatness of mine estate, could not satisfye my
honesty, until the arowes of love did so wound my heart, that the wound being
already putrified the remedy is immortal and incurable. I say this, because
that my life is not only in peril and danger, but my own honor, the which
thing is worse. Therefore my Busando, I pray thee to have before thine eyes,
the confidence that I have in thee, knowingfull well that who so delivers his
secret to another, to him is committed the thing that he ought to keep more
derely than his own affection. And so thou shall have in remembrance as well
to hide my thought, as I have had pain first to open it unto thee.

The answer of the dwarffe Busaneo to Niquea, assuring her so to be hirs, that
he would not to die for it do the thing that should offend her. In the.8.
book the.18. Chapter.
PArdon me (Madam) for ye do me wrong, being in doubt that I am any other
than obedient to your will. Also I would sooner chose to die, than for any
thing to transgress it, beseeching you most humbly to believe, that your
Busando has no more power upon himself, than it pleases you ^o give him. So
then, command him hardly all that shall please you, and with so much faith,
that he shall keep it so close as though ye had showed it to no other but to
your own soul, esteeming me to be so greatly beloved of virtue, that she as
touching me shall overcome all things that I may think to be contrary unto it.

The Oration of the knight of the burning sword, to Lucelle the Princess of
Siceli, declaring unto her, that he is vehemently wounded with her love: ^umbly
beseeching her to feel in her self this great amity, and to have pity of
his pain and dolor. In the.8. book the.21. Chapter.
WOuld God Madame, that love had as well employed his forces and strength upon
you to my advantage, as he has willed to do toward me, making me wholly
yours, and so greatly affectioned to honor you, and to serve you, that if all
things went by reason, the flames that burn my heavy heart, should be the
mean to give me such quiet and rest, that you your self (feeling the thing
that causes me to suffer) would blame your self, to esteem, and think your
self so cruel. But seeing that my evil hour does consent that I alone
should suffer, I esteem the travel fortunate and luckie, if it content you,
trusting that (I knowing my self such as touching you) will have pity upon me,
if not shortly, at least way in time, trusting so in your goodness and
honesty, that ye (knowing that ye are the cause of my martyrdom) will not be
so cruel, as to suffer such a knight as I am, and only borne in this world
to obey you, and to ^^e^se you in all that ye shall think good to command
him, to dye so miserably and wretchedly.

The answer of Lucelle to the knight of the burning sword, causyng him to
understand, that she bears him as good affection as she may in true and
faithful amity, and to marry together, if she may do it. In the.8. book.
the.21. Chapter.
AH ah, my friend (quod the Princess) how say you that to me? think ye that
I hold you so far from reason, to think in your mind, that I would
knowledge the services that ye have done for me, to be things unmeet for my
honor? Believe me that ye shall not live being deceived in the love that ye
bear me: for I love and esteem you so much, that if all the Monarchy of the
world were set on the one part, and you alone on the other, and that the one
and the other were at my commandment, I would accept and choose you for my
only lord and husband, rather than to remain lady and empress of the
rest. And this is it that causes me to be very sure, that your heart does not
desire, nor would not think upon any thing whereof my reputation might have any
^lur, or the least blame that any man might presume. Likewise I will swear
unto you, that no other but you, shall at any time possess my heart, for it
is and shall be yours, as long as I have life in my body, to will you well.

The knight of the burning swords letter surnamed Amadis of Greece, answering
to Niqueas letter, aduertising her that he is ready to come to see her, seeing
she has granted him her good grace, the which shall cause him live content. In
the.8. book the.22. chapter.
MAdame, I have received the letter which it has pleased you to write to me
by this bearer, and reading it, I by and by felt my heart inclined to do you
all the service that shall please you to have of it, desiring no greater
goodness than to see and to enjoy your presence, being well assured, that my
eyes receiving this fortune, that your two sweet and pitiful eyes shall have
compassion of the evil that I suffer for the thing that I never offended. So
that I, ye giving me a certain part in your good grace, shall live content,
and you obeyed and honored by him, upon whom you have entier commandment,
the which desires you to do so much for him, as to suffer and to set an
order, that he may see you, and kiss your divine hands, recognisyng the grace
and favor that ye have showed him, sending him word of your will by Busande,
the which he shall take pain to accomplish even as I have prayed him to show
you by mouth, whom ye may believe if it so please you, as from your most
humble and obedient servant the knight of the burning sword,

The complaint of Onoloria for the absence of Lisuard, and and therefore she
prays him to have pity of her extreme dolor, and to come unto her. In
the.8. book, the.36. Chapter.
ALas my dear friend, whereupon think ye now? to leave her thus alone, and
not favored, whose esperance and hope is more than half dead. For as the
shadow does augmente at the departing and going down of the Sun, and
rendereth terror, obscurity and darkness to fearful and not well assured
hearts, in like manner fear (you being absente and out of my sight) does
hold me so assieged, that it for^aketh me not one hour, but does what it can
or may, to cause me to leese you and my life together. Therefore now O my
sweet light, and my only sun, advance you and come to give cleerenesse to my
spirit, which is now so obscured and dusked with mortal noysomnesse, that
the first news that ye shall hear of me poor woman, shall be (as I think) the
desperate end of your Onolorie the which does no less serve you, and call
you to her help and succor, than she is easy and joyful of your liberty
and deliverance.

The Oration of a Trumpeter to Queen Liberna from the people of Abernis,
praying her to excuse them, and to pardon their fault, that they have
committed against her Majesty. In the.8. book the 31. Chapter.
MAdam your humble subjects constrained by the violence of Abernis to take
arms and to war against you, do pray you in all humility, to receive them
from henceforthe unto your good grace, and to forget the fault that they have
committed against your majesty, under this charge and condition, that in time
to come, they shall be faithful and obedient, so much or more unto you as
other subjects or vassalles the which are in other provinces and countries.

The Queens answer to her people, declaring that with good heart she does
pardon them of their offense, upon the hope of their amendment. In the.8. book
the.31. Chapter.
MY friends, seeing ye have taken this journey, ye shall find me a gracious
Princess and as affable, as Albernis was unto you grievous and uneasy. I know
well enough that many of you were seduced and forced to make war, and that
many a one also forgot themselves more than they should have done. Yet that
notwithstanding, upon the promise that ye have made me, and in the hope that I
have of your amendment, I am ready to make you a general pardon, and to
entreat you from henceforth as a good and a virtuous Queen and Princess
ought to entreat and govern her good and faithful subjects.

The Oration of Queen Liberna to the knight without rest, causing him to
understand, that she is so taken with his love, that he has all power upon
her. In the.8. book the 31. Chapter.
I Promis you knight without rest, that considering the great valiantness that
is in you, and the goods that I have recovered by your means and occasion
only, I am purposed to cause you to leese the name that ye bear, and to give
you such might and power upon me, as a Lord and spouse may take upon his wife
and lover. For I confess, that there was never princess, nor no other, so
taken with love, as I am toward you, although that in a manner ye are unknown
unto me.

Abra the princess of Babilons letter to Lisuard, reproching his great
cowardnesse, that he killed her brother Zair, whereby he has showed that he
has clean forgotten the love that she did bear him, and that she therefore
will sacrifice her self to death, for to celebrate the remembrance of her
foresaid brother. In the.8. book the.34. Chapter.
ABra princess of Babylon, servant of the sovereign Gods, and enemy to
those that are against them, to thee Constantine, and Prince Lisuart, murderer
and rauisher of the spouse of the divine land of Babylon, leaving and
forsaking it by the death of the most noble Zair, Orpheline of his royal
cheualrie, and made bare and spoiled of her hope, to recover any more such
another Lord. Tell me ingrate, is this the reciproke love wherewith thou wast
bound to me, giving thee knowledge of the goodness that I desired and wished
thee? Is this the recognizing of the election and choice that I made of thy
person, to be my Lord and spouse? Is this the fruit of my esperance and hope,
that thou did then put me in, when that in ye presence of so many princes I
required thee to voutsafe to take me to thy wife and perpetual lover? having
thee so well printed in my heart, that thou should not depart from thence, as
long as life should rest, but should be resident there, to norish my desire
the better, that I have to revenge ye death of my well beloved brother. But
alas, who would ever have thought that the fearful sea should have bin
consecrate with his body and sepulture? Certesse I believe that the sea is
ignorant, that she has him drowned in the depnesse of her waters. For if she
had known it, it is very like, that the waters would already have triumphed,
yea in communication with the sovereign heavens, holding themselves honored,
to enjoy his blood and divine body. And if the sea be not yet advised, nor the
earth as yet has not perceived it, it would not have delayed her complaints
and dolours so long from the sovereign Gods, to have and to recover her spouse
and her just possessor again, that has bin usurped from her domination, and
put into so contrary an element: whereof peradventure may chance in time to
come continual war between her roundnesse and the depenesse of the abismes,
each of them pretending the rejoicing and guard of his prince and magnificent
dominator and ruler. But if these two do complain, the fire and his element
will not hold their peace, but shall complain them for ever, through the
regard and consideration of the sacrifices that the gods hoped for, if he had
dyed and deceased upon the earth. The air then is alone, that does enjoy the
thing that thou do possess, that is, the assurance of the death of Zair.
Also he was present and occupied in the conflict between the infernal furies,
the which during the battle vomited out brimston and filthy stinches by the
mouth of an infinite sort of canons and other artillery. But alas alas, what
vengeance shall be done for him, for whom the air, the ^arth, and the fire
shall at sometimes feel his absence, and the deep waters glory for the
possession of his body? yea and other truly, than it, at thy death, at ye end I
say of my life, seeing me thus deprived of my Lord and brother. At the end (I
say) of my life, because that cruel love will not suffer the vengeance upon
thee, but that I must sacrifice my self to adorn thy death, that shall make
mine very happy and fortunate. So shall thy funeralles be entirely celebrated
by the death of Zair and of me, to the end that fortune make them egall at the
victory, the which she would have granted thee, not only in thy life against
knights and beasts most cruel, but in the death that she shall procure thee,
that as long as she shall live defieth thee, the which shall be no longer, than
thou shalt be resident in the world, that by such and so strange cruelty
the desire of my vengeance may be executed.

A letter of Zahara Queen of the mount Caucasus to Lisuard, containing that
she is come to Babylon to marry Zair, but finding that Lisuard had slain him,
she defyeth him. In the.8. book the.35. Chapter.
ZAhara Queen of the mount Caucasus, Lady of all Hiberia, victor else of great
provinces, of the Sa^^ates, Corces, Hircanie, and Massagetes, to thee Lisuard
the Infant of two sovereign Empyres of Greece and Trebisond greeting. Know
thou, that the renoume of the stout Soudan Zair, has caused me to come from
my country that is far hence, into this great City of Babylon, trusting to
have given him the possession of my self, and of my kingdoms together, my
immortal glory continuing upon his name. But after that I knew that fortune
which sometimes was his friend, had suffered his blood to be shed, leaving me
by this means and for ever without a husband, that there should remain no
other that might come unto the merit of my highness, being such a
princess as I am, and endued with the beauty that the Gods have given me,
by whose advise, the marriage of us twain had been consummated, if misfortune
(as it has done) had not said against us: but whatsoever impediment or
let that unkind fortune has done to my destiny, yet it cannot hide nor quench
the glory of Zair, his death being revenged by thine. And to come thereunto, I
defye thee as touching thy person and mine, and with what weapon thou will
choose, the camp being before the palace of the right puisant Emperor of
Trebisond. And to the intent thou despise not this combat, because thou art
presented by a woman, I do open unto thee, that the custom of Sarmate has
gotten and procured me the possession of cheualrie, and the name of a knight,
and in such sort, that the victory that thou shall obtain upon me, (if thou
obtain it) shall be very noble, because of diverse other that I have won upon
many as valiant as thou art, the which have proved the force and strength of
my arms. And thy ancient glory shall be nothing the less, (notwithstanding
the good countenance that fortune has born thee and showed thee hitherto) but
greatly aduanunced, having the upper hand of such a Queen, and so mighty as
I am, and that desires to extinguish (to her power) this cruelnesse, wherewith
the beauty of thy eye can overcome (as men say) and conquer the high Ladies
and damsells that see and behold thee.

A letter from Lisuard to Abra the Empress of Babylon; wherein he shows the
causes of his coming to Zairs countr^y, and the good cause why he slew him:
and he declares the good affection that he bears to the foresaid Abra. In
the 8. book the.36. Chapter.
SOueraygne Empress of Babylon, and of the Parthes, Lisuard of Greece, Infant
of Constantinople and Trebisonde, and the servant of Jesus Christ, does greet
you, and honor you as your highness does merit. Ye shall understand right
honorable Lady, that the imperial blood of Greece joined with the glorious and
invincible England, has brought me to the place where truly I have found
the mean to revenge the injury that I received by the prince Zair. In doing
whereof (and with so good and so just a cause) I think that I have not
offended the great obligation wherein verily I am, (for the love that ye say ye
bear me) greatly bound unto you: Also the desire to do you humble service, is
not, as concerning me, diminished in me, but as long as I shall live, I will be
yours (as I am) without altering the fidelity that I have born to my Lady
Onoloria my dear sister and wife. Now (madame) somewhat to answer the letter
that it pleased you to write unto me, and spec^ally upon that ye complain you
of the sea, that may glory in it self, having in it the body and the blood
of the Prince Zair. I think (saving the better advice) he could not have
received a more glorious sepulcher, being honored (as ye do publishe it) with
so great a multitude of waters, which (after your judgment) should esteem him
more than their own Neptunes. And if heaven will rauishe him out of the
abysines, to place him more higher, who can wish him better? Certes, the one
and other are more meet to lodge him than the earth, whereof he ^ath lost the
possession, yea he should think it too little to contain in it self, the
body of him, whose virtues and valiantnesses are inenarrable and innumerable.
Thus (madame) I beseech you most ^umbly, to diminishe your passions, which
thing reason should sooner do, than the time, knowing you to be as sage and
as virtuous a Princess, as any in all the world. By the occasion whereof, I
have, considering the latter lines of your letter, conceived more pity of
your evil, than of any fear of the thretning that ye threaten me withal, to
purchase and to seek my death: the which chauncing to me by your means, ye
shall be but easily satisfied, and shall leese if ye leese me, the best and the
most affectionate servant that ever ye shall have, and so ye shall find me,
where and when it shall please you to employe me or command me, without
sparyng of life, and a doseyn (if I had th^^) in obeying of you.

The answer of the Infant Lisuard to the Queen of Caucasus letters, by the
which he does advertise her of the receyte of her letters, and that he
accepts the combat, and remitteth to her the choice of arms. In the eight
book, the.36. Chapter.
RIght high and myghtie Queen of Caucasus, I have perceived and known by the
brief and letter, which it has pleased you to send me, that the occasion of
your coming to Babylon, was upon the hope of the marriage that should have
been between you and prince Zair, whom I caused to pass by the file and edge
of my sword, saying that through his death, ye will live a widow at all
points, because there is no man living worthy to have you. Truly madame, the
highness of your estate, and the beauty that does accompany you with this
valiantness whereof ye are renoumed, does right well merit, that men should
esteem you such a one as ye are. But I will never easily consent, yt there are
not other Princes, Lords, and knights enough and as good or better than Zair,
to join with you in marriage, and to satisfy and supply his defaulte. As
concerning the rest, I promise you, that I am sore displeased for the combat
and fight that ye will enterprise at al vttera^ce and assayes against me. For ye
being but a woman, are more to be feared for your great beauty tha^ for the
force of your arms, considering that I am more accustomed to put my life in
hazard, and to serve you and other like unto you, than to defend me and to
fight against them. But yet seeing that in regard of this, ye would be rather
taken for a valiant and a hardy knight, than for a sweet and a gracious
damsel, defying me, as concerning your own person and mine, I accept it. And
to reserve apart the obligation that I owe unto your service, I remitte unto
you the election and choice of arms. For I trust so much in your natural
goodness, yt you your self, shall be won of your self, without seeking the
victory upon you, whereby I may rather defend my self against those that have
occasion to enterprise to assail me. As concerning the camp and other things
required by this prudent Lady, they shall be granted you as she has of your
part demanded them. The time shall be fifty days hence, to the intent that
with ye solemnity of so glorious an enterprise, my marriage may the better be
celebrated and honored.

Niquea the Princess of Thebes letter to the knight of the Burning sword, by
the which she praises him, and does labor to insinuate her self in his love,
and to come thereunto, she sends him the portraiture of fair Ladies. In the
eight book the.40. Chapter.
NIquea the Princess of Thebes, gives and sends salutatio^ to the knight of
the Burningsword, more valiant than any other that ever bare arms. Your
excellency shall understand, that I have received the letter that ye have
written unto me, and I have heard at length the credence of this my faithful
Busando, and the news of his high chiualries; that has so often environed and
compassed the world: so that my passioned and tormented heart shall take no
rest, until my eyes have enjoyed his presence, and he the glory of my sight.
And to incite and provoke you the more thereunto my only Lord and friend^, I
send you the portrature of the most perfect Ladies, that be at this day in all
the world. Among the which ye may know whether the gods have set in me any
advantage above them, and the goodness and good fortune that is in you, to be
beloved as I love you, my sight being invisible unto all other, and desiring
but ^o much, that ye only should enjoy it, for whom I am reserved, as I have
given charge to this dwarffe to tell you from me, and to bring you at this time
without any longer delay.

The knight of the burning Swords letter to Lucelle Princess of Sicilie,
aduertisyng her, how that pursuyng the vegeance of the dwarffe he was caused to
tarry in the spoiled and uninhabited Island. In the.8. book, the.43. Chapter.
MAdame, since my departing out of England, pursuing the vengeance of those
that had outrageously used the dwarf (as the dainsell reported to me in your
presence) fortune which at all purposes does turn vpside down the enterprises
of men, has so retarded my return and coming to you, that passing over many
strange countries, I am come to this uninhabited Islande, where I found this
fair company in the estate as she may declare unto you. But so much there
is, that I esteem not that this adventure was granted me from heaven, but
under the favor to be yours. And seeing that in very deed I am such a one,
and that by your mean I live, it is reason, that the glory and grace of all
my enterprises be given and ascribed unto you. And if they should be of too
little merit to be offered unto your highness, yet I beseech you most humbly
(madame) at least way to receive the good will that I have to serve you,
thinking my self most fortunatelye recompensed, if ye will so favor me. And
forasmuch as I have prayed and desired this virtuous and sage Queen, to tell
you the rest, it may please you to credit and to believe her in my name:
beseeching the great God madame, to keep you in health, and a right long and
fortunate life From the spoiled and uninhabited Isle, the thirteen mooneth, and
sixte day of the Moon. By your right humble and obedient and affectionate
servant for ever, Amadis of Gre^^.

The answer of Lisuard to Abras damsel that was come to defye him. In the.8.
book the.48. Chapter.
Damsel, ye shall report unto your mistress, that she ought to content her
self with that that is past already, seeing the slender and the little right
that she has in her quarrel, I hope that in place and steed of revenging her
shame, she shall double it, and her anoyance therewith if god be just. And
therefore it were better for her to joined clemency with reason, tha^ thus to
continue in an evil and pernicious displeasure. wherewith she purchases me.
But seeing she is so stiff in her opinion, and finally because she shall not
esteem me otherwise than I am, I promise her, that she shall not only have
suertie of the camp and field because she demands it, but in all other
things that she shall esteem meet to do her pleasure and service: for
although she does travel all that is possible to cause me to leese my life,
yet I will not leave off to take pain to honor her, and to serve her as long
as I shall have occasion and means to do it.

The knighte of the Burning sword does accuse Lisuarde of Greece to have
falsified his promise to Abra the Princess of Babylon, and that unjustly he
slew the Soudan Zair, and upon this he does present him the combat. In the.8.
book the.48.
Sovereign Prince (said Amadis of Greece then) the accidents and chances of
fortune be such, that oftentimes men do find themselves more constrained (by
obligation, than by their will) to do that they ought to do, as presently I
may experiment and prove in my self, whereof the peril of my enterprise
hereafter shall be witness, seeing that I being but a simple knight, and
unknown both of name and of arms have been bold to demand and require camp
and to fight against thee most comely and valiant Prince of the earth: trusting
that if I be overcome, the glory of the victory gotten upon me by you, can
not redound unto me but to my honor, keeping company with so many other more
esteemed than I am, and of whom ye have the vantage. And when the hour and
time shall stay unto me, be it never so little, God knows in what reputation
I shall pass forth from hence forwards the rest of my life. Upon the hope
whereof, I will maintain that ye have (against the duty whereto your Royal
estate does bind you) disdained not only the love, whereof ye are indetted to
the Princess of the Parthes, and failed as concerning the gift that ye
promised her in the presence of so many Princes and Lords, but also sheding
the noble blood of the Soudan Zair: and for this cause I defy you at all
assayes to the end that either by your head or mine, your ingratitude may be
manifest, and that the death of the Prince Zair, Soudan of Babylon has been
too unjustly enterprised by you and your fellows. And for as much as after the
right of ye combattes, it is my duty to choose the field, I declare unto
you, that it shall be before this palace in the place where I have seen in time
past a woman enchanted (as men told me) Puruey for the rest, as unto you it
shall seem best.

Lisuard does answer Amadis of Greece, the knight of the Burning sword,
praising him for the modest defiance that he has made him. Afterward he
does excuse him of the charges imposed and laid unto him, finally he does
accept the camp presented, and does make the election of arms. In the.8.
book the.49. Chapters.
Sir knight, the gracious communication, and the honest fashion of the defiance
that ye have used against me, has not given me lesser estimation of your
person, than of the valiantness that I certainly believe to be in you, for such
courtesies are commonly accompanied with high and stout hearts. And for as much
as I repute you such a one as ye are, and that it may be (through evil
information) that it may hazard your honor wrongfully, and offend my
justification, I am content that ye first understand how the things go in
verity and truth, to the intent that under an evil quarrel ye leese not the
thing, that other wise (through the valiantness that is in you) should be easy
to be conquered with equity. There is nothing more certain, nor I will not
deny it, but that the princess of the Parthes demanded a gift of me, the
which I liberally granted her, but every man does know, that men should not,
nor are not bound to give or demand more tha^ is possible, for the
possibility failing, the obligation and promise takes no place. Abra required
me to marie her, and I was bound already, so that it was not in my power. As
concerning the death of her brother, whereof she is so heavy, by God and
because Zair went about and did treason, and that that was naught, the which
he invented against my Lord the Emperor, the Empress, my ladies their
children and other, she has more reason and cause to complain her of his
honor, than of the chastisement yt he, as it is to be presumed received by the
divine judgment of God. And yet I will well confess, that for the love of
her, I desire that he were yet alive: but seeing that his days (fighting like a
good knight) are at an end, and that she has received the crown and Empire of
Babylon, as a sage and a virtuous Princess as she is, I think that she
should forget her tears and quarrels, and to take reason for payment without
desiring thus my head to sacrifice it to the unrighteousness of her brother.
And to the verifying of the same, I will take pain (saving my self) to have
yours at such mercy, as ye ^e desire mine. And to do this, I accept the
defiance, and the field by you presented. The arms are these accustomed among
knights of honor, shield and spear, and the day, seven night for your solace:
for I suppose that ye are sore travailed, because of the long journey that ye
have made. The just and the right God be the keeper both of the honor and right
of him of us two, unto whom it pertains.

Zahera the Queen of Cauease does submit her self to do (her honor saved)
the will of Lisuard after the conditions of the combat, in the which she (as
she says) was overcome. In the.8 book the.49. Chapter.
THe truth is, nor I will not deny it, but that by ye comnant that we made on
the day that we fought together, he that of us two should leese his armor,
should remain as overcome, and be bound to do the will of the victor. All
you my Lords do know what chanced. And although that fortune has done so
little for me, as to take from me that was in her hands, to give it you, yet
for all that I will not deny you the rest of that, that I do do owe you, for
doing ye thing otherwise, the stroke at the entry might be attributed to such a
fortune, that it should redounde to my greater disadvantage, not fulfilling my
promise to him, unto whom I owe it. Also the gods will not suffer it, but
rather send death unto me. For notwithstanding I am but a woman, yet I know
certainly that neither cord nor nail can so constrain or close the thing
that they will fasten it unto, to hold it steadfast, as faith does staightly
hold a gentle spirit with his line or cord indissoluble. And for this cause
(as I have learned) the old and ancient painters did paint her with a white
lynnen clothe, declaring thereby the pureness, which may not nor ought not to
be defiled with any spotte, or peril, be it never so strange and dangerous.
And this is the reason, whereby I submit me wholly to your will, purposing to
obey you, so far yet, as my estate and honor shall permit and suffer it. Now
therefore advise you what it pleases you, that I shall do.

Lisuard does answer Zahara that she overcame her self, and does set her
again in her liberty, and for all recompense h^ requires her amity. In the
eyghte book the.49. Chapter.
MAdame quoth Lisuard^ I think there is no princess, nor no other that has
well considered our combat, that does not esteem the victory that ye give me,
to proceed of your own voluntary will, and not of my force and strength.
For (as I have oftentimes told you) it was you your self, that overcame you
and not I. And so this glory that ye attribute unto me, does return to you,
and it is reason that it be associated with your good and entier liberty,
without any order appointed by me otherwise than it shall please you. Ye have it
then, and enjoy it as before, requiring of you no other recompense, for the
service and goodness that I desire and wish you, but that we may continue
friends: assuring you madame, that of my part I (as concerning you) as long as
I live shall be no another, what evil or displeasure so ever it be that ye have
purchased and sought for me.

Esclariana the Empress of Rome (coming to king Amadis) does show him in few
words, how that Florestan delivered her out of the hands of the Pirates, and in
recompense thereof, she demands him to her husband and spouse. In the 8.
book the.52. Chapter.
I Believe that few of you (most excellent princes) be ignorant of the cruel
death of the Emperor of Rome Arquisill, and of his son the Prince of
Inerpie, by the occasion whereof, the imperial crown by the right of
succession pertains to me. And yet that notwithstanding fortune not being
content with the injury and inhumanitie committed by those that touch me very
nigh, assaied after yt to give me yet another charge very evil to digest. That
was, that the Empress my dear and dolorous mother, believing to save me from
the tyrants and the usurpers of my goods, brought me by sea into a place,
where that not only I and she fell almost into the peril of leesing our lives,
but of our honor it self, with the greatest shame yt ever chanced to any
poor lady, or unfortunate damsel. The which I had never avoided, without the
good succ^oure and aid of Florestan here present, the which has done so much
for me, as to have saved me, and brought me again unto your hands my Lord,
whom I pray you most humbly I may find good, and agreeable, if so be I have
chosen him for my Lord and husband: for it is reason, (seeing that he has
taken the care and pain, and with such honest and friendly amity for me,) that
he have the enjoying of my goods, and of that that depends thereof.

Amadis does answer Esclariane, and does accord to her dema^d. In the.8. book
the.52. Chapter.
IN good faith my niece (quoth king Amadis) Florestan my nephewe is the son
of a good father, and he himself a knight of so great merit, that ye could not
appointe you in no place better. And I greatly thank you, that ye love him,
and him also, that he has showed him self so courteous, and so ready to serve
you, as he has done. Ye require him of me for your husband, and I agree unto
your request, and pray you both, that it may be done even now, without any
further delay.

Amadis of Greece takes pain to persuade Abra, that she should take in good
part the thing that the Gods do send her, and to hope for better in time to
come. Afterward he prays her to pardon Lisuard, seeing also that he with his
honor is come forth from all the combats and perilles that she had prepared
for him. In the.8. book the.53. Chapter.
MAdame, I beseech you (using your wisdom) to take in good part such things
as are sent you after the will and mind of Jupiter, unto whom we must obey
without murmuring. And whereas ye may command your self, and follow this
counsel, fortune being prompt and noisome, may chance to turn her wheel, and
ye shall come at the last to the thing that ye if ye be governed by reason, most
desire. For otherwise neither you, nor the Gods should desire it, nor it
should not be granted you by our Gods, the which are just, and of whom does
hang the self justice. And to the end madame, that ye should not esteem me to
speak without reason, ye know that to overcome himself, is a work that
holds more of the heavens, than of humanity: and yet it is eas^ unto us, if
we will give our consent. Forg^t then I pray you, this heaviness, the which
cannot but anoy you, and trouble you, and rejoicing your self in your
troubles, take ye things, not at the worst, but to the best, as much as ye may
possible. For it is a comely thing to do, yea and at al times, when one has
occasion to show the virtue that man has in himself. Nevertheless I perceive
very well, that seeing your deliberations are clean turned, it is unto you a
despite and a displeasure that cannot be borne. But what? ye cannot then
command destinies, nor stay the course of the least planet of Heaven. Seeing
then that the will of the Gods is such, will ye strive against them? They have
suffered the death of your brother; they hail conserved and kept my father,
they will frustrate you of your enterprises, and favor his: will ye break the
ele with your knee? For Gods sake (madame) forget the remembrance of the evil
that ye desire and wish him, and do so, that he may so much remain yours, as
ye of your part are his but little, I am sure that with his amity, ye shall
get more laud and praise, than by the pursuit that ye make to anoy him. Ye
have seen how he has despatched him of the combats and strifes ye prepared
for him, ye have caused his forces to be experimented and proved by me and
other, the issue whereof has bin such, that ye should do your self wrong, if
ye give not place to reason, having so many ways purchased the vengeance of the
death of Zair, whereof ye have had so little fruit, that even that thing alone
ought from henceforth to mortifye both your pain, and much more your pursuit,
thinking to have reason.

Abra does answer, that notwithstanding the counsel that Amadis of Greece gave
her be right, yet it is impossible for her (although the Gods would it) to
accomplish it: to this end that she will purchase the death of Lisuard as much
as she can or may. In the.8. book the.53. Chapter.
TRuly (Lord Amadis) ye are not out of purpose, to say that ye have said unto
me: also it is easy for him that is whole to counsel the sick. And
nevertheless, even as many (during the gross fever) do find the taste of water
better, tha^ the hope of life: so will I well confess, that notwithstanding the
thing that ye counsel me be right and according to equity, yet it has no
lively part in me, nor disposes me not to follow this good advise. And
although I should feel some goodness, yet I promis you I would sooner take
pain to root it out, than to keep it in my heart, being so resolved in the
enmity of Lisuard, that if I cannot cause him to leese his life, he shall die
as I may. And forasmuch as all my evil and hope lies there, I have by this
point begone to complain me, and to answer you, not by the entrance of the
purpose and communication ye held me. But by the end that ye made, and yet with
the time, I shall well satisfye both the one and the other. Ye say that it
would well become me, and that I should and must obey without murmr to the will
of the Gods. As touching that, I promis you that they may sooner deprive me of
my life, than they may take that from my understanding, that is imprinted and
better graven than ever was any writing upon copper or white marble. Therefore
from henceforth judge my stedfastnes and co^sta^cie such, as I surely paint it
unto you. It is true that I am not ignorant (as ye have put me in remembrance)
that I cannot command another superior things nor fortune her self. And yet I
know very well, that her wheel being mouable, (as ye certainly have told me)
that she may turn some day, and to be as gentle to me, as she has been
contrary. Then I may play another personage, and such a one, that the unjust
death of my brother may be revenged, and my self content, and no sooner. In the
mean while, I will not break ye eele with my knee, but desire only to employ
the forces of my body, and of my spirit and mind, to satisfy my intention.
Alas, at the beginning I saw and had his acquaintance, that has afterward
so greatly offended me. I would never have esteemed, that of so great love,
there might have come forth so great and perfect hatred. I loved him more than
my self, I sought his alliance, more than any other man's that lives or shall
live: and now I hate him more than death, and I will pursue his ruin more than
my proper health: praying you (Lord Amadis) for a resolution, seeing that
complaints cannot resuscitate and revive the dead, and that vengeance does
somewhat discharge the heart, never to speak more to me of him, for his name,
and the remembrance that I have of him is so odious, that I as often as he
presents him to my spirit, suffer but too much ruin. For this cause it is
certain, that as long as I shall have life or means, his life shall not
remain in safegarde. For if it continue long, yet shall I cause him either to
be slain, or to be destroyed, yea and ye your selves should show your
strength to dispatch him.

The Damsel that deceytfully had brought Lisuarde, Amadis of Greece, and
Gradafilea (after that her embushment was discovered by Queen Zahara, and she
brought to prison to Trebisonde) does recite the manner and cause of the
treason, afterward she requires, that if they will show her no mercy, to
put her shortly to death.
ALas my Lords, men say commonly, that the most shortest follies are best, and
that it is much better to assure one vengeance appointed with long deliberation
and means, than to have it without consideration of the dangerous issue that
might chance, whereby shame increases to him, that thought to quench and to
suage it. The which thing may now be proved by the misfortune that is chanced
to my sovereign Lord the King of Crete: for he thinking to revenge the death
of Sulpice and his brethren, the which Lisuarde, Pirion, and Olorius put to
death, has lost his own. And he was the first that this invincible Queen
destroyed with ye stroke of an arrow. But he with too little consideration
began to revenge the injury, yt he promised him was done by whom I spoke unto
you, (without finding of any proper occasion after his own mind) until one day
among other, knowing me to be crafty and malicious, as I am, he declared unto
me what he thought, praying me on my part to give him counsel. The which thing
I promised him to do, and when I was advertised of the great assemble and
meeting that they made here, I purposed my enterprise such as ye shall
understand. This it was, that I cou^selled him to send me toward you with
feyned swords, and so forged, that they should break even at the first
stroke that they should be occupied. And because I would forget nothing, I led
these two dwarfes with me, so well appointed, that they should assay the spears
of the two knights, yt which I should deliver them at the tilte, and to leave
them as soon as they should see them ready to enter in, as they could do full
well. The thread whereof I spoke unto you, was the ambush where my king was
present with his brother, and ten other knights, that incontinent should
assail my pigeons, I call them my pigeons, whom I purpose to take and deceive
under the shadow of pity, the which I di^guised unto them in your presence, so
that all the purpose that I spoke unto you of yesterday, was false and only
invented and found to take either king Amadis, the Emperor, Esplandian, or some
other of their lineage, as it should happily have come to pass, if that fortune,
or (to speak better) the sovereign Gods had not willed the contrary. For the
king of Crete willing to make sure his enterprise, had brought with him above a
thousand chosen knights, the which I cannot tell by what Amazones, were hewed
in pieces, of who^ they doubted but little. Nor they would never have cared for
it, if it had not been for the report that was brought them by his sp^es, the
which the king had ordinarily in this town. But what is become of them, I
cannot say, but I will say unto you, that if our purpose had taken place, the
will of the king was such, that he would have caused two knights, the which I
had brought from hence to have past over the sea, to assay and prove to have
woonne through their puisance, the Castle of Rock, and Lica, not long ago
usurped upon king Muton his brother, and then to have cut off their heads, and
have sent them unto you. As touching the rest of the fortune, ye know it as
well as I^ therefore I will hold my peace, praying you, if ye envy to
prefer mercy above my fault, to give me the shortest and readiest death
that ye may possible, the which shall well content me, seeing that my Lord
and Prince is departed and dead.

Abra complaining her self of the enmities and wrongs of Cupido. In the.8.
book, the.57. Chapter.
AH, ah sir, they that have not experimented your forces and power, do think
them (as I believe) far other than they ^e, I pray you most humbly either to
take from henceforth a name conformable to your works, or the deeds like unto
your name. For why, as concerning my self, I have more cause to name you the
God of enmity, and of misknowledge, than that that ye apply and appropriate to
your self. Also the other Gods have had (as me thinks) great wrong to suffer
you to have some jurisdiction and power, to use it so as ye continue: seeing
that the property of a God is goodness, justice, mansuetude, pity,
liberality, and amity, wherewith he recompenseth his servants, and ye your
ministers clean contrary. And seeing it is so, how can ye excuse you, or cause
any reasonable person to find your injustice and cruelnesse good, that ye have
used against my brother? or with what arms can ye honor and adorn your
triumph, that a C. times in a day has given me death, not to have power, and
to be able to die. But alas, what do I say? to whom do I speak? or why will
I thus contestate or enter into reason with him that has none? Cer^es neither
your eyes nor you were never bound, but to excuse your fault upon the
blindness that is in you, attributing to you upon this occasion such justice,
or (to say better) such pleasure as is agreeable and pleasant unto you.

Lucelle does grievously complain of Amadis of Greece, that forsakes her
without offending him, in the.8. Book the 63. Chapter.
ALas, was there ever Dam^ell more unfortunate than I am? or that has a
greater occasion to complain her? having a feyned lover set in the place of
perfect amity, within a while to forsake me and mock me? But alas, where is
now this promise so oftentimes sworn, and those feigned tears, that you
Amadis to intrappe me, has so oftentimes shed upon your face in my presence?
Ah, ah, ye evil man, one day ye reputed me for a Venus, that rested (as ye
assured me) in your heart: but now the poison being manifest, I see clearly
that she is the Venus that ye auauan^ed you of. The which thing shall cause me
as long as you shall live to esteem you slothful and unfortunate, to have
taken so great pain and pleasure to deceive me. Therefore all thing truly and
well considered, ye should (as me thinks) have a respect, that I being the
daughter (as I am) of so great a king, deserved to be otherwise entreated of
you, and not with such mockes as ye have dressed me withal. But I understand
full well, that as yet ye will take a glory, whereof I shall complain me for
ever of you, and of the love which I now abhor more than ever I had it in
reverence. For as there is no pleasure that can be made equal with the
perfect amity of two lovers, so there is no hatred or impacience, that can
more trouble the spirit than just jealousy, without which, all other
martyrdom that mingleth it self with the sweetness of love, is not (as me
thinks) but a multiplication of love, and a true inticement wherewith she
utterly destroys her self. An extreme brought or thyrst, causes water to
be the better accepted, and long fasting gives meat a better taste. Also the
goodness of peace and rest of the mind, cannot be sound nor esteemed of him,
that has not experimented the strong, cruel, and hard war that suspicion
does make. The absence of a friend is sometimes well supported and borne
withal, for the hope of a new joy at his return: And one excuse, one
disdain, one refuse, one evil look, one light miscontentation: but after
that hypocrisy and falsnesse is known to be in the heart that one esteemed
faithful, it is most certain, that there is no martyrdom, nor no
displeasure that tormenteth a man more than where faith and true amity make
their habitation. Alas my Amadis, found ye ever in me any other thing than
affection and good will toward you? Did I ever thing were it never so little,
to cause you to be miscontent? By my God, ye do me wrong.

The Oration of Abra to the Princes and people of Babylon, complaining her of
the death of Zair their Prince, incyting them to take arms, as well for the
death of Zair, as to resist the Christians. In the.8. Book, the.65. Chapter.
ZAir the last Summer had enterprised a journey to Trebisonde, trusting with a
perpetual peace and amity to take and to make an aliance, and to marie the
Emperors daughter. But the evil hour succeeded so, that the Souldan
frustrated of his intention lost his life, as it is manifest to every man.
Therefore my Lords, there is not one of you, unto whom such an injury does
not redounde, your Prince being so evil entreated, and finally slain, and
with his hand whom I my self had chosen and elected for my Lord and spouse.
Truly the love that I bare him, has been evil recompensed, plucking out the
blood out of the belly of so noble a Prince of the Babilonians, and of an
infinite of other your friends, parents and kinsfolk. And in such a sort,
that if you well considered how all is past, it shall be found, that either
your fathers, or your brothers, or your cousins in particular and general have
been meat unto the monsters of the sea, their bodies being deprived of all
honorable sepulture, and buried among the waters of the deep Abismes. Shall
this injury be forgotten at any time? Shall the name of Babylon be made a
fable unto all those that shall hear men speak of their mischief? Shall the
just vengeance be ended without doing of any other thing? Ah ah, ye stout
Kings, I adjure you by our high and mighty Gods, that every one of you take
his armure, not only to cause it to be known throughout all the world, that
ye be the dominators of all Princes that does offend you, but the scourge and
chastisement of all nations. The Christians (as it is reported to me) do
assemble themselves, and cause a brute that they will come and find us, and
chasing us out of our proper heritages, proclaim Axiane the son of Zirphee,
Emperor of this Monarch. But if ye will believe me, we shall set them far
from their accountes, and go to prevent them and to set them forwards, entering
into the Empire of Trebisonde, the which being sacked and destroyed, we shall
pass on to Constantinople, where that fire, and the edge of our swords shall
be the executours of our vengeance, sparing neither king nor man, woman nor
child, being assured that if ye would set forth your ensigns and banners in
the field, that they should resist us no more, than straw against fire. And
this is the cause (Princes most excellent) why I sent for you, praying and
commanding you, that in most greatest, and most extreme diligence ye may
possible, to cause the Drum to sound throughout all your Countries, and to
assemble both horsemenn and footmen, Galies, Ships, and other vessels, as well
for war, as to carry vittayles, that we, our preparation being ready, may
finish and end the rest of our enterprise so, as I have told you, the which
thing shall be unto you very honorable and profitable. In the mean while I
will send to my friends and allies, requiring and warning them to be
favorable unto us, and to aid us, considering that this deed and matter, for
the reason and cause that I have declared unto you, does touch them, the
Christians being willing to invade as well their Country as this here, if we
will endure and suffer it.

Niquea preferring Amadis of Greece honor, above the pleasure that she had of
his presence, does suffer him to go and succor his father Lisuard^. In the.8.
book. the.74. Chapter.
MY Lord, the love that I bear you is so perfect, that uneasily I may give
you council that should be sound, and to me agreeable in this that ye
demand: but yet greater is the force of your honor and renown, seeing that
it has been the only mean of the goodness that we have the one of the
other. And for this cause ensuing and following reason, and considering that no
Emperor nor King should make himself subject (if it were possible) nor pay
any tribute, I think that you and I ought to neglect and forsake our
pleasures, and to have a respect to the thing that beseems you, for the
conservation of you, and of your estate. Therefore I give you (if I should so
speak) all the leave that shall please you, although that in verity and
truth, it be due, against my will, esteeming and holding it great glory, thus
to captiuate my self, to permit and suffer you to have such liberty, by the
which ye shall execute and cause to be known more and more the excellency of
your valiantness and high cheualrie.

The heaviness of Lisuarde for the death of his wife Onoloria. in the.8.
book. the.73, Chapter.
ALas, alas, fortune, what does rest and remain from henseforth, to satisfy
thee to trouble me? Will thou have my life? a hundred and a hundred times thou
have drawn me from the place where I had forsaken thee: and yet for all that
thou have taken fro me, to cause me to die a hundred times upon a day, my dear
wife and spouse, and have by this evil hour and chance, brought unto me all
the other that thou have reserved and kept for me. O God, God eternal, alas my
friend, my wife, and my faithful companion, ye are (all things considered) well
at ease, living in heaven, and I remaining and dwelling among such and so great
melancolies and heauinesses. Pardon me I pray you, if I lament and weep for
you too indiscreetly. This is not for the good chance that ye have, but for
sorrow that I do not follow you and accompany you in your ^ases, as ye have
fiftene or twenty years followed me, in the most part of my travels.

Gradasilea does comfort king Lisuarde showing him that he^ must be constant in
his adversity, and not to sorrow for death so much. In the.8. Book, the.73.
chapter.
HOw now my Lord, is this the magnanimity of heart that is wont to be in
you? have ye forgotten that you and I are borne to die? Think ye to revive my
Lady again by weeping, or thus tormenting your self? she is certainly very
fortunate and happy, wherefore then do you lament her so greatly? She has
showed you the way, and does tarry you in the place, where one day (if it
please God) we shall see her. Leave these tears, and such exterior appearances
to those that have no hope in the second life, and comfort your self in the
lord, beseeching him to give you the virtue of patience, and such as is
necessary for you, for the glory of his holy will.

The letter of Abra to Lisuarde, by the which she comfor^eth him for the loss
of his wife, and of his son, aduertising him that he ought to search her
amityes, with promise to grant it him. In the.8. Book, the.71. Chapter.
ABra the Empress of the Babilonians, Princess of the Parthes, and
commanding threescore kings my vassalles, greeteth you Lisuard of Greece,
Emperor of Trebisond, halower of the waters of the Sea, with the royal blood of
Zair my very honorable Lord and brother: Ye shall understand noble prince, that
yesterday very lately, I knew of the visitation that fortune has made you, by
the death of your dear spouse, and of your only son Amadis of Greece,
whereof (I promis you) I was greatly displeased. For notwithstanding that the
obligation that I have to the just vengeance of him, of whom I am sole
inheriter, and to the wrong as ye know, that you your self did me, do greatly
constrayne me to hate you to death, yet cruel love that does daily vndermind
my heavy heart to love you but too much, will not suffer it to consent to the
ruin and destruction that I have prepared for you. The which truly does cause
me to name you, and that of right, a lover and a friend of the high Gods, the
which have found (and thought it good to prove your courage and extreme
constancy) not only by the strength of many a brave man, and beasts more
cruel, the which ye have conquered and tamed: but also with the rod of
their might and supreme power, they have punished you with so hard and grievous
persecution, that I being your enemy, as I am, have felt it in my soul, so
that I wept with both my eyes, judging thereby, what that dolor and heaviness
might be, that ye suffered for the loss of your wife and lover so dear, and
your only son so comme^dable. And yet being true (as it is true indeed) that
the consolation of the unfortunate, is to find their like. Yet ye have some
occasion to moderate this great anoyance by that, that I bear even such
another (or there lacks very little) as yours is. Ye have lost (as men say,
your wife, and I could never recover him, whom I only merited to have to my
Lord and husband, that is your self, that has made me oftentimes marvel,
how it was possible, that so great amity might conceive in heart so great
hatred, where such conformity ought to be represented. And yet if ye way all
things well, the time present does show you him, whom ye ought to follow in
time to come. And that it is so, ye see the end, whereunto your great
prosperities have brought you. The heavens are not always in one being, nor
Lisuard also ought not to be continually victorious, nor Abra always ouercomde
by him. What then? must I sorrow and be heavy for the mischance that makes and
aduanceth at the sight of the eye a better fortune than I may wish for, and
that does promis me a sure recompense of the love that I have nourished so long
in my soul, yea and until he put him into my hands that so cruelly, and by so
many long days has illuminated and inflamed my heart, the which I already
have almost distild in the fire of Ielously. Truly all things well considered,
it seems Lisuard, that the time approaches, in the which I may execute upon
you the vengeance that ye have merited, finishing my anguishes and the hatred
that I bear you, by the augmentation and increacement of love, the Gods giving
you the knowledge of the evil that ye have done me, with the will to ask me
pardon, and me to grant it you. Therefore I counsel you to prevent the time,
and sooner to believe my advice, than your own opinatiue will, knowing the
forces that I have so nigh unto you, and well minded to do you more harm, than
I desire ye should have.

The answer of Lisuard to Abra, giving her thanks for her good will, and that
he feels himself very fortunate to be retained in her good grace and favor.
In the.8. book the.76. Chapter.
MAdame, I have presently received your letter that it pleased you to write
unto me, and by ye same ye do certifye me of the trouble and anoyance that ye
felt for the vnfortunable chance that happened to my dear companion and spouse,
to my son Amadis, and principally to my self, for the love of them. For the
which I cannot sufficiently thank you: assuring you, that I esteemed no
otherwise of your honesty, knowing it to be no less accompanied with
clemency, sweetness, and natural goodness, tha^ with virtue, prude^cie,
and kingly nouriture. Yet for all this, I at the first was astonished how it might
be possible, that ye should judge me fortunate, to be thus touched as I am,
with the rod of God, and to have lost so much, if it were not for this, that
I hope to have for my patience a reward in another life. And moreover I do
marvel of this, that ye maintain and compare your losses to mine, unto the
which (under your correction) there is no similitude at all. For I have lost my
Lady, and my lover, and ye have yet in me a servant well affectioned, and shall
be (as touching you) all his life, (the honor and duty of the estate
reserved, as it ought to be) and in such sort, that notwithstanding the great
enmities that ye have against him, he will assay and enforce himself to obey,
honor, and serve you. Trusting so much in the goodness of God, that promptly
and within a short season my justice shall be known, and your wrong made
manifest, reproved, and of your own proper conscience finished. Ye furthermore
write unto me, that the time does approach, that fortune shall deliver me into
your hands, in recompense of the pains that ye have suffered in loving me to
much. I know not why ye should hope so, for the thing that ye have already: for
I swear unto you by the God of heaven and of the earth, that there is not a
gentleman in all the world that is more yours, and more at your commandment
than I am, or that loves you so much or more. The which thing ye shall
know, where and when it shall please you to command me, aduising you for the
rest, not to trust so much in fortune, as ye seem to do. For although she
has for a troth been now entierly against me, it is not said, that she will
favor you in all points, judging in your self, as ye very well do counsel
me. One good thing I have, that the threatening that ye about the latter end of
your letter do threaten me withal, does so much assure me, that I fear a great
deal more the sweet casting of your sweet eyes, than the fury of all your
soldiers together, kissing for the rest the hands of your highness, even
the same that desires to have a right good part in your good grace, the which
is, and shall remain for ever your ancient and perpetual friend, neighbor
and servant Lisuard.

Axianes letter to the Empress Abra, sending her word of the war, with the
destruction, and entier ruin of her, person. In the.8. book the.78. Chapter.
WE disherited Empress of ye Babylonia^s Axiana princess of Argenes, the most
humble servant of one only God almighty, to you Abra the usurper of our
Empire, and paternall goods, we cause you to wit and understand, that the
divine justice, willing to put in execution the sentence and arrest pronounced
by the sovereign judge against you, and in the favor of our repel and
banishment, has caused us to come unto this country, where you and yours
shall receive the hyre of their merits: yet there is, that somewhat displeases
us, that ye are arrived even at the very point, where the fall and ruin of
your unrighteousness does threaten you. For as much as we be so nigh of
kin, the which kindred and amity ought to be so much our familiar, as hatred
is our domestike and neighbor, but seeing that our sovereign judge would not
suffer our possession to be taken but by the price and sheading of many men's
blood, we do signifye and denounce unto you the battle within these four
days, and in the camp and feeld where we be. And for our judges he alone,
whom we Christians do adore in trinity of persons, God omnipotent, the first
and the last of all things, the which shall give, if it so please him, for ye
suertie of yours and ours, the rigorous justice of his eternity, and for the
equal compartment of the sun, the night, or the victory. As touching our
harneis, ye have them in your hand, and caused them to be taken of our own
vassalles and subjects, so unjustly, that the men, the earth, and the waters do
cry vengeance already, the which God will not deny them, as their blood
being shed shall bear witness.

A letter from Abra to Axiane, granting her the battle by her required. In
the.8. book the.78. Chapter.
ABra the Empress of Babylon, Queen of the Parthes, to you Axiana Princess
of Argenes, such salutatio^ as we esteem you to merit. We have received your
letter no less accompanied with temerarious and proud words, than with unjust
quarrels, and without any reason, the which things we trust we shall cause to
be known in the self same camp, that ye have chosen, and we grant you such
battle as ye demand: And for sovereign judges, your God, and ours, Mars,
Cupido and Venus, from the which we cannot go in no wise: but for as much as
the victory does more consist in the effect than in many words, we remit the
whole, to that, that shall chance, aduising you that we may have pity upon
you, that under the shadow (I cannot tell of what presumption) do take pain to
leese so little land as is left you, the which we trust shortly after that we
have ended this enterprise to join to our Empire. In the mean space let there
be a truce between you and us, for these four days as ye have required, the
which as touching our part we promise you in the faith of a Princess to
observe, without breaking them by any means.

The heaviness of Abra, for the loss of the battle. In the.8. book the.80.
Chapter.
AH, ah, fortune, fortune, thou have pursued me so much that the spoil of me
and of my goods from henceforthe shall serve thee for a triumph, fortune
enemy of all virtuous persons. O troublous ingrate, and accursed fortune, the
which to deceive and abuse me, did promise, not only the Empire and Monarchy
of all the Orient, but the free or the enforced enjoying of my Lisuard. Alas he
was never mine, although I have deserved him more tha^ any other that ever was
borne. And yet so much there lacks that such merit has taken place, that
he has destroyed me both of goods and of honor, but not of the honor that
all ladies should prefer above life, but of the honor and victory that he
has conquered upon my heavy vassalls, being all dead, or slaves. Ah, ah
Lisuard, what recompense or degree of amity is so steadfast and constant, as
that I all my life have borne thee? Alas, if ye have been in doubt in time
past, I beseech mighty Jupiter, that the death, which I feel does approach,
may give you sure witness: for I protest, yt I die not for any heaviness yt I
have of any loss either of men, of reputation, or of goods: but only that I
have no hope hereafter to have any thing of you: esteeming that this glorious
victory has so pufte up your heart, that disdaining your Abra, ye shall nor
will not receive her for the least of your slaves.

The letter of Niquea to the Soudan her father, by the which she prays him
to pardon her offense that she has committed, marying her self, and
departing from his country without his leave. In the eight book the.84.
Chapter.
MY Lord I beseech you most humbly, sooner than to blame my absence to take the
pain (if it please you) to read this my letter, and reading it to consider in
your self, with what might and power love is accustomed to cause them to obey
him, that are in his rule and dominion. And willing to exercise it in me, he
presented long since, before the eyes of my spirit, not only the renoume of
the valiant and invincible Amadis of Greece but also his beauty, dexterity,
and good grace, for the which he is commended of all men, that have had the
chance to see him and to frequent him. And for this cause I set my love and
affection so to him wards, that I was ready to die: also he was sorry that I
could live without the mean that I found out to give him knowledge not
once, but more than twice, of the pain that I endured for the great desire
that I had to him, whereof he only had compassion. For love it self was so
gentle unto me, that he wounded him with the like shot, that he hurted me,
making him so much mine, that under the feigned habit of Nereide the slave, he
came to this your Court, where that afterward he had the combat with the
usurper of his name and of his figure: what the end thereof was, my Lord, ye
know sufficiently inoughe. So much there is, that within a while after, the
hour and time was given me to know him. And we agreed so well, and so
accorded our intentions together, that finally we were married, the which if it
be your pleasure, ye shall not take in ill part, his person being of such
merit, for why his valiantness and the noble blood whereof he is descended,
seemed only worthy of my beauty, and Trebisonde more meet for the
celebration of our marriage, than your town Niquea, because of so many
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and high Ladies as he and I trust to find there.
And for this cause and occasion, we bring in these vessels ye excellent Queen
of Caucase, by whose means our enterprise took place. Nor I will not deny
that I have offended you: but I trust so much in your fatherly goodness, yt
forgotting my fault, and considering to whom I have vowed my self, ye will
pardon me, the which thing I require of you with all reverence. Your most
humble and most obedient daughter Niquea.

Amadis of Greece letter to the Soudan of Niquea, declaring unto him the mean
of the marriage of him and his daughter praying if he find himself offended to
excuse her, and to pardon him. In the.8. book the.84. Chapter.
Sir, the love that might have solicited you in your youth, and after, shall
put you sufficiently in remembrance, in what pain and little ease they do
live, that are overcome with the passion, that I have seen you suffer, waiting
for the joyful hope of you Nereida, and it shall be, if it please you, to
excuse the fault yt I have committed against you, as well for deceiving you
under the name and habit, which was borrowed, as making the marriage of my
Lady your daughter and me, whereof yet ye should not be miscontented with me,
considering the beauties and the perfections wherewith she is indewed from
heaven, and the just occasion that I (by your self) have had to chose her to
my wife, and such a lover as she is to me: yet for all that sir, if ye find
your self in this, or otherwise offended, I pray you most humbly to blame love
only, and to pardon us both, seeing that the noble blood of Niquea can receive
but glory and honor by the aliance and kindred that from henceforth it shall
have both of that of France, of Constantinople, and of Trebisonde, of the
which I am descended, and principal heir. And for this cause we go presently
toward the Emperor my father, that shall receive my lady your daughter so
well, that it shall be a pleasure for you to understand it, and to me a sure
contentation. Trusting sir, as touching the rest, to be from henceforth such as
concerning your self, that ye shall have a great cause for this respect to
find all that is past good and reasonable unto this day, that we kiss your
hands in all humility. Your most humble and most obedient son, Amadis of
Greece.

The Oration of Lisuard to Abra, Axiana and other, exhorting them to peace and
perpetual amity. In the.8. book the 90. Chapter.
Virtuous princess, and you excellent Ladies, ye have seen and sufficiently
enough perceived, what issue this war has had that was begone long since, ye
know also as well as we, the occasion why it was enterprised, and afterward
sharpened and made worsse, and now that the affairs be in hand, as ye may know
and consider, it seems to us just and reasonable, (seeing it has pleased God
the creator to lend us so fair a victory) to assay and prove to make peace and
amity, where war and discord has had vigure and strength so long time. And
to come to this, after long and ripe deliberation of counsel, we are of this
advice and mind, and do ordeine, that you madame Abra, shall leave to my Lady
Axiana the Empire of Babylon even as she and Zarafiell, of good and famous
memory held it and possessed it, and that ye should peasably enjoy all the rest,
notwithstanding it was conquered by the virtuous and sage Prince Zair, or any
otherwise. The peace remaining perpetually between you two, the thing shall be
so well parted and divided, that ye shall have greatly and abundantly
wherewithal to entertayne your estates, and to content you. And to the intent
(quoth he to Abra) the yo^g infants and princes which have accompanied you, may
be partakers of the pleasure of this amity and confederation, we will marry
them worthily, and so, that they shall have great occasion to thank us. And
this for a resolution of that, that we took deliberation of to certifye you,
and to declare in so high and to so great assembly, praying you both to find
our advice and counselll good, and as it is reasonable, for the wealth and
highness of the one and the other to follow it. For as concerning us, we will
hold us only to the honor that it has pleased GOD to grant us, without
usurping or taking of any thing upon those that are overcome, whether it be by
ransom in money, in lands or possessions.

An elegant and a pitiful Epistle of Lucell Princess of Sicilie, to Amadis of
Greece, charging him of unfaithfulness, of leafings, and of temeritie. In
the.8. book, the.93. Chapter.
I Cannot tell by what occasion, thou false and unfaithful Amadis, I have
taken ynke and paper to write to thee this Letter, if it be not upon the hope I
have, that ye shall not so soon see it, but that the wrong that ye have done
me, shall cause you to wax read for shame, and that remorse of conscience
shall prepare in you such heaviness, that there shall not be one day of all
your life, but that thing the which ye have purchased for me so cursedly,
shall displease you, and in such sort, that ye shall receive part of the
punishment that ye deserve, betraying me so falsely for loving you so well and
faithfully. Truly when I think of the thing that is ^haunted, I surely think
that I dream, or to be out of my wit: But alas, to whom shall I go? Is it
possible that ye be^ the Knight of the burning Sword, that overcame the seven
keepers of the Castle, and that did rule and tame the strong Gyantes of the
Isle of Silenchi^, and of whom the renown is this day so clear, both in the
East and in the West? Truly it should be hard to think it: for where that
promise and chivalry is so commended, full uneasily there may be resident a
heart so cruel and so full of lies as yours has showed it self unto me,
abusing and decey^ing me under the color of amity, and the assurance of
marriage, to set and bring you to the place, where I trust that repentance
shall be the executour of my vengeance. But what? I feel now that ye are
far from honor and virtue, that hitherto ye are not ashamed of the thing
that may be said unto you, and whereof ^ee may be reproched, so that it
may bear good witness of the injury that ye have done to your self,
chaung^ng so famous a name, to take that with the habit and raiment of a woman
very unmeet and uncomely for those that will show the estate of magnanimity
and highness. Alas, when the fidelity of your Grandfather, the good King
Amadis, does present him before my eyes, the proof that he did that day
when he wanne the green Sword, and Queen Oriane, the Kercher none like it,
the entering and coming forth of the one and other under the Arc of
faithful Lovers, the glory that your father Lisuarde received by the
h^^m^tte made of Diamondes, when my Lady your mother wanne the inestimable
Crown, and all this by the force of true and unfeigned love: I cannot (by my
faith,) nor I should not say, but that all the goodness remained in them, and
the evil in you alone, or that Nature in place to give you an heart like unto
these, has provided you the heart of a Tiger, or of some other more fierce
beast, if ever there were any. But alas, what profit is this for you (I pray
you) to see me now deprived both of you and of the world, and to have
forsaken Father, Parents, goods, and all pleasure, to lament your death, the
which I held for sure. Think ye nothing then, of the force of this extreme
love, and of the hatred that ye show me? In good faith Amadis, ye should
dye for very shame, and complain with me for ever, for the wrong that you
have done me, the which is to me so great a grief, and so uneasy to
sustain, that I purpose to reserve my life as long as I may, not for any
ease that I hope for, but to find a mean to revenge me, and in revenging of
my self, to live long^ and in living, to make and cause the fault that cannot
(...), to live in you, so long as ye shall feel and perceive that she is
among the living, of whom ye never deserved the least favor of a thousand,
that she deserved. And I pray the just Judge of your iniquity, and of my
justice, to give you at the least the knowledge of your sin, of my
innocence, and of my too singular and perfect love.

Amadis of Greece answering Lucelle, does confess that he^ has done her a
wrong irrecuparable, he requires pardon, and finally he excuses him by love.
In the.8. Book. the 93. Chapter.
MAdame, receiving the letter that it pleased you to write to me by this
Gentleman, the present bearer thereof, I have received therewith in my soul
all the displeasure that reasonably ye may have in yours. Yet I pray you first
or ever I enter into my purpose or matter with you, to believe that I have no
envy, nor pretense in any manner of sort to use any cloking, or any excuse
toward you, that I should not confess to have done you a wrong irrecuparable,
and so great an offense, that it is out of my power at any time to satisfy
you, if you (using your natural goodness, and virtuous condition) do not cast
ye blame from me, upon the puissance and power of love. And yet that
notwithstanding, it seems to me very convenient, to answer you somewhat to
the thing that ye accuse me of, demanding by the discourse of your letter, if
as yet I be the self same man of whom the renoume has left his mark of
glory, both in the East, and in the West. I ensure you Madame, that I am even
he himself, the which under your favor, and through the desert and merit of
the excellency of your beauty, has at sometimes obtained the renown of
valiantness and chivalry, through the merit (I say) of you, for without the
continual remembrance of your presence, that then did accompany me. It had
been uneasy, yea truly impossible to have ended the high enterprises, that I
have finished. Therefore if there chanced any glory, it redounded to you
only, and not to me. But as touching the blame that ye set before my eyes,
saying that I have abused you, under the color of promise of marriage that was
between you and me, ye shall pardon me if it please you, for ye know right
well, that the last purpose and communication that we had together, was, that I
should ask you of the king your father, to my wife, without going any
further: each of us by this means remaining i^^fr^^ and pure liberty, but
love since that has so ravished me, that (as ye have understood) it
constrained me to change my name and habit, and to take a woman's or a
maidens, to come to the thing whereunto he presented me, whereof I am nothing
reprehensible: for neither name nor strange habit shall ever diminish the
force and the good hour and fortune of Amadis, being victorious upon the
Prince of T^race, by the victory that happened to Nereide, the which under
this color has obtained and enjoyed her, of whom ye your self may give
perfect witness, and of her perfect and incomparable beauty. For ye saw her
twice, once in the Castle of secrets, and again in her glory with good and
fair company. And as concerning the faythfulnesse of my Parents, the which
ye paint unto me very lively, I pray you Madame, to consider that being a
man as other be, it is no marvel, that such a one (the which by the gifts of
grace, and of nature that are in her, might overcome the most perfitest that
ever lived) has brought me to the number of them: but this is a thing almost
out of nature and incredible, that I whom ye wanne in the garment of a
Knight, has won her in the habit and vesture of a Damsel, being a slave,
and to conquer her to my wife and Spouse such as she is to me at this
present. And nevertheless, because that it is done, and that the stone ^he
which is cast is irreuocable, I pray you most humbly, not to take it to the
worst, but to moderate the anger that ye have against me, as I have seen and
perceived about the end of your letter, where ye say that ye will conserve
your life, to purchase and that very long the vengeance of the wrong that I
have done you. Certes Madame, if by my death ye might remain satisfied, I
should hold and think my self very fortunate, for I know no torment, that
I with a good heart would not suffer for you, so it were given me by your
means, and so doing, it might also deface a part of my fault to your
contentation, and to satisfy it in some sort, I purpose to see you shortlyer
than you we (...), and I (asking you pardon) to execute upon my self all the
cruelnesse that ye shall ordeyne for me, and that with my own hands, for of
your bringing up in all works of virtue, he cannot receive but all
goodness, whom ye hold for your syngular enemy, and he you for his
honorable Lady, unto whom he presents his most humble recommendations,
willing to remain for ever your most obedient and affectionate servant Amadis
of Greece.

Letters from Zahara to the Princes being at Trebisonde, praying the Emperor
of Trebisonde, and Amadis of Greece, to give the order of knighthood to
Anaxartes and to Alastraxerce, his Son and Daughter. In the.9. Book, the.6.
Chapter.
Lords and Ladies, since our last seeing one another, that was at Trebisonde,
it has pleased the Consistory of the sovereign Gods, to receive me into
their divine company, communicating in me the seed of the God Mars, of whom
I am so greatly loved, and he wills me so well, that he receiving and
accepting me for his companion, has ingendered in me a son, and a daughter,
so fair and of so goodly form and proportion, that their form and shape does
show undoubtedly the fruit to be engendered of a God, the which thing
causes me to say, that their virtue, magnanimiti^, and valiantness shall be
such, that they shall be taken among men for half Gods. Of the which pleasure
and honor thus received by me, I thought it reasonable to make you partakers,
to the end ye should be merry and joyful, as they do merit ye should,
being the infantes and children of such a God, the which is the mighty Mars,
whose anger (doing the contrary) may greatly trouble and hurt you, whereof I
Zahara your friend, should be maruellously displeasant, the which thing has
caused me to pray you once again, in the name of my Lord and friend, to have
the nativity of these my two children in singular honor and recommendation,
and from henceforth to have and to hold the mother of them in the place that
she deserves, seeing that the Deity and Godhead is joined in her, so that the
world by me does take part of the divine seed. And besides this (noble
Emperor of Trebisonde) we have elected and chosen you presently to give the
order of chivalry to my son Anaxartes, as soon as he shall come to the age
for to receive it, and the sword by the hand of my great friend Abra, and
Amadis of Greece, I require you in like case, to give it to my daughter
Alaxtraxer^e, and that Niquea (whom ye love so greatly) do her confirmable
office to Abras son, not knowing any other more worthy than ye are to
approach to the divinity, being such as all men do esteem you, and for such I
shall hereafter take you, giving peace to your Monarchies and estate royal,
when these my children following the nature of their father, shall bring all the
round world to obey them, and to reduce it to the obedience of the law of
our Gods, the which ye have forsaken to follow him, that has no power,
and then ye shall know the power and merit of Zahara, the which does
salute you all. Your cousin and perfect lover, the divine Zahara.

The answer of the Empress Abra, to the foresaid letter, dispraysing the
false Gods of Zahara, and exalting the only living God in Trinity. In the.9.
book, the 6. Chapter.
RIght high and excellent Queen of Caucase, the friend and companion of the
Gods immortal. The Emperor my Lord and spouse with the company of Kings and
Princes, Ladies and damsels have seen by the letter that ye have sent hither
the favor and great goodness that is chanced unto you, the gods having you
(as ye do say, in so great estimation, that Mars has engendered of you a son
and a daughter, worthy for their perfection to be the children of such a
father, whereof certainly we are very joyful, as my foresaid Lord and husband
and this high and noble company has commanded to certify you and to give you
knowledge. But yet I marvel how ye understand this, that in time to come, ye
shall have some knowledge of your amity, to leave the country and Empires of
my Lord in peace and suertie, I know not whether your children may conquer all
the world after your devise, but I am sure that we keep the true law, and
honor one God in Trinity, by whose aid we have no occasion to fear neither
your Mars nor Jupiter, nor any other, the which have closed up the eyes of
your spirit that ye should not know him at whose foot all creatures, whether
they be in heaven, in the earth, or in Hell, ought to fall down, and make
obeisance: The goodness of whom has so visited me, that he has provided me
of like lineage as ye have, that is, of a son and a daughter. And Amadis of
Greece also of a little Prince, so excellent, that at the least he may advance
him, not to owe your Anaxartes any thing, whereof I was well willing to
advertise you, trusting that ye would be no less joyful of our good hour and
fortune, than all this great and noble company has been of yours,
recommending us all to you. Your cousin and good friend Abra.

The letters of Anaxartes and Alastraxarce to the inhabiters of the vale of
Rochers, entreating of the excellency and sovereign goodnes^e of the Gods. In
the nynth book and.10. Chapter.
ANaxartes and Alastraxarce, son and daughter of the God of battelles, and of
the most mighty Queen Zahara of Caucase, to the three estates of the vale of
Roches, love and favor. Uery dear and good friends, as it has pleased the
great immortal gods, that no inexpugnable fortress of the Castle of Lac, nor
the incredible force of ye horrible Giants Bradaran, and Brandauell, wi^hall
their might, craftiness and subtlety, could not let that the divine Justice
should not be executed upon them by us (the Children of Mars) sent into this
world to put in effect the Justice and immovable judgment of their supreme
might and power, willing thereby to show that al resistance is vain and
unprofitable against the power of heaven, and will of those that govern and
rule all this that is contained under his roundnesse, we had a good will to
advertise you of the deadly ruin of the four Giantes, the tyrants of this
country, that chanced unto them by the sharpness of our swords, to the
end that you and all other might know, that the gods have the authority and
power, (they alone) to do all things, by the same might and power, that they
have made them of nothing, specially resisting those, that are greatly bound
to know them, and yet do not their duty: the which thing might be alleged
against the reasonable creature, that leads a life like unto beasts, not
observing the law ordained by the infallible creator, to conduct him by reason
above his will, considering also that all other creatures (by the providence
and goodness of the sovereign gods) are set under the hand and subjection of
men, every one of them doing their diligence to maintain it self in his
order, and to keep that, whereunto the gods have stablished it, as we see the
marvelous order of the heavens, of their planets, and cleerenesse, of tame and
wild beasts, of the birds in the air, the fishes in rivers and deep seas,
of the plants and sweet herbs, whereof men see that the earth does length,
and is garnished with diverse works in time and season very gracious: every one
of these things feel and perceive his own nature, not going nor passing over
it one point. Seeing then, that al things have been set in the hand, yea under
the feet of man, what reason shall excuse him not to observe the ordinance of
the creator? and if he do it not, how ought he to be the more punished and
chastened by the divine laws? Truly (my dear and good friends) he deserves
no less punishment, than that, that is chanced upon the Giantes your cruel
tyrants and rulers, whose death and correction ye should not esteem to
proceed from any other, than from the gods immortal, whereof they will give
you very swifte witness, seeing that two only persons have destroyed and
brought to ruin such and so fearful m^nsters, notwithstanding the situation
of the very strong and inaccessible places the Gigantine forces, and all their
puissance and might both crafty and subtle. Again (my dear and good
friends) we counsel and admonish you, that ye give no place to your
affections, so that the anger of God f^ll not upon you, if ye disobey the
children of Mars sent hither to be soueraines, and to set peace in your
country. As touching the rest, ye shall come unto us, to understand the
^uerplus of our will.

Arlande the Princess of Thrace letter to Dom Florisel of Niquea, praying him
to come to see her, to understand and to revenge the wrong done by Amadis of
Greece, to Balarte his brother. In the.9. book the.14. Chapter.
ARlande Princess of Thrace, to the Knight of the she sheepeheard greeting.
The renoume of your excellent beauty, and glorious acts of arms that
runs, not only throughout all this country of Thrace, but almost
throughout the world, has drawn me into so great admiration and desire to
know the truth, that after I had consulted with our go^^ upon these affairs
and matters, and that they answered (...) after the common brute and rumor, I
was well willing to send you this present, and to pray your Lordshippe to
come hither, to understand and to perceive the wrong that the unfaithful and
traitor Armadis of Greece did to my very dear and only brother Balarte
Prince of Thrace, by whose death, the succession of this Realm (after the
decease of my heavy father) shall pertain to me, yet with this charge, to
pursue and revenge the death of my foresaid Lord and brother. Therefore, if it
please you to come hither, to execute this reasonable vengeance, I have
purposed, and do promise you (in recompense of the duty that ye shall do)
to make you Lord and master of my self, and of all that I possess in this
world, aduertising you moreover, that the gods have revealed unto me, that ye
only are he, to whom this great justice, and glorious vengeance is reserved.
Obeyng then the divine prescie^ce of the gods, leave off from henceforth to
pursue the vengeance of a sort of evil injuries and quarrels of Damsels, of to
base quality, and come to take the possession and enjoying of great goods and
honors, the which are prepared here for you: thus doing ye shall content me and
make me joyful. She that desires to remain for ever in your good grace and
remembrance, Arlande.

The answer of Dom Florisel of Niquea, to the letters of Arlande, graciously
refusing her demand, as well because that Balarte was justly slain, as that
Amadis of Greece, was his father. In the.9. book and the.14. Chapter.
DOm Florisel of Niquea the son of the right virtuous and stout Prince Amadis
of Greece, to Arlande, the Princess of Thrace salutatio^s, eue^ such as her
excellency deserves. Madam, I have received the letters, which it has pleased
you to send me by this your Damsel, and reading them, I know the great desire
that ye have, to revenge the death of Prince Balart your brother, slain as I
have understood most valiantly in the camp of the battle (by the hands of
my right dear father Amadis of Greece) for a good and a just quarrel, a thing
that should divert and turn you to make any such sute^ for the more that the
cause of his death shall be published, the more dishonor shall fall both upon
him, and upon those that shall enforce themselves to revenge him, every man
evidently knowing his unrighteousness, for ye mischeuous turn that he
purposed to do unto him, that (with all graciousnesse and good entreating)
received him into his house. Therefore Madam find it not strange at al, if in
this I satisfy not your desire, not for the regard of the honor and
reverence that I ought to have naturally to him that has begotten me, but for
as much as I should greatly offend God, and my honor, yea I should do against
all reason, to revenge so virtuous an act, putting the case that another than
my father had done it. And I well assure you, that who so ever would obey you
in that, he shall find himself justly smitten of God, augmenting the shame and
dishonor of him that deserves to be buried in the darkness of
obliuiousnesse. As concerning the goods that ye promise me, that is, to make me
possessour and to enjoy your excellent beauty, and all your possessions, ye
may understand by these present letters, that I under the condition that ye
damaund, have a just occasion to refuse the^, nevertheless I thank you as
much as I ca^ possible, for your good will and affection that ye bear me, in
recompense whereof, I promise you, to employ me to be your servant and to serve
you, in all that honor and virtue shall command me. Thus much Madam, praying
the creator of al things, (unto whom vengeance ought to be reserved) to give
you his holy grace, and after that I may be affectuously recommended ^o yours.
He that desires you all goodness, and increase of honor, the knight of the
she shepherde.

A letter from Dom Florisell of Niquea, to fair Helen princess^ of Apolonia,
excusi^g himself of the boldness that he takes to write unto her, and to
present her his heart. In the ^^. book the.33. Chapter.
MAdame, if ye will measure your highness, and advise you upon the kingdom
that ye possess in respect of me, that am but a wandering knighte, and yet
unknown unto you, I think well that ye would marvel of my temeritie and
foolish boldness, that durst write unto you at this present: but if ye would
consider how great the force of love is, I am well assured, that your benignity
and sweetness shall excuse me, and accuse this divine beauty and good grace,
the which yesterday did so ravish me of my liberty, that I had not the power
nor the will, never to love or to serve any other but you. For this cause I
took boldness to pray you as humbly as I may possible, to receive my
faithful heart, the which has left me to be wholly yours, and does suffer
me to keep, and to name me your knight and very affectionate ^eruant, the
which shall little esteem all his misfortunes that are past, if ye would do
him so great honor, as that he might one of these days tell you by mouth, that
he fears to write unto you, because of the little aquaintance that ye have of
him: praying the creator and maker of all things (the which has m^ued you with
so great beauty) to give you the increase of honor and felicity. Your most
humble and obediente the knight of the she shepherde.

The princes^e of Apolonia does rigorously answer the letters of Dom Florisell,
denying him to be the knight of the she shepeherd. In the.9. book the.34.
Chapter.
I Cannot marvel enough of your presumption, that has enterprised to write
me the letter that ye have sent me by the which it is easy to know, that ye
go about to deceive me, and to rob me of the thing, that I have so derely
kept^ unto this present time, and that is promised long since to another that
does deserve it: but be ye sure, that your feigned and sweet words, shall not
cause me to consent and agree to your ill will: for I have well learned (God be
thanked) to keep me and to defend me from such assaults. Furthermore, if I
were at my liberty and power, esteem you that I would so much abase my self
(that am a kings daughter) to give me to a wandering knight, and unknown as ye
are? think you that I know not who the knight of the she shepeherd is, whose
name ye do vsurp in your letter? Truly to make me believe that, ye should have
showed your self a little more modest, and have done an act of a greater virtue
and valiantness, than that that ye did the day before, when ye outraged my
dwarffe in my presence. Leave off therefore to trouble me any more with your
letters, or by any other manner of means, and look that from henceforth ye
have a greter consideration and respect to my highness and place that I came
fro, or else I may advertise such men that shall cause you to feel your folly.

The letters of Dom Florisell of Niquea, to fair Helen princess of Apolonia,
by the which he does affirm that he is the knight of the she shepeherd, and if
that she desire his death, more than to love him, he is purposed to die. In the
9. book the.35. Chapter.
RIght excellent princess, the knight of the she shepeherd destitute of all
health does send you such, as his misfortune does suffer him. I have received
the letters the which it has pleased your highness to send me, by yt which I
have perceived and known that ye feel your self greatly offend^^, for that,
that love only constrained me to give you knowledge of, trusting to recover of
you some grace and favor, but seeing that in the place thereof, I have found
anger and disdain, with hard threatenings to cause me to feel my presumption,
I think that I cannot better satisfye you for the vengeance that ye desire,
than with good heart to receive dolorous death, the which I shall find more
sweet and amiable, than to live, not having your grace and favor. But yet
before I do execution, I was well willing to send you this present letter, to
give you knowledge, that my love and extreme affection toward you is not
fained, nor the surname that I bear (as ye send me word) falsely usurped,
trusting that before my death, or after, ye shall surely know it, and then it
may be ye will be sorie^ that ye have used so great cruelnesse toward him,
that loves you more than his own soul, the which (tarying your answer, and
latter sentence of death) does pray the creator to maintain you for ever in
joy and contentation. Your most humble and affectionate servant the knight of
the she shepherde.

Letters from the Princess Siluia to Dom Florisell of Niquea, aduertising him
that she is married, and that she is his aunte: praying him to abstain to love
her, and so doing, she will move the marriage between him and Alastraxeree. In
the.9. book the.38. Chapter.
Remembering the entier and perfect love that ye have borne me Lord Florisell,
in like manner the great goods and honor that I do now enjoy by yours
means, I would not fail (in recognizing of this) to wrighte this present
letter unto you, to advertise you, that since that the fortune of the Sea
separated us the one from the other, being at the fountain of love of
Anastarax, ready to kill my self with your own sword (for the great sorow^
and heaviness that I had of your misfortune and m^^^) the Princess of
Alastraxeree came suddenly unto us, and saved me from falling into this
inconvenience, and conducted me to the hell of Anastarax, who was taken out and
delivered by the means of her and me, and to recompense so great and so good a
deed, he has married me, and after the solemnity thereof was done, I by a
strange adventure was found to be the Emperor Lisuard of Greece daughter,
and so your fathers sister. Therefore I pray you to transmute and to change
this love and vehement affection that ye bear me, to the princess of
Alastraxerce, the which for the conformity of the great virtues, valiantness
and beauties that are in you both, does only merit and deserve to have you, and
as I think, I cannot give you a better, nor a more condig^e recompense, for so
many trauelles as ye have taken and suffered for me, than to move the marriage
of you and her, whom I have prayde and desired not to depart from this
country, until I have received news from you. Therefore I pray you, as much
as I may possible, to come hither as soon as ye can have opportunity, that we
may set some order, whilst occasion does present it self. As touching the rest
(because that this gentleman may show you by mouth all that is past and done
here, since the deliverance of prince Anastarax my dear lover and spouse,) I
will make an end at this present, of the which I desire that Darinell may be
partaker: praying the Lord God to give you the fulfilling of your good desires^
after that I have with good heart presented my recommendations unto your good
grace. Your aunt and perfect lover Siluie.

Dom Florisell of Niquea does answer the letters of his aunte, saying that he
is very well eased and joyful of her recognissance, as well for the place that
she is come from, as to be out of the pain that he suffered for her love. In
the.9. book the.41. Chapter.
MAdame, I have received your letters, and by th^^ I have understood the
news of your coming to the principality of Niquea, likewise the
consanguinitie between you and me, whereof I am as joyful, as of any thing
that might have happened to me in this world, because that my heart from
henceforth shall be exempt from the amorouse passion that it has suffered for
the love of you, not knowing the excellency of the place from whence ye are
issued and come fro: and you of your side shall be quited and delivered of the
obligation and promise that ye made me, to content and satisfy me of the
thing that so often I required of you, if perchance the Prince Anastarax
should have refused you, the which thing our Lord God has not suffered, nor
would not frustrate you of your virtues, whereof I give him immortal thanks,
as to him, that has kept us both from committing the thing against his honor
and commandment. By my truth, this name of a she shepherd is not
inconvenient nor vn^eete for you, and I believe that this was a certain
foreknowledge that ye should one day conduct and lead this virtuous ^^ocke,
that is to say, all this people which are so obedient unto you, whose love ye
have acquired and gotten, not by the greatness of your lineage, but by your
virtue only, of the which I think that there is noman that can bear more
certain or truer witness tha^ I, because I have accompanied you into the
places, where it was need to show it, whereof ye merit and deserve great
honor, but I will not rest nor tarry upon this, for neither my spirit nor my
hand, are able to exalt, nor to give it the place that it deserves: Therefore
leaving this charge to perfect Orators and true Chroniclers, I will at this time
make an end, nor I shall not send you at this time other news of auentures,
that have chanced me since that we were separated by the sea, because I
esteem that your Darinell (which went to seek you as soon as I had delivered
him your letters) may show you them, for he has continually kept me company,
and as I hope, I will be there shortly, after I be h^aled of certain wounds
which I took in a combat upon my journey of Apolonia, whereof this your
Gentleman, the bearer of this, may tell you the occasion, and against whom. In
the mean season my Lady my Aunt. I recommende me most humbly to your good
grace, and to all your noble company, specially to my Lady Princess
Alastraxeree, whom I greatly desire to see, praying the eternal God, to
maintain you in his grace and favor. Written in the kingdom of Apolonia, by
your most humble and obedient servant and Neuew Florisel of Niquea.

Astibel of Sciences letters to Arlande the Princess of Thr^^^, by the which
she shows her the manner how to revenge the death of her brother, and to
enjoy her love. In the.9. Book, the.50. Chapter.
MAdame, I have been very joyful to understand the imprisonment that ye have
caused of the infant Alastraxeree, and of the Prince Dom Florisel of Niquea,
trusting that your excellency shall receive by this means the ^ontentation of
your spirit and mind, and the vengeance of the death of my Lord Prince your
brother: but forasmuch as I have found by my art Magike that king Amadis of
France, the Emperors of Constantinople and T^ebisonde, and other Princes and
Princesses their freedes and alies are bewitched in the tower of Universe, and
ought to be delivered within this year: for this cause I was well willing to
advertise you, to provide for all inconveniences that may chance, and how ^ee
might by this one means take vengeance of Dom Florisel of Niquea your
prisoner, of his Father and Mother, and generally of all his next kinsefolkes,
that is, to send incontinently the infant Alastraxeree to the tower of
Universe, to take heed that no person do enter to see the adventure, and to
finishe and make an end of the inchantement and witchcraft, knowing that it
shall come well to pass, seeing the great valiantness, force, and magnanimity
that does associate her, above all other of the earth. And if she keep the
peace, I (that during) assure you, that then, for all the rest of their lives,
shall continue bewitched, nor Dom Florisel shall not depart from your prison,
if it be not your pleasure. Thus ye shall not only revenge your self of
those that ye desire, but furthermore ye shall have a mean and a commodity
to come to the possession of two Empires, by the aliance that ye may make with
him whom ye love, the which he shall willingly accept to be at liberty, and
out of your prisons. Therefore Madame, it shall please you speedely to advise
you, in as much as ye love the repose and quietness of your mind, the which
shall be the way for me to pray him, that is, to mayntaine you in his favor and
grace, recommending me most humbly to yours. By your humble Astibel of Sciences.

Letters of the infant Alastraxeree to the Princesses Helen of Apolonia, and
Timbrie of Boetia, declaring unto them, the cauteles wherewith she and Dom
Florisel of Niquea abused Arlande the Princess of Thrace. In the.9. book, the
50. Chapter.
RI^ht excellent Princesses, knowing in you the zele of perfect amity, the
which ye bear to Dom Florisel of Niquea, (as every one of you declared to me
with her own mouth, when ye took me for him nigh unto the hermitage of Almond
trees) I would not ^ayle, seeing the commodity, to certify you of these
news. Therefore my Ladies, ye shall know and understand that he is well as
concerning the disposition of his body, but I think that his spirit is somewhat
troubled, because he is fallen and arested prisoner in the hands of Arlande
princess of Thrace, the which was purposed to revenge her upon him for the
death of her brother Balarte, slain in the close camp by Amadis of Greece his
father, and I believe that she would have put him by and by to death, after he
was are s^e^ in the Castle of the Glass of love, if he had not auised him to
usurp my name, and say that he was Alastraxeree, because that he and I are
very like, (as ye know) and so like, that the knights which took him, and
believing his saying to be true, brought him into the city of Thrace, where the
King and the Princess Arlande received him very humaynely for me, and he has
playde his personage unto this day so well in a woman's garment (wherewith the
Princess presented him) that it is impossible to do it better, whereof I
grea^ly thank him. Now it chanced that I going to the Castle of the Blasse
of loves, was auertised by a strange adventure of his good subtlety (whereof
my Damselles will certify you) and afterward I, as fortune would, was arested
even as Dom Florisel was, whose name I usurped, because he should not be
discovered, and for such a one I was carried to Arlande into a house of
pleasure, where she held me fast and close, and daily solicited me to love
her, using to mewards, gestures, and amorous countenances, another less nor
more than if she had spoken to Florisell, but I can so well entertayne her and
content her with words, that as I hope (she being more priny with me) will
set him shortly at liberty, and when he shall be so, I trust that he will find
the means to set me likewise at liberty. Thus my Ladies I shall present my
recommendations to your good graces, praying the great God to maintain you in
his protection. Your cousin and good freende, the divine Alastraxeree the
daughter of Mars.

Letters from Helen of Apolonia, and from Timbre of B^etia, to the infant
Alastraxeree, with the which they laud and exalte her greatly, bringyng to
this purpose diverse old examples. In the.9. Book, the.53. Chapter.
MOst excellent Lady, we have perceived by your Damselles, the good subtlety
that ye have used to find ^ m^^nes for the deliverance of Do^ Flo^is^l^ the
which is fallen into the hands of the Princess Arlande of Thrace, a thing
that ought to make you immortal for ever, seeing the danger that ye put your
self in, to show so perfect amity. And to show you truly what we do
think, we find the acts that ye have done and do, so excellent and noble,
that by good reason all the world should wish for such a personage as was
the Grecian Homere to describe your high and heroical acts, to give an
ensample to the posterity, and to inti^e them to ensue the like. Great
Alexander needs not to go before you, nor Anniball, nor yet the Scipions,
for if they have had great victories, it has hene with the multitude of men,
but you alone have won so much, that ye ought to hold and keep the
highest room, not only among the wise and valiant men, but also among the
women more noble. All the high acts of arms that the noble Queen Gradafilea
did, ought in nothing to be compared to yours, for all that she ever did, was
through the force of love, which is invincible, and to conserve her
integrity, but ye were only moved by a certain natural and native virtue to
do him good, whom ye in no manner of wise know not, and not to him only, but
to all those, unto whom ye perceived injury and extortion to be done, the
glory and the laud whereof, redoundeth unto you. Certainly the fair and
chaste Judith, that cut cruel Holof^rne^ head off to observe and keep her
chastity, nor Cleopatra, that overcame her brother Ptolome, nor Queen
Fantas^lea, with many other ought in no wise to be compared or made equal with
you, which does not only excel all men and women in virtue and
valiantness, but also in excellence and perfect beauty, exceptyng none, nor
this fair Syluia, the which (as we have understood) ye preserved from
cruel death, when she would have slain her self nyghe unto the Fountayn of
loves of Anasterax^ for the absence of Dom Florisell, the which is bound unto
you all his life long, and I also, for the goodness that ye have done for me
in saving of him: Notwithstanding truly, as I think, he should not (seeing
the promise that he made me at his departing from hence to be in Apolonia, at
the adventure of the contention of the four brethren) have strayed, nor have
cast himself into so many ieopardous adventures, without sending me news of
him: yet I will not write unto him, least that presenting my finger unto him,
he take the whole hands, considering that his coming hither shall certify us
of his being so far off, and of his so grievous absence, so that it please
you of your goodness to suffer him to return, unto whom you and I are so
much bound for the goodness that we have received of him, that it is
impossible for us to satisfy him, nor you to give him condign thanks. But
Madame, we shall pray the Creator to give you such and so good peace, as we
desire for the war that does torment us, presenting our most humble
recommendations to your good Grace.

Your great friends and ready to obey you, Helen of Apoloni^, and Tymbria of
Boetia.

The defense of Raison upon the difference of honor, and love. In the.9. book
the.53. Chapter.
Honor and you love, it greatly displeases me that ye cannot agree as
touching the health of these two armies, yet forasmuch as the point and the
truth of your rightes cannot be known but by the effusion of human blood,
or by the victory of one of these two armies (the issue whereof ^oth depend of
the will of God) I can give you no other counsel but to let your men join, to
the end that the vengeance and judgment of God, may be vmpere and arbiter of
your difference and debates.

A prophetical letter of Anaxenes, a Philosopher and a calker to Dom Florisel
of Niquea. In the.9. book. the.54. Chapter.
MY Lord, the king Arpilion, and the Queen Galathea, his very dear
companion and spouse, have charged me to present with a very good heart their
recommendations unto your good grace, and I of my part do no less, which am
their Philosopher and a master of art Magic. Understand my Lord that the
goodness and valiantness which I know to be in you, have provoked me to
advertise you o^ certain and great adue^tures that shall chance unto you, the
which I have foreseen and known by my science and learning, and by the high
secrets of art Magic: and to the intent ye may avoid and escape them with
your honor, I send you the helmet that y^ lost in the sea, when that by
tempest ye were separated from Siluia, the which shall do you good service, in
a combat that two brave Lions shall make, yea for the price of your blood, and
there shall come forth of those that fight, a light that now is hidden in deep
darkness, the which shall give light to all those that thought to have lost
it, and so well, that your ^ead being delivered from the peril, the which ye
shall see before your eyes, men shall see an old wound renewed in you, the
which shall put you to extreme pain, and yet cannot be eased, until this
sovereign remedy shall be multiplied in you: and in all those that shall
sustain your part, shall be new wounds, whereout shall come a blood, that
shall moist all the land of Greece, by the means whereof, your body shall be
delivered by a general effusion, until the payment be perfect. Nor the prince
the Author of this war, nor his friends nor confederates shall have it no
better cheap than you, aduertising you, that the time of most greatest
danger wherein ye may he, shall be even then, when that the Lion which
ingendereth the lawful and legitimate Lions, shall find him self in more
peril than you. And a little while after, there shall come even suddenly a
Bastard, the which shall beat down with his brighte and shining arms the
glory not hoped for. Then shall arise the six bastards and little Lions, the
which shall awake their fathers by a more strange fashion, than the Lions
progenitors have given life to their little ones, and all that with
encreasement of your great honor, and the inestimable effusion of blood on the
one side and other. Therefore take good heed at the beginning of this evil,
whereof ye shall have cause to laud him continually, that is laudable above
all things, by whose permission and sufferance, all this shall be done, and ye
shall daily hold his divine hand in your defense. Therefore doubt not at
all: for all thing shall chance as I have told you, praying you not to be
curious to know more, until the sovereign judge shall have executed his
determination and will, to show you a war, whereof peace shall proceed. And
in this behalf, I shall pray the moderatour of all things continually to
maynteyne you in his protection. Your humble servant Anaxenes, Philosopher and
Magitian.

A letter from the Princess Arlande to the infant Alastraxere^, quyting her of
her promise, to the end she should not leese him that she loves, and hates
more. In the nynth^ book, the.56. Chapter.
MAdam Alastraxeree, the dolor (accompanied with an extreme anger) that I
have had to see me abused by you ^ Dom Florisell of Niquea, has so much
prevailed upon me, that to revenge me of such a wrong I was willing^ to procure
his death, and yours together, you making request to go to the Universe Tower
to fight with him, thinking that ^^e meddling of you two^ would make no end
without the death of one or of other, or of both of you together: but yet
afterward I bethoughte and considered in my self, that his death should
be the cause of mine. For the great and extreme love (as ye do know) that I
bare him, then I thought it best to desist from this vengeance, and to use
humanity and sweetness toward him, the which he has not deserved. And
therefore madame, my will was to send this my damsel unto you, to pray you to
cease and desist from the promis that ye have made me, of the which I do
quite you by this present letter, wherein ye shall find my humble
recommendations to your good grace, praying the sovereign God to give me so
much grace and favor, that Dom Florisell may once know the entier love that I
bear him, and the great wrong that he, disdayning my aliance has done me.
Your Arlanda princess of Thrace.

Dom Florisell of Niquea excuses himself in his letters that he has not kept
his promis, the which he made to the princess Helen of Apolonia. In the.9.
book the.57. Chapter.
MAdame, since my departing from Apolonia (where your grace did me so much
good, and so well received me) I have bin in diverse and many strange
adventures, being so far from you otherwise than I trusted, so that I had not
ye mean nor way to accomplish the promis that I, taking my leave of you at the
Abbay of Rois, made you, whereof I have bin and am in such a perplexity, that
it is impossible for me to declare it by letters, assuring you for all that,
that no other thing has constrayued me to absent me so long time from your
presence, but the honor that all knights are bound unto. Therefore I beseech
you most humbly, not to put me in any fault, and to think that as soon as I
may have the ways and mean to come to you, there shall be no fault nor let,
but that I will come, the which thing I trust surely to do, when I depart from
hence, where I am constrained by promise to remain for a time, as Darinell
this present bearer may show you, whom ye know to be faithful and secret,
the which shall let me at this time to write any longer letters, praying you in
the mean while to do me so much pleasure, as to write me news of you, for
there is nothing in this world that I desire more to know. Thus much madame,
after that I prayed most humbly the Lord to maintain and to keep you in his
grace and favor, recommending me with good heart to yours, and to that of my
Lady Timbria. Your faithful and very affectionate servant the knight of the
she shepeherde.

The Princess Helen of Apolonia making an answer to Dom Florisels letters,
does send him word, that the amity that she does bear him, cannot suffer her
to keep her faith that she has promised Dom Lucidor. In the.9. book the.58.
Chapter.
LOrd Dom Florisell, I have received the letter, that it has pleased you to
write me by Darinell, the which has certified me of a great part of the
adventures that have chanced unto you, since ye departed out of this conntrey,
and therewith of the enterprise that ye have done in keeping the toure of
Universe for a certain time, the which I desire to be shortly acc^mplished,
that ye might shortly come hither, to give consolation unto my feeble spirit,
the which has bin continually in wrapped (since your absence) in melancholy
and heaviness. Alas how oftentimes have I been at a point to put my self in
ieopardy to recover you? Certainly if I could have found any good mean to
have come thither where ye were, be you assured I would not have showed my
self slothful to have departed, nor the honor nor reverence that I owe
unto my father should have turned me, and the faith much less that I have
promised to Dom Lucidor, the which by my consent shall never have any part
in me, for the extreme love and affection that I bear you cannot suffer it.
Consider therefore my dear friend the thing that I do in your favor, and be
not unthankful to acknowledge it, as I do not mistrust you, considering the
purpose that ye make me by your letters, and the thing that Darinell has told
me, praying you in the mean season, to keep secret the love that is between
us two, and to be a faithful keeper of my honor, considering that fortune
shall show her self to you and me hereafter more favorable, than she has done
in time past. And in this hope I shall pray the creator to give us grace to
come to our affectionate desire, after that I have presented my most humble
recommendations unto your good remembrance: of the which my cousin Timbria
does desire to be partaker. Your perfect lover Helen of Apolonia.

The Prince Anaxartes by letters does show fair Oriana the love that he does
bear her, and so doing he forgets not to praise himself. In the.9. book
the.64. Chapter.
RIght excellent princess, the divine Anaxartes, the son of Mars God of
battles, does give you such salutations as he desires for himself. Madame the
wound and dolor that I have received by the regard and sight of your
excellent beauty, is so great and so vehement, that it has not only subdued
my natural force and strength, that my glorious mother Zahara Queen of
Caucase has given ^e, but also they have so feeblished my divine virtue
(whereof I take part of my fathers side) that I am co^s^rayned to draw unto you
to have health and remedy for my wound: for even as they y^ be pricked and
stinged with a Scorpion do use to take remedy of the^, likewise seeing that ye
have bin the cause of ye evil that I suffer, I search remedy of you, the
which ye should not deny me, considering the place of my birth, and the power
that the mighty Gods have given me, of the which the most part of them have
bin smitten with the darts of love, as I am at this present, and so that by no
means I can resist it. And therefore madame, do not wonder, seeing me to be
partaker of the divinity, that my heart is kindled with your love, for they
which are entierly divines, may be as well taken as I. This Infant (whom I
pray you receive as his highness does merit) may show you by mouth, the
torment and anoyance that I am in. Thus I pray you not to deny me your
comfort, the which I ask not but with an honest intention, the which is of one
true and perpetual alliance of us two. And in this hope I will pray the
Almighty to give you his grace, presenting my most humble recommendations to
yours. He that cannot be long without your succor, the divine Anaxartes.

Letters from prince Anaxartes to the Infant Oriana, continuing
(notwithstanding her answer) the burning affection that he does bear her, and
aduertising her of the danger into the which he may fall, if she refuse him.
In the.9. book the.65. Chapter.
RIght virtuous Princess, I perceiving the answer that ye have made to the
Infant Artimire, by whom I sent you my letters, I know that ye find it another
good nor decent that I have appointed my self to come to you, for the reason
mentioned in them, that is, because ye are under the power of your father and
mother, unto whom ye will obey, and do nothing but their pleasure, the which
thing I agree with you to be reasonable and honest to all persons, be they
never so high and noble, but if ye knew what power this little God of love has
upon men (I will say also upon the divines) I am assured ye should not have found
my humble request so strange, for your highness would have considered that he
does so blind men, that who so it pleases him to smite with his golden dart,
he for the most part and most often, takes from them all discretion, as we
have infinite examples by the histories, the which at the present I will not
recite (fearing to trouble you with ^oo long letters) but only pray you to
believe that your excellent beauty has brought me to such a stat^, that if
it please you not shortly to show me some beningne favor, I ^eare me very sore
that ye shall see me fall into the greatest misfortune that may chance to any
knighte, presenting in this behalf my right humble commendation to your good
grace, of the which I desire to be participant, considering the mean, how that
I may demand you of the King your father, seeing that ye will promise me
nothing until ye know^ his will. The very same that is more yours than his
own, the divine Anaxartes.

Letters of the Infant Helen to the King of Apolonia her father, by the which
she does pray him to excuse her that she is married without his leave, seeing
that the destination would so have it, and that the Prince that she has
taken, has deserved much more. In the.9. book the.70. Chapter.
Sir, your most humble daughter Helen does pray you or ever ye read these
letters at length, to consider what power love has evpon men, otherwise ye
would Judge the fault that I have committed against your goodness, greater
than it is^ if ye measure the obligation of obedience that all children ought
to have to fathers and mothers. Well sir, to the end that I disguise nor hide
nothing from you. I think that ye do it for the best, to keep me far off
from amorous affections, separating me from your court, and to set me in this
solitary place with my Aunte and my cousin Tymbria of Boetia: but I ensure you
that love has so assailed me, representing to me in fans^e the beauty, good
grace, valiantness, and magnanimity of Prince Florisel of Niquea, that
fortune so favoring me that I have seen him, and known the singular virtues
that are in him, and the unspeakable love that he hears me, I have been
enforced afterward that I had promised him marriage by present words to follow
him, and hereof is witness my cousin Tymbria, the which has kept me
company, fearing that ye would have given her some evil countenance, she
presents her humble recommendations unto your good grace, and prays you,
and I also (as much as I may possible,) to excuse her unto my Lord her father,
assuring you, that she is not ye cause of the thing that I have done, but
contrariwise, resisted it with all her power, but ye know sir, that no
wisdom, nor yet no human force nor strength can resist the fatals
destinies. Thorefore sir, ye ought to believe suerly that it was the will of
God, nor ye can not say that I have offended my honor, nor yet yours, taking
an husband not agreeable unto my highness, for he whom I have chosen, does
merit one of a greater stock than I am, for the goodness that he does
possess, as well of fortune, as of the spirit, yea a great deal more than the
Prince Lucidor, unto whom I pray you to excuse me, and to consider that I never
promised him any thing, so that he need not be greatly grieved with me, nor
offended with the thing that I have done, in as much truly as this has not
been to disdain his aliance, for I acknowledge that he did me much honor,
willing to take me for such a one, as I am now to Dom Florisel of Niquea, the
which has conducted me to Constantinople, accompanied with Prince Falanges of
Astre, a Prince as wise and as valiant, as he is virtuous and of good grace,
praying in this behalf the sovereign creator of al things, to give you health,
good fortune, and long life. Your most humble daughter Helen of Apolinia.

Prince Lucidor of Vengeances letter to the Infant Alastraxeree, giving her
knowledge of the just occasion that he has to revenge him of Dom Florisel,
and praying her not to let him to do it. In the.9. book the.72. Chapter.
MAdame, were it not that I think that ye have been misinformed of the great
wrong that Prince Florisel of Niquea has done me, I esteem that your divine
excellence would not have been in battle against me, to have lefted the
effect of the just execution of the vengeance that I ought to take upon him,
as well in my own name, as upon the occasion of the injury that Amadis of
Greece his father has done to my sister Lucelle, the which is here with me.
But to the end Madam, that ye may know what has moved me to assail him in
such order, as ye have seen, ye shall understand that he ravished and led
away Helen the Infant of Apollonia, the which has been promised me of long
time, to be my wife, and for such I have accepted her and will have her. I pray
you then to consider how much that thing should grieve me, and show not your
self to be so great an enemy of your own highness and good renoume, as to
let so just a vengeance, but rather to show favor and aid to him that
follows it, thus doing ye shall observe and keep the integrity of your
justice. Thus Madame presenting my humble recommendations to your good grace, I
shall pray the sovereign to give you the accomplishemente of your desires. Your
cousin and intier good friend Lucidor of Vengeances.

Alastraxeree does answer the letters of Prince Lucidor of Vengeances, and
does show him that she has done her duty in helping Dom Florisel, and does
pray him to be at one with him. In the.9. book the.72. Chapter.
EXcellent Prince Lucidor, the divine Alastraxaree the daughter of the mighty
Mars, the God of battles, and of the triumphant Zahara Queen of the Mount
Caucase, and of the mountains of the Orient, does send you salutation and
amity. Ye shall understand that I have received and read your letter, by the
which ye complain greatly that I have helped Dom Florisel of Niquea, by who^
ye maintain that ye have been greatly and sore offended. For an answer
thereof, I pray you to consider, how much I am bound (as all other Princes
ought to be) to favor and minister justice to those that have good right: so
it is, that I am no less bound also to acknowledge a good deed and service,
for I am as much bound to Dom Florisel as any person may be to any other, and
that for many causes, the which to make you understand at this present time, I
have no leisure. And it seems to me, that ye should put me in no fault, nor
be miscontent with the thing that I have done in his right: and if I had or
this known and perceived your difference, yet my highness does bind me to
succor him in such necessity as I found him in, so that ye ought not to
procure your vengeance and justice by inequality of force, as I have seen by
experience, but to summon him and advertise him to repair the injury that ye
maintain he has done you, and if he refuse to content you, and to make you
amends, then ye should proceed by good counsel and moderate deliberation.
Think and esteem therefore, that I have not done but my duty to Dom Florisel,
nor I will not leave of to satisfy you, and to maintain your right even
against him, the thing being well known and examined. Yet in the mean space I
pray you, that ye will enforce your self to agree and accord your difference
without sheading of blood i^ it he possible, and not to follow the impotuositie
and hastiness of your choler, that has caused you to take and to have the
surname of vngeances, not convenient truly for a Prince, for the gods would
that we should leave unto them all vengeance, because we cannot keep a mean
in the executing and punishing of those that have offended us. As touching me,
I will take pain, and pray him for peace between you, assuring my self that
he will not deny it me. And in this hope I will make an end at this time,
wherein you and all my lords of your company shall find my recommendations to
your good graces, beseeching the Gods to maintain you all in health. Wholly
yours and ready to do you pleasure, the divine Alastraxeree.

A letter from Dom Florisell of Niquea, to the Princess Arland, excusing him
of this, that he cannot bear her the amity that he desires, being in love in
another place. In the.10. book the.4. Chapter.
MAdame, the praises of the warlike victories, published in every place by the
clear trumpet, seem to me of little valor, in comparison of him that does
deserve it, the which by wisdom is an ouercommer of himself. For of the
first, the great part is done to fortune, the which is common among us, our
Lieutenants and soldiers, on the other, no man may have any right, but he
alone, unto whom all the honor does perteyne. The deed already past between
you and me, does summon and inuit you to this conquest of glory that has no
peer, considering the assaults, that your own will does both day and night
deliver you, the which you ought virtuously to sustain, and by your great
wisdom to quiet: for ye know, that on my side and part, I may not obey the law
of your true love, having lost my entire liberty, of ye which there remains
no part, that I may bestow in your service, I would, although I may not: I
confess and knowledge the deite: but I have not wherewithal to satis^ie,
because of a former obligation and band, that does bind and engage both the
body and soul: therefore ye must needs take my good will in payment, without
complaining upon me, as touching the fault of love to you wards, in as much as
my unableness does excuse me, seeing I had placed it before in another stead:
nor unfaithfulness, considering that my faith and promise was already set and
arested in another place, from whence I could not retire it. Considering
therefore that love no less than other natural things, does continually
retain his property, the which is to exercise tyranny against his vassals,
as he did against Queen Dido, and diverse great Ladies, the which did
sacrifice to this cruel God, with their pure blood, and at last with their
life. Take an example, and look upon me, to obey his force, as ye see that I
could not resist him, and ye shall win above me (that does live in continual
war) this vauntage, to remain in peace and quitnesse of spirit: the which I
wish you, with the increase of glory, prosperity, with as good an heart, as I
do present these most humble recommendations to your good Grace. The self
same, which is wholly yours, even as he is his own, Florisell of Niquea, Prince
of two Empyres.

The Oration of Prince Lucidor, desiring aid of the King, and Princes
Apolloniens, to revenge him of the Princes of Greece. In the.10. book the.5.
Chapter.
SIr, and you Princes, Barons, Captains, and Soldiers Apolloniens, if our
sage auncetours, (which the worlds that are past did bear) had left us in the
succession of so many good documents, the certain knowledge of the train and
government of fortune, her inconstancy should not give me at this time
occasion to blame her, nor her certainty a law to say this that I say: but
forasmuch as she her self has prescribed the authority to execute her own
mind, the Princes of this world shall win much less to will to resist her
might, than to obey and acquit themselves of the obligation that she often
times does lay and entangle them withal. Not sir, that I will under this
color deny in any point that I owe unto your honor, nor likewise leave of to
exact of you in justice that ye owe unto mine, being disposed to make of two
like things, one or other, in the case of the rauishment and rape of your
daughter Helen, and my spouse. In whom no less force has been done to you,
than to me, the which thing induces me presently to require that your will
conform it self to mine, for our mutual satisfaction in the enterprise of
this just vengeance. Not that I doubt (Lord Birmates) or have any mistrust in
this case of your frank and noble courage: but fear only of the council
that may be given you to the contrary, whether it be to turn you wholly, or at
the least to slack your diligence that is required in this business, by the
occasion of the ancient amity that ye have continually with the Princes of
Greece, a thing that should turn me to an inestimable loss, if it should be
prolonged, seeing that the array and the furniture, whereunto ye see that I am
set, the which to me should be unprofitable, if it be not strengthened and
augmented by yours. And therefore sir, and ye Princes, Barons, Capitaynes and
soldiers Apolloniens ought not to marvel, that I so vrgently do solicit
you to this enterprise, and less to refuse my request being of such
consequence for you, that thinking to reject it as mine, ye shall find it as
much contrary to your selves. Who is he that can say that this outrage has
not been done as much to you as to me? As touching my part, I am disposed to
vengeance, in the which if I do not content my desire in the satisfaction of my
honor, in as much as Fortune is not content, I will turn upon my self the
rest of the force and strength, not as a subject to serve her any more in any
new cruelty. For this cause Sir, and you other Lords Apolloniens, I pray you
most humbly and very effectuously, that ye will in this behalf employe and
show your force and strength, and the strength of your friends and allies to
be joined unto mine, to appoint and prepare such a power and might against the
Princes Constantines, that if willingly they will not make amends for this
wrong and injury, we may be sufficient to execute the thing upon them, and to
enforce them to reason. Here I make end of my demand, not doing it after my
first intention, whether it be as concerning the vengeance to give, or to take.

The Prince Birmates sp^^king for them all, does answer^ bycidor, showing him
that war ought not to have, a (...) beginning, and he counsels him to
send a letter to Dom Florisell, and to dissuade the combat between them two^
In the.10. book. the.5. Chapter.
MY Lord Lucidor, seeing that the good pleasure of the king my Lord and
father, and the Lords assisting, do charge me with the answer that they
intend shall be made you, I will briefly show you the thing, and what they
think in this matter, remitting yet my will and resolution to yours. In the
first place, I confess unto you, that we have a common inter^st with you in
the issue of this c^use, the which in condition is nothing different or unlike
to that, that was begun among the Greeks and the Trojans, for the rape of
their fair Helen, of whom I am extremely di^ple^sed, that my daughter bears
the name and effect of the second. I will not deny any more the ancient
amity that I have with the Princes of G^^^ce, if it be so that the balance of
my judgment be not of such weight, that the respect of my honor, and of my
daughters, does not fall nor decay: the which Iesteeme ought to be bought
again with what price so ever it may be, as well of the goods, as of the
person. Yet the affairs of such importance require their beginning to be
diligen^ly consulted and debated, for fear least the end shoulde-euill
succeed: referning such diligent regard, that their Princes and men may be
discharged before God, and principally their subjects, in case that fortune
turn contrary to their ^stimation. She has somewhat a regard to things that
are against my own taste: for leaving of all passions (as men should do in
matters of counsel) I esteem that in this enterprise we ^ouche and lay the
total and whole sum of our estates and treasures in the hand of Fortune,
without assurance to come to any other reparation pretended, than of our own
right, the which as subject to the inconstancy and variableness of the
variable and wavering Goddess has oftentimes need of help. The Princes of
Greece had good right against the city of Troy, the which, that
notwithstanding, did sustain their siege and assault the space of ten
year, and had sustained it peradventure unto the end, saving for the treason
so craftily pretensed, and so valiantly executed. But let us leave a part
the great effusion of blood that I see prepared: let us only consider what
issue it shall have: for in very deed, the effect of arms is almost upon
fortune, nor never ground in any suretis, therefore we must descend specially
to the conservation of our honor. Touching the which (notwithstanding that it
has been offended by ye taking away of Helen) it may be that greater reason
shall be showed us, for the satisfaction of our injury than we hope, after that
the party shall have well perceived, and discussed the ground of our
complaint. Upon the which men can give no lawful judgment, before they hear
the deduction of both parties. Therefore let us take heed to proceed by ripe
deliberation, fearing least we repent us to much by leisure of our foolish
precipitation and hastiness: for this cause we are thus minded my Lord
Lucidor, that or ever ye proceed any further, ye should show your mind and
intention by writing to Prince Florisel, summoning him for the reparation of
the outrageous injury, for through his refuse, ye shall make our cause a great
deal the better. The^ without any difficulty ye may denounce mortal war
with fire and blood, unto the accomplishment and fulfilling of the vengeance:
and as concerning the combat of your person with his, I am not of that opinion,
for as much as the deed of so general offense, should not be charged nor laid
upon the shoulders of any one slone, the which lesing, the rest of the
pursuit, should as touching other remain without amenyment. Not that I will in
this revoke in any doubt the valor of your person, ^ut because the favor of
Mars is uncertain and common, in the which a man should not put his confidence
of a thing of such importance, without he had his promise by sign and seal
autentike. This is it whereunto the Kings each one and this assistence does
tend, to tarry the answer that the Prince Florisel shall make unto the
Ambassadors sent by you, for to take thereby the fundation of our final
resolution. In the mean space not to require, nor yet to put our friends to
pain (of whom we should desire succor in these affairs) until we may show
them more than duty, unto whom we shall be sent to search for peace, and to
avoid the horrible fury of the war: the which thing shall furthermore
encourage them to take armor and to fight for us, against a common enemy, for
right, equity, peace, and quietness of the people, besides that the loss of
so little time cannot be prejudicial unto you, in the expedition of such a
consequence, the order and preparation whereof requires a longer time, least
that we for our sudden enterprise incur to late repentance.

Lucidor the vengeor writing to Prince Florisel of Niquea, does pray him to
declare the cause of the rauishment of his wife: finally (he setting his honor
before his eyes) does counsel him to restore her again, of in refusing
thereof, he denounces him mortal war. In the.10. book, the.5. Chapter.
MY Lord Florisel, Lucidor the vengeor, the natural prince of France, and of
Apollonie by aliance, does pray God so to inspire you, that ye may know the
fault that ye have committed against me, and to repair and amend it, as
right and reason commands. The thing that has moved me to write this letter
unto you, is, that I, your error being known, and the amends made, may
remain with you in such peace and amity, as two Christen Princes, of such
highness as we ^e, ought to employ our common forces and strength against the
Infidels. I desire greatly to know, what excuse ye shall sinde for the great
wrong that ye have done me, and to your self (as I may say) in violating my
Kingly estate, and likewise the amity that ye owe to the father of my spouse,
praying you that ye will write it unto me by parcel means, to the end I may
consider that it be sufficient to accomplish the satisfaction on your part in
my behalf: for if I with your good will cannot have it, I must be constrained
to take it with the edge of the sword, by the way of arms, between you and me
only, unto the utterance of your life or mine. I marvel me much, that your
virtue so well known here in so glorious acts, is so forgetful through a
disorbinate appetite of unbridled youth, to declare it self so great an
enemy of reason, specially of the peace inviolable, that your Fathers and
predecessors have always entertained with the parents of my spouse, assuring
you, that with great pain ye shall wash you of so great a spotte, with all
the water of the Sea, for your estate was bound to resist this vile act, nor
doing the thing that ye would not that he, that is of your quality should do
to you, of ^he which ye cannot discharge you neither to God nor man. By the
means whereof, although I had good right to make war upon you, as a defiler
of my wife, and of her own proper faith, so it is yet that having God before
mine eyes, and the businesses of the Christian common weal in recommendation,
I would have invited you, to have she woe and done me right of your self,
considering that the laws as touching themselves do kind Princes, that by this
means men might avoid one so cruel war as I see, to be prepared, and no
less than your predecessors had before Troy, the which God thorough his
grace turn from us, by the means of your just satisfaction. And in case no, I
protest to make you such war, that one of us shall remain in gage.

Florisel of Niquea does answer Lucidors letter, excusing himself of the
accusations laid against him, submitting him to the judgment of his parents,
or otherwise he is appointed to defend him. In the.10. book, the.6. Chapter.
LOrd Lucidor I marvel me of this proud surname that ye occupy, causing your
self to be named the Uengeor, knowing (or else ye should know) that such a
title does not pertayne but to God only. And particularly to answer to the
articles of your letter, the which yt Cry of Armignac your ambassafor has
presented unto me, I say, that ye your self are bound to satisfy for the
presumptuous words ye have used against me and Helen my spouse. And as
touching that ye say, how that the excuse is not sufficient that love has
led and conducted me to that fault, inferring that a person of estate, as
you and I, should not commit so filthy deeds, I say, that the excellent
beauty of my Lady Helen, joining thereunto the parentage and place whereout
she is issued, have bound me to such noble thoughts, daily drawing me out of
my self, continually giving heed to the honest love that I bare her under the
pure law of Marriage, the which ought to discharge me, and to deface the fault
that ye lay unto me, of the which I in no wise feel my self reprehensible,
if that fault were not, that I made her parents, leading her away without
their consent, a thing that greatly displeases me, for the love of them unto
whom in this respect I was bound much. To this, where ye say that I deprive my
self of the thing, that good renoun^e has always granted me: I maintain,
that I in nothing have violated nor yet diminished it: but tru^^, that the
thing which I have done in this case, shall fall and come forth so the
augmentation of my great glory. Also the Princes of Greece are accustomed and
wont to keep the point of honor, and to revenge the outrages that men
enterprise to do unto them. And now the Empire is ruled by those which are
more stout of mind and more warlike, than ever it had, it is not ready to
fall from the degree of his ancient reputation. And as touching you, if ye
will understand reason, ye should depart from this quarrel, seeing that Helen
is my wife, and that the deed is irreuocable: but for the reparation and
satisfaction to you wards, my Lords and parents have concluded to give you
another lady of great highness, beauty and richesse, such a one as by reason
ye should content your self withal, if not, let it suffice you to remit the
deed to the discretion of your parents and mine, and of my wives, promising
you to condescende to every reasonable and hones^ condition toward the
Prince Birmates and the King of Apolonia. Otherwise I protest before God to
defend my just cause as long as my soul shall breath in my body, praying you
lord Lucidor for amity sake, to have and to take a regard to the doubtful and
uncertain end of battles, and to the great number of friends of Greece,
besides the number of vassalles, not comprehending the murders that this enorme
title of Vengeance the which ye under the divine power do usurp, shall stir
up against you.

Lucidor of Vengeance letters, to Zahara Queen of Caucase, demanding of
hirayde and succor against Florisel of Niquea. In the.10. book the.6. Chapter.
MAdame, I being come not long since that Florisel of Niquea enterprised upon
the aliance made against me and Princess Helen of Apolonia, he has indecently
and violently ravished her from me, I could bethink me then of no better
recourse tha^ of your excellence, and in that of your noble son and daughter
to obtain help and succor to revenge the wrong and shame that he has
purchased me, the which if ye will not grant me, notwithstanding any amity
that may be between you, or his, I pray you to have a more regard to the
divinity, whereof ye are participant, that does bind you to do justice in
earth to those that do require it of you. Thus much Madame, the high gods
maintain you daily in their communication, inspiring you with a will inclined
to my just quarrel. The same which is always ready to serve your royal
majesty Lucidor of Vengeance.

Lu^idor de Vengeurs letter to Florisel of Niquea. In the.10. book, the.6.
Chapter.
LVcidor the Vengeur the natural Prince of France, of Secilo, and Apolonia by
alia^ce, to thee Florisel of Niquea, misfortune for all salutation. I required
thee not long since lovingly to restore me my wife and spouse Helen, whom both
against God and reason, thou have taken from me in her fathers house, the which
thing thou haste refused to do, against all divine and human law, by the
means whereof, I say that thou have done an act of a brigant, a ruffin, a
rauisher, and of a wicked adulterer. So I defy thee with fire and blood, thy
friends, sautors, and alies, to bring thee with mine to such reason, that
shortly thou shall come to my mercy, to receive punishment after my
contentation and pleasure.

The answer of Florisel to Lucidor the Vengeurs letter. In the 10. book
the.6. Chapter.
LVcidor the Vengeur, Florisel of Niquea, Prince of two Empirs. etc. has
received thy presumptuous letter of defia^ce, where upon he does answer thee,
that never did thing that a gentelman a lover of his honor ought not to do,
aduertising thee again, that Helen of Apolonia is my wife and spouse, the
which he shall defend against thee, and all either that for her will quarrel
with him, with such a charge, that thou and thine shall curse the hour that
ever ye girded sword against the Grecians, for the wound sake that shall
bleed upon all thy posterity, and confederates, for by the unjust refuse of
the conditions and offers, unto the which I submitted me, thou have made of thy
right, thy wrong. Whereby we have God on our side the which by his justice does
continually punish the proud, nor he shall not suffer thee to usurp the
right of vengeance, that is namely reserved to his divinity.

Florisel letter to the Soudan of Niquea, demanding help of him against
Lucidor. In the.10. book the.6 Chapter.
MY Lord, fortune has willed and favored me so well, to join me in marriage
with Helen ye Princess of Apolonia, and although the form and manner be
somewhat light, through the force that I was compelled to use, and so bring her
to Constantinople, so it is, that to purge ye foreset that men might pretend, I
afterward made them so many lawful offers, that the right remains on my
side, having offered the aliance of our house, to Lucidor the Prince of
France, (with whom there was some seeing of her marriage,) in so much that the
thing done already, cannot be undone. Yet for all that he has not ceased too
importunately to trouble me, until he sent to me, my parents, fautors, and
alies, a letter of defiance of fire and blood, by sea and by land, pretending
(as he does write) not only to take my wife fro me, but also my head, whereof I
was minded to advertise your imperial majesty, trusting that you will not
fail me in this matter. My Lord I beseech the creator to give your highness
a good and a long life.

Anaxartes writing to Princess Orian, does complain him of her rigor, does
pray her to draw him out of the exile, where unto she sent him. In the.10.
book.6. Chapter.
MAdame the self same does present you health, from who^ ye have taken it,
desiring the fullness of the hours and fortunes of this world to her, that
has cast him into ye fountain of all misfortunes, the which he esteems
less, than the desperation of your good grace, wherein ye have plunged him
through your last rigor, the which if he felt that there were any offense in
him, that might give you any occasion to be rude and hard unto him, he would
not only go about to ask you mercy and forgiveness, but he would revenge
you upon himself, doing more than the Pelicane for her little ones: but if this
be his affection to measure this cause by your extreme beauty, he has
nevertheless restrained it with ye bridle of reason against nature. And it he
in so little access and conversation that he has had with you, did not once
twinckle with his eye to the interest and hurt of your highness, much less he
has hazard his tongue to change the face of his weary heart. What reason can ye
pretend thus to banishe him from the fruition of your sight? for leesing that,
he seems to live in darkness, but that the continual flame of his heart
clears him, the which had been, burnt long since, and consumed to ashes if my
ordinary tears had not been, wherewith I mortifyed it. May it please you then
for all satisfaction, that not I, but love has merited for me, to call me,
again from this exile, or at leastwyse to make me understand even by your
own hand the conception of your spirit and mind, yt which mine cannot
comprehend, if ye desire not the short^ death of him, whose only thought of
your excellency, does sustain him in a sorrowful life.

The Oration of the Prince Dom Florisel of Niquea, to the Kings, Princes,
Captains, and soldiers of his army, setting before their eyes, the victories
obtained by their predecessors against many nations: and that they should use
modestly the victory if it be given them, and to consider that they have to
do with a victorious nation. In the.10. book the 18. Chapter.
RIght mighty Emperors, Kings, Princes, valiant captains and soldiers, if
the time that is past had not left us the memory of the noble and virtuous
acts of our predecessors, and also of many that are yet alive and present in
this battle, I would have esteemed it reasonable enough that I (seeing it has
pleased you to chose me the head of this army notwithstanding I am unworthy in
price and comparison of diverse that are among you) should have made you an
Oration, to excite your hearts to magnanimity and valiantness: but your
virtue known already among the Troyans, Romans, and Carthagiens, the which
have oftentimes proved the strength of your arms, does excuse me of this
pain, and turns my prayer to God, beseeching him through his grace, to
maintain audacitie and boldness in those, from whom as yet it never departed.
Our victory, if it so plese him, is without doubt, the which coming, I pray
you my Lords and friends to stand and persist in your ranges, moderating the
heat of your execution, so that ye rape and pray (y^ which afterward cannot
escape us) set no man out of his array, whereby we may leese that is certain, and
revolt and turn fortune. Furthermore I advise you not to disprayse nor to
contemn your enemies, but to esteem them as much as ye think your selves to
be worth, for of a troth the French me^ with whom ye shall have to do this
day, are a nation of the best warriers of all the world, the which have always
discomfited those that would assail and invade them, praying you furthermore
to do better than I can say, and to consider yt this victory upon those that
overcome al other people, does prepare you an inestimable triumph of glory,
defacing or dusking at once the most noble of our auncetors and elders.

Prince Anaxaries Oration to the Paganes, assuring them of the victory, as
well for their good right, as for the presence of the Infants of the Gods. In
the.10. book the.18. Chapter.
LOrds (quoth he) Captains, and Soldiers, we see oftentimes that the Gods do
so show their might in the deed of battles, that oftentimes the great number
of people are broken by the less. But how much should your courages be assured
of all such hazard and danger, knowing for a surety that the right is on your
side. Also they have sent you hither their son and their daughter to execute
their victory, of the which no man should make any doubt, seeing the multitude
of our alies^ and knowing the valiantness of the conductore of the army. Now
I will hold my peace, being well assured that ye are more prompt and ready to
the effect of the deed, than to hearken to any such words.

The Oration of Lucidor to the Christians. In the.10. book the.18. Chapter.
MY Lords I will not use great nor many words with you, to increase the
boldness that is naturally in you, and greatly experimented among all your
enemies, I will only reduce unto your memory, that ye must set your assurance
in the divine majesty, the which does certainly know to harde^ your sinnowes,
and to double your breath to execute his justice by our hands, upon the unjust
usurpers of other men's. Yet that notwithstanding, good right has need of aid,
therefore consider all thing to maintain the order of war, that shall be
appointed you by your captains and the Sergeants of your ^ands, being certain
that this one point might deprive and take from us the victory which we hold
as it were even now between our hands. Consider also besides the common right
of this enterprise: the obligation that every man has to assist his natural
prince, to aid him, to maintain the honor that they have of long time
obtained, joining thereto your own so greatly celebrated and honored, the
which by the loss of this journey, should be abolished and brought to
nothing. Furthermore advise you, that we hazard our selves much less in this
battle than our enemies do, for if it were so (that God forbid) that by them
we should be broken, the loss could not be so great of our part, fighting in
this champio^ country, for why, our wives, infants, parents, and friends shall
remain entier and whole without leesing of one foot of land, but if our
enemies chance to be overthrown, (as I trust) all we shall be enriched
occupying their lands and Lordships, with a glorious satisfaction of our
injury.

The king of Scitbes, and Dom Florisell of Portingale do defye by a letter
Amadis of Greece and Florisell of Niquea upon the quarrel of Lucidor. In
the.10. book the.18. Chapter.
BEing come into this camp to favor justice, against the wrong that by you
has been done to the royal blood of France, specially by Florisell, the
usurper of the true bed of prince Lucidor, we being for this cause in the
battle that is paste, it seems to us a thing enorme, that so many good men
are slain, and other ready to follow them, and all for the cause of a woman.
This considered, we judge it reasonable, that ye two, which are the spring and
the beginning of the deed, should also bear the whole deed and effect of
the enterprise. Therefore Dom Fryse of Portingale and I have appointed to fight
with you two, with eyghteene knights of ours against as many of yours:
trusting that God will give us vengeance upon you, with the fruit of all your
glory, redounding with like mean unto ours. And that with this condition,
that they which win, may drive and cast out of the camp all that be
ouercommed, and those that be under their charge as long as the war indureth.
Offering you of our part such surety of the camp, as we shall desire of you,
parting the sun by egall advantage, as well to the chalengers as to the
defenda^ts: the judges of our side are the prince Anaxartes, and the princess
Alastraxeree: and they of your part shall be such as ye shall name within the
thirteen of the date of these present letters, of the which we make an end, as
we trust to make of the whole war.

Amadis of Greece, and Florisell answer to the kin^ of Soites letter. In
the.10. book the.20. Chapter.
THe sovereign God has in such wise reserved the oversight of all things by
him created, that fortune has no other power, but as much as it pleases him to
suffer, he is the only stay of his holy faith, the which he will sustain,
against all the invasions of infidelles, and false Christians, taking their
aliance, not suffering his laud to be transported to whom it pertains not.
And to answer to your letter, Amadis of Greece, and Florisell of Niquea do
accept the combat, with eyghteene, gentlemen, the which they have chosen
against your eyghteene, with such surety of the camp, departing of the sun,
wind, or dust, and other conditions as ye have capitulated and rehearsed. In
the which we do name for our judges the high and excellent princes king Amadis
of France, and the Emperoures Esplandian and Lisuard of Greece. Whereupon we
make an end, remitting the end of our combat to the disposition of God.

A letter of defyance from the princess Alastraxeree, to prince palanges of
Astre. In the.10. book the.22. Chapter.
THe humayne justice does condemn in a great amends the vassal committing
felony against his liege Lord: but they that run or fall into the crime of
the divine majesty defiled, are cruelly both they and al their posterity
punished. This I say for thee Phala^ges, which art ataint of these two enorme
vices: for thou can not deny but that thou have not presented me thy
seruice^ with faith and homage: and against all right and duty, thou do
rebel, and even now do take arms against me and mine. To what end does
it tend that thou did publish the ceremony and adoration of my Image,
making to me divine and godly honor, if thou labor and go about to destroy
and to bring me to ruin in open war? This proud boldness does constrayne
me to denounce unto thee by this letter mortal combat of my own person to
thine, to make and cause thee to knowledge him, whom thou haste not well
known: for the day, I assign thee the same, upon the which our knights
shall fight against yours, that the memory of thy temerariousnesse and pride
may be celebrated and showed in the Theater of so many good men. I do assure
the camp of my side, asking no sureties for thine, the sun shall part it self
instely, if the brightness of my shining harness do not dasell thy sight.

Phalanges, answer to the defiance of the princess Alastraxeree. In the.10.
book, the.22. Chapter.
MAdame, I have received the letter of defiance sent unto me of your part, the
which I will not (because I may not) accept in no manner of wise: for the
offense that ye pretend to me in your first anger provoked by the flatterers
that are about you, I trust in your discretion when ye have received me in my
justification to deface it. I am come (say they) to Constantinople to help the
Prince Florisell against them, ye have done them the honor, that they have
not deserved, to camp your self for their defense, in the which thing ye
are not ignorant of such cases that doe^ often times chance among Kings
alied together, taking of contrary arms one against another, for some former
obligation or band, such a one as mine is against the Prince Constantine. Do
these lordans think to range themselves against you in the mortal conflicte
of him that does die for you a thousand times every day: believe or trust
they so to couple or set the faithful servant against his right honorable
Mistress? for this cause most dear Lady I beseech you for the honor that ye
have showed me, to receive me for your Knight, and that ye listen no more unto
them, and to content you with my ordinary death, without seeking any other for
me, the which takes no respite in his langure, but by the contemplation of
your divine portrayture: praying you to entreat him more humaynely hereafter,
the which (will ye or no) can never be but yours.

A letter to defiance from Macartes king of Their, to king Amadis of France. In
the.10. book the.24. Chapter.
MAcartes king of Their, to Amadis king of England greeting. Fortune long since
contrary to my auncetours in the favor of yours, and the Macedoniens, turning
now his wheel to my mind and pleasure, has now commanded me to come and
to take vengeance of the blood of my Syriens that are paste by the edge and
cutting of your swords, following the occasion of the new injury and wrong by
you against the Prince Francis Lucido^ committed, unto whom I adioyne my self
for the restitution of the second Helen, in hope of a like issue that ye had
against the Troyans for the first. Therefore I understanding that you king
Amadis are chief of the rowte of those that make this war, your name
sounding through out all Asia, has provoked me to come to this army, to prove
if the effect of your virtue does answer to his incredible renoume: entering
in fiercely against you in a closed ^ampe, the victory whereof should be unto
me a short way to the sovereign price of arms, if I might overcome the
ouercommer of all other.

The answer of king Amadis of France, to the letter of Marca^tes king of Their.
In the.10. book, the.24. Chapter.
KIng of Their, if ye attributed to the sovereign God the glory that ye hold
of fortune, and of the strength of your arms, I would have you in greater
estimation: but I do know that this abuse does proceed more of the false
belief of your Gods, than of any other imperfection of the brain or
judgment. But to come to the point. I accept the combat that ye present unto
me with the specified conditions, chosing the seuententh day after this,
ensuring you the camp on my part. And for my judges I demand the Princess
Alastraxeree, and the Prince Phalanges of Astre, they remaining to your choice,
whom ye shall elect and choose for your self.

A letter from Queen Cleofila of Lemnos, to the Princes of Greece. In the.10.
book, the.25. Chapter.
CLeofila Queen of the I Will of Lemnos salute and peace to the Princes of
Greece. My Lords, although I am issued and do come of the noble blood of
Troy, and of the kindred of valiant king Gedeon, yet I come not to you at this
time to renew the ancient quarrel of your Helen of Greece. but hearing the
news in my realm of the marvelous assembly made in this Empire, by the
occasion of the rape of the second Helen, and of the great number of Princes
and gentle knights that come thither as well of your enemies side as of yours,
I accompanied only with Damselles am departed from my kingdom to see this
noble assemble, to remain as neuter of all your differences and strives. And
being arrived to this port, I have sent you this ambassade to advertise you of
the cause of my coming, the which is to judge the valiantness and the high
acts that shall be showed as well on the one side as on the other, and that, to
bestow my lands and Lordshippes with the guage of the beauty, wherewith the
Gods have willed to indue me, upon such a knight, whom I shall see accomplished
with estate, virtue, and perfection of his person. Wherefore if it please you
to give me a safe conduite for me and my company of women, I will set my foot
upon the earth, and come and visit you at Constantinople, to see this goodly
^ourney that shall be sole^nised at the marriage of Helen of Polonia.

The oration of Queen Cleofila to King Amadis of France. In the.10. book,
the.28. Chapter.
MY Lord, I have heard say of wise men, that the Gods have set in the motions
of heaven, and in his lights a certain force above all creatures, and that the
things fatal cannot fail to fall there, where they be destinate, so that it
is not in the power of men to resist it: but yet there be chances of great
violence, the which may be overcome by magnanimity, such as ye have ended ^o
the great admiration of all that live. Also it seems to me that a Lady of
estate does merit no less glory to sustain the assaults of love, and if
she abtayne, yea more than other, she is more cruelly afflicted by the
irreuocable sacrifice of her faith, desiring rather to die, than to bespot it
or defile it. I say this, to declare unto you the inconvenience that I am
fallen in by the influence of love, the which I think is inevitable, against
the effect whereof, I am purposed to resist, for the conservation of my
honor. For why my Lord, I pray you believe me, that since the day that I saw
your Mai^stie come before me, accompanied with the Princes of your own blood,
there was no man of all the company that pleased me so much, and I so printed
my affection, that it is impossible to deface it and I hold it very dangerous
to tarry long in your presence, considering your faithfulness so greatly
approved, and the reason of my estate and sex, the which by all means do
bind me to depart, and having made a dowe never to marie but to him whom I
should ^inde the paragon of all men (such as I judge you to be) nor to
associate any other unworthy of the gifts and graces that nature and fortune
has most largely given me: and finding you appointed to another Lady, I
remain tormented with an incurable sickness, the which does receive some
lightning and rest, discovering my heart to you. This done, I have purposed to
depart from this country to return into my own realm, considering that from
henceforth there is nothing more to be seen worthy of memory, and that the
greatest strokes of the combattes of the valiant men of both parties are fallen
and given. Thus not being able to accomplish my desire as touching you, I pray
you not to take it in evil part, but to lay the fault to love, of whom ye know
the power and might, the which is such upon me, that my will shall never be
changed nor set upon any other but by your consent, to the which I wholly submit
myself, my honor saved.

The answer of Amadis of France, to Queen Cleofila. In the 10. book, the.28.
Chapter.
MAdame, I humbly thank you for the good affection that it pleases you to
show me, and I praise God that giving you such affection, ye draw to him that
does accept it, with such discretion and judgment as is convenient for your
honesty, promising with good heart to answer it, until I have quited me to
you wards, of so good a knight as I think my self to be, to the intent that
your faith be no longer charged.

The Oration of Dom Florisell of Niquea, to Lucidor^ In the 10. book, the.30.
Chapter.
LVcidor, I have already by letters caused you sufficiently to understand,
how little right y^ have in this quarrel, offering you upon conditions more
than liberal, to the which I was not bound, in respect of the tranquillity of
our people, the which I neither came now to augment^^^^ to diminish, but only
to understand, whether the iourneyes or battles past already, (in the
which^ye have known your disadvantage) have not reduced you to reason. This is
the sum of this that has led me and brought me.

The answer of Lucidor, to Dom Florisell of Niquea. In the 10. book the.30.
Chapter.
FLorisell if I had had so feeble a courage as ye lay unto me, I would first
have parleyed and spoken of the matter, and not have accepted the battle: our
continuance and preparation does cause you oftentimes to do the contrary. As
^^ncerning the adversity of Fortune, that as ye allege unto us, in certain
combats we have proved, and ye know ^ull well, that at times ye have felt part
your self. And if it were so, yet the hazard thereof through his ordinary
variety, would now cause me to trust to be better, as now it has done,
joining unto us the new aid and succor that God has sent us by the valiant
king of Their. Therefore think not to convert and ^urne me at all by such
words, but be you certain, that through the confidence that I have in him,
and in the justice of my cause, I will tarry for such an end, as he shall give
us in the battle, leaving you the assurance that ye hold in Fortune, the which
before this has been favorable unto you, lifting you up to the highest part
of his wheel, to abase you down the more lower.

Phalanges Oration to his companions and Soldiers, showing them that the
prognostication of birds are not to be feared, seeing that they must fight
against men, and not against birds, furthermore, that their enemies do march
and go in companies greatly extended and enlarged, the which is an easy thing
to be broken. In the.10. book. the.31. Chapter.
Lords, Princes, and Soldiers, the Gods in times past have given you and me
great victories, by the which we in many Countries have made both the sea and
the earth to tremble and quake. I doubt not at all ^o do here as much or more
with the flower of the chivalry of the world, the which to assure us, and to
honor us, have given us charge of the battle, willing to sustain the
vauntgarde, and the rereward for our surety: yet I do think, that many among
you, would rather desire the first rank, whereunto ye may chance to come all
after the recounter and meeting is, and I have felt and perceive that some of
you not well instructed, are afearde of the signs of Doves and Crows, that
this day have foughten in your sight. Well, I will well it be so, and that it
is an evil presage and sign. But yet I say unto you, that the Gods have sent
us such signs celestial, to give us a mark of a great victory, having
threatened our courages, to crown us with higher glories, because ye had not in
you the magnanimity and holdenesse to resist such doubtful temptations, the
which they would show vafor to prove us. The true assurance of arms should
not be taken of birds, with whom as with our enemies we will not fight, but in
the strength of the soldiers arms, and in the good art and knowledge of
war of the Capitaines, in the which I will well assure you, and advertise
you, as touching the business that I see prepared for us this day, that their
square companies (as ye may see) go very large, and far extended one from the
other, to represent unto us a very great multitude, and we contrariwise must
and ought to go the on^ nigh unto the other, as we be. The which thing they do
feign purposely, to put them out of fear of the number of their enemies. This
done, I hope that our good order (the which is the principal point of war)
shall soon break them, being thus open, and it may be, through vncarefulnesse
and negligence chauncing unto them, through the hope that their Magicians have
given them by this frivolous and vain flight. But ye see already at your eye
their misorder, the which is your certain advantage if ye can take it. This
is (my companions) the thing that I would have said unto you, recommending to
you my honor and yours.

Amadis of France with a warlike Oration does comfort his Knights and his
Soldiers, the which had been discomfited, and does teach them a certain
subtlety to deceive the enemy. In the.10. book, the.32. Chapter.
Lords, Knights, and Soldiers, I will here rehearse or lay unto you the
deed of another, to compare it unto ours: that is, that having respect unto
the strong and cruel battle of Pharsalia in the which Julius Caesar after
diverse victories that he had against him, overcame Pompeius, how think you
that it had been possible for Pompeius children to gather so few men as they
had left, but that fear and cowardnesse never occupied their courage? the
which afterward set him in that estate, to conquer the Empire, if he could
have followed his fortune. And be it so, that now I see nothing in you but
dolor and displeasure, because of those that be dead, yet I shall never
think, such a fault and feebleness of heart to be in you, that any one of
you should not desire to revenge himself upon his enemy, and to sell his
skin dearly. Well, it is convenient for us a little to dissemble our
heaviness, and take patience perforce, and not to discourage the other. Ye
may believe me, that the greatest part of the annoyance does rest in my
brain: but I enclose it, to open and manifestly to open it doubled perforce,
when time and season shall give me occasion. Therefore I command you all to
go and to rest your selves a while, that as soon as the fair Diana or Moon
shall arise, setting you in train and order to go and to invade our enemies,
every man taking a white shirt upon his harness, for every one of us to know
each other: assuring you that the joy which they had through our loss may
cause them to be negligent, by the means whereof, we may give them so strayte
a hand, that they shall think thereof. And this shall be a demonstration that
our little company has not a faynte heart against so great an host, seeing
that our execution of vengeance has no care for the travel and pain
received. As touching me, my friends, although I have bin hurt like as other, I
feel not these wounds so much, as that, the which I have in my heart of
despite and evil will, believing as much of other, and that diverse of you which
are not deadly wounded, shall not leave to come to this camisado, the which I
would should be two hours after midnight, and as secretly as may be, for
fear of waking of our enemies, but to rock them so well, that they shall
sleep for ever. The which thing I esteem to be easy, considering the great
cheer that ye made yester even, and the small watch that they shall make,
trusting in your misfortune.

A complaynt of Amadis of Greece, being in the desert of Lions, lamenting his
Lucell whom he had forsaken to take Niquea. In the.10. book the.37. Chapter.
O Force that do force me against my own will to break the faith and
fidelity that I should rather keep, but yet thou have made me, in changing of
my self to change it. Truly my pain is greatly redoubted for the good thing
that does me so much evil. O gentle Lucell what is this to say, that when your
beauty was wont to torment my heart through a mortal desire, I enticed of
good hope did bear it patiently: but now that I have it no more, alas I suffer
an evil not to be borne. Alas, hope was wont to maintain my life in thy
absence, what does now sustain it? it must needs be, that there be some hope
against hope to deliver me a more grievous punishment for my unfaithfulness,
the which does banish me from the presence of her, whose inestimable virtue did
promis me some pity: but I my self am contrary to my self, so that I cannot
have repentance to require your pardon for my falsed faith, when I remember my
dear Nequea, of whom I have received so great glory and contentation. O
death, now make an end of my life, to finish my travel, and thou life
entertayne me no more to cause my lanlonger to endure. O ye waves of the Sea,
why have ye not swallowed me now of late into your deep bottomes, to exempt
and to take me from this so horrible torment? O fountain (beholding that of
his cauerne) thou art fortunate making thy ordinary course, and my eyes
unfortunate distilling continually by unnatural constraint. Thy fresh licor
does take from me the heat that is come from the common sun, but the fire
that Lucell (my very sun) does cause, no water can quench, but one pitiful
tear by her sprinkled upon me. Niquea, Niquea, thou do owe me the pardon of
this offense, whereof thou have forgotten the obligation of my first loves.
Lucelle Lucelle, rejoice your self now, that the time is come, that ye shall
have vengeance of your unfaithful knight of the burning sword, with
satisfaction of the fault that his son might have done against your brother.

Anaxartes does pitifully show princess Oriana, that the fire of love which
has inflamed him through her beauty will reduce him to ashes, if she take no
pity. In the.10. book. the 41. Chapter.
I Beseech you madame to excuse my boldness that I take to discover unto you
the martyrdom that I suffer for your excellence, and so much the more it
greeueth me that I keep it close and covert: for what soever reverence I bear
to your highness, the strength of love is so vehement, that my reason can no
longer resist and to cause you to perceive it well, it is such, that I for
the extremity of the violence thereof cannot tell it, but that I through it do
feel in me as it were in a little world (after the saying of ancient wise men)
all the diverse passions of the elements: Alas my poor eyes do well show and
declare the running waters of the sea in my continual tears, and my deep
sighs do fly as the winds in the air: and are moved by the heat of fire
hidden in my heart, the which without your pity, shall turn all my body into
dry earth and ashes.

A sweet and an honest answer of princess Oriana, to Anaxartes. In the.10.
book the.41. Chapter.
MY Lord, the place that ye hold, suchas we know, does give you a law to
speak privily unto me: but of the affection the which ye would declare unto
me, ye shall pardon me, if I be purposed to believe the thing that I may judge
by effect more than by words, the which may easily be disguised:
notwithstanding I shall judge that princess fortunate, unto whom God shall
give a knight that abounds with great virtue, whom I esteem and honor in
you, after his merit.

The Queen Sidonia does declare to Phalanges of Astre, the cause of the law
that she has established, and she requires him to marie her. In the.10.
book, the.44. Chapter.
IF the excellent Ladies of Rome and Greece, have in times pas^e offered
themselves in sacrifice to conserve and keep their virginity, and to obtain
by such death immortal glory, there is no less reason in the law, as by
me in this Isle constituted and established, for the conservation of my
daughters chastity and mine, preserving them from diverse abuses that men
threaten them withal, to draw them to their unclean affections by efficace
promises and persuasions, by the means whereof the fire of love by semblable
and like nature, does embrace the hearts of them. Therefore I have only
reserved liberty to maidens to choose their husbands, and to knyghts to choose
them wives, and I have submitted my self to the Law, and to use it after my
desire and for the wealth of my realm, the which is in my power to give to
whom it shall please me as husband and wife. The which thing I do to you
knight (taking Phalanges by the hand) requiring you through amity and love, to
marry me, and I make you lord of my person, and of all my countreye, because
of the grace, force, valor, and beauty that I know in you, the which I
esteem no less than those that they have reported to me of the excellent
prince Phalanges of Astre. Wherefore choose you now either to pass by the
satisfaction that I offer you, or by rigor of my laws, in the punishment of
the refuse. For I cannot anull my ordinances, that I have made, but the husband
of whom I shall be provided, shall have power to abolish them.

Phalanges does refuse the marriage pre^ented, for the love of Alastraxeree, of
whom he is amorous and in love. In the.10. book the.44. Chapter.
MAdame, I do understand very well the sum of your co^stitutions, tending to
the conservation of mortal honor: but of my part I am constrained to keep
inuiolably the divine thoughts in me infuded by the celestial princess
Alastraxeree the daughter of the God Mars, and of the Queen Zahara but if they
will force me to the contrary, I had rather die in the faith of my goddess,
and more than that, by so ^aire hands as yours be. Therefore madame I put my
life into your hands: for the soul and the will remain to her, unto whom it
is dedicated long ago. For the rest, I thank the Gods, and you for the honor
that ye have offered me, y^ which I cannot accept.

Amadis of Greece speakinge to Lucell, does accuse and excuse him together of
the fault that he as touching him has committed, praying her to forget it. In
the.10. book the.54. Chap.
MAdame, I certainly do know, that besides the ^eruent desire that the beauty,
such as yours is, does cause in every person well borne, there is yet a more
like nature among certain, that does draw to one mutual affection, the which
wise men do call Simpathie, and yet engenders a certain entier, fervent, and
inviolable amity, of the which our first love between you and me does give
us witness, although it may seem unto you that my long absence has somewhat
cooled it, since that I have been alied by the force of certain secret
destinies to another. But ye see that this conjunction is not durable, and that
your fortune does call mine back to his first influence, the which should
cause you to esteem that my desire has slept only, as the fire covered under
the cinders, the which by and by does reu^ue more strong and more vehement than
ever it was. And think not Madame that there is in the world any more than one
way to such an extremity of wills, nor that ye can have any other than me, I
being upon the earth, we are as it were two lutes set in one tune, so that the
one giving found, the stringes of the other not touched (the which is set over
against it) do move, and causes straw, if it be laid upon it, to move.
Madam if these reasons take no place in your understanding, at least wise
consider you the stock, whose youg ones do norishe their dame, as their turn
does fall, so you recognizing the pleasures and services that have first
advanced you, if not, this ri^^rous penance shall make an end of my miserable
days.

Lucidors Oration to the Lords and Ladies being at Constantinople, rehearsing
unto them diverse and perilous adventures and denou^cing the coming of diverse
Princes, whereof the company marvelled very sore, and reioysed. In the.10.
book and.57. Chapter.
MY Lords, the sovereign god and maker of this world, does cause us to play
heavy and bloody tragedies when it pleases him, and afterward comedies and
joyful enterludes when his godly will does bear and suffer it. Whereunto we
must apply our obedient and subject wills, doing and of necessity, following
virtue without kicking against the spur, complaining in himself of his
fatal ordinances, he does send us great adversities to cause us to know his
greatness and our weakness, and afterward rain and fair we at her in
witness of his goodness, the which will not destroy us after his might and
our demerite. I will not put you in remembrance of the miseries yt are past,
but I will show you such news, whereof I believe that none of you shall not
complain that I took the gantelet, for in such things God has used me for a
mean, as of a Scorpion (that makes the wound) and draws afterward a
remedy: first I will come to you Madame Niquea, declaring unto you, that your
Amadis of Greece being inchaunted in the pray of the Princess Arlaride,
because of her brother whom he had slain for the love of you, was not only
vnbewitched by my sister Lucelle, but advertised of the danger whereby he
saved him self, yea after that she gave him such decasion, that ^^e^^at once
he restored unto my sister the pleasure that she had showed him, and converted
the mortal hatred of Arlande into true and hearty amity, delivering them out
of the hands of a Duke a Pagane, the which brought them to Vengeance for his
cousin the King Breon. O what manner of eyes of ^ortune, afterward we coming
to succor these ladies, we happened upon him and knew him not, where we had
such a do, that ye may judge his virtue. In the mean while, the false Duke
had scapte him, if he had not lept into the ship, the which did carry him
among al his enemies, where he had been lost, if God had not given us so good
an hour to depart, and had not drawn him out of ^o certain danger and peril.
The fortune of time carried us to the Isle of Rhodes, where that by strange
encounters and meetings this valiant Prince had such a conflicte against the
valiant Florisel his son, that they both lay in the place for dead, the
brave Queen Zahara, in the favor of the father sustained the matter against
the Princess Alastraxeree, and the Emperor of Rome against the strong
Anaxaries, and I against the hardy Prince Phalanges. But by the inconvenient
chance of the father and the son, the Queen was known, and made an end of
all our combattes: declaring unto us (after that the solemn tears were shed
upon the two Princes that lay stark and styffe) how that by force of the
inchauntment, they came together another time, of whom came the two I^ells
Anaxartes and Alastraxeree: whereof they had had no knowledge nor remembrance,
if at the second time they had not found them selves together in the self
same place, that did put them first in remembrance of the end of the charm.
And thus as we were in this discomfort, we were all enchaunted and bewytched,
until the coming of the Queen Argenes, of the sage Alquif, Vrgande, and M.
Elizabeth the which set us again in our estate, joining thereunto the
advertisement of the wise Mirabelle, by whom all the secrets of the Castle were
discovered, the father and the son healed of their wounds, and the gentle
bastardes cheered of the father the which was so long unknown. Thus came all
these Lords and Ladies into our company, also the Princess Oriana that was
met withal upon the sea, and by a strange adventure delivered. They honored
me for this present Embassade. There rests now, that I must return unto
them, to deliver them into your hands to verify my word withal.

Phalanges does require of the Lords and Ladies being in Constantinople, that
Alastraxeree whom he has loved long may be given him in marriage. In the tenth
book the.57^ Chapter.
RIght high and mighty Lords, the boldness of my thoughts, the which
heretofore have been given to a presumptuous divinity, does not abase her
wings, knowing it to be turned into human lineage exalted by heroike and noble
virtue above mortal fragilitie. Also I faint not to attempt her as before, by
the means of the aid that I newly find in your majesty's by the
reknowledging of her kindred, unto who^ I have long since vowed my heart, my
honor and my goods. The which (if ye judge that I never deserved nothing of
you, and if ye esteem not to much unworthy to have her) is the gentle
Princess Alastraxeree, whom I require to my true and loyal spouse: first
su^moning in this case the Prince Florisel, to quite him toward me for the
duty of mutual love, giving me like comfort and succor, as he has received
of me (as he well knows) in his affairs.

A letter of credence of the Princess Arlande. In the.10. book the.58.
Chapter.
ARlande of Thrace, disherited of her lands, because she made him heritor of
her heart, that had the property of her liberty so greatly alienated, that
she can accept no part in his, to Florisel of Niquea, Prince of France,
England, Apolonia, and Rhodes, salutatio^. Fortune has in such wise conspired
against me, that she has given me no other ynke to write withal but blood, nor
no other messenger but a child, nor has sent me no succor, but against the
son of my mortal enemy, for my brothers sake, and yet more than this
mortal enemy, because I cannot be my own friend. Look upon me ye ladies
that do complain you of the light turns of her customable inconstancy, and
take an example to hope in desperation. She has not left me as much as my
surname, the which I have borrowed, because I would not too much astonishe you
in the first sight of the superscription of my letter missiue, or in the
salutation, the which she may ill send, that has of long time her heart
captive and afflicted as ye well know, and not long since the body in prison.
I have no great leisure with my hand to send my complaints, when that with my
mouth I cannot cause them to be vnderstranded. Praying you for the rest on my
part to believe this Damsel as reason would on your behalf.

^lorar^am does count to Florisell of Niquea, and to the other nobles being at
Constantinople, the cause of his coming, and the imprisonment of the princess
of Thrace. In the.10. book, the.58. Chapter.
MY Lord, the case is this: In the time that my Lady had left you in the Isle
of Rhodes, and was at her returning in my masters the kings Court: she found
there the Duke Madasanill, the tyrant of the next Islands, a fierce Giant,
great and marvelous mighty, accompanied with four hundred of his cousins
like unto himself, all they being issued of the lineage of Furius Cornelius,
calling themselves the reuengers of his blood: This Duke required of the king a
wife, under the conditions of the vengeance that be undertook upon Prince
Amadis of G^e^e, for whom I was nourished and instructed, if the obligation
that came afterward had not defaced this cruel enmity, by the means of the
succor that the Prince gave him in his extreme business, whom I loved and
honored, and yet knew him not, and was desirous with all my heart to serve
him. But the king perceiving the new reconciliation of my Lady with him that
had slain his brother, he delivered her quickly into the Dukes hands,
commanding him to marry her. He was even then ready with the Duchess
Arhide, whom he retained to come to your marriage. Then hearing she should be
sent to such other, she answered the king: believe not my Lord, that the
trespass and fault that I have done to my highness, in that I could not
resist the strength of the love of the son, now I make it to the father,
assuring you, that I will never have other husband than the son, nor no
greater enemy than him, that shall purchase evil to the father, unto whom I
have sworn and given my faith of peace and concord. The king was so irrited
and chafed with her answer, that even upon the field he did disherite her:
and caused an oath to be given to Madasanill the Prince of Thrace, setting my
Lady in his power, to lodge her incontinently in the fortress of the lake of
four pauements, the which as men do esteem, is one of the strongest places
of the world. So he gave him the charge of her, and of the four Pauementes,
to the Giantes his cousins, commanding them to keep her in prison a whole
year, if she applied not her will unto him. The which if she did not within
the term appointed, he would that her head should be smitten off, for the
appointment that she had made of his brother. The fierce villain failed not
to fulfill this ordenance most diligently, leading my Lady weeping and
sobbing to the Castle, where he enclosed her alone with her cousin Arlinda,
delivering the keys of the prison to a great and a vile Iayler, reserving the
coming into the self same Castle to himself, his cousins being established
in the four Pauements, the which cause all those to swear that come thither,
to be at the vengeance of the death of Furio, if not, that he will thrust them
into deep and cruel prisons. At night they shut in the Gates of their
Pauements, and by Caves made under the ground they return to the Castle,
being distant from the Laake two shottes of a Crossebowe, of the which the
Duke himself does open and sparre the Gates. Well, I followed them into the
Castle, where they suffered me ^o walk at my case: but I enforced through
sorrow to see her in such estate, not knowing how to remedy it. One day she
putting out her head at a little lattis window, saw me beneath, and said unto
me, Florarlan, prepare thy self by some means that thou may speak unto me:
Incontinent I went up, leaving the Duke beneath with his men, and I prayed
Bocarell the Iayler to show me so much favor, as to let me speak a little to
my Lady the Princess: the which answered me, that if I spoke any more unto
him, he would cast me from the height of the wall. Oribaulde (quoth I to him)
if I were weaponed as thou art, I should bridle thy snoute well enough. Then
casting my sight on every side, I saw a sword hanging, the which I took
suddenly, and the villain came to me having a Part^ane in his hand, wherewith
he smote once at me, the which leaping aside I avoided, and so that he perced
me not, but only my velvet Casd^k^ in two parts, or else he had smitten me
through the body. Then I gave him such a garter in the hamme, and so right
upon the joint, that by and by he fell down in the place, and cast out his
arms to take me, but I laid the sword so between him and me, that it perste
him unto the hiltes through the middle of his belly. Then through pain he
stretched him, and I that they which were beneath should not perceive it,
took a hatchet wherewith I cut his gorge, as it had been a great Ox. So I
took the keys, and went to open the gate of the prison, where I found my
Lady trembling for the fear that she had of the strife and debate that she
heard between Bocarel and me; the which embraced me, and kissed men hundred
times, saying: Alas Florarlan, what shall become of thy life, if the Duke
understand thy deed? My minion God prserue thee and keep thee to much more
greater things. Madame (quoth I) the thing that is done, cannot be undone: but
I see the remedy, that is, to go to the Duke, and to tell him that ye have
sent me word by Bocarell, to pray him to send me to the king, ^o require him
of a certain thing, and that afterward ye will apply unto his will. Thus I
shall get out and escape. Again she ^ooke me about the ne^ke, smiling for my
invention. Then I said unto her, that there was no tarying there, and that I,
(she beholding the thing) being out of that place, should have business for
her deliverance. Ye must (she said) go to Constantinople, and bear me a
letter to Prince Florisell of Niquea, but we have not here wherewithal to make
it. It shall not let (said I) for that, for I will go and take a Reed in
Bocarels chamber, and mingle it with the blood of this ruffian, with the which
ye may write this present letter. Incontinent I kissed her hands, she blessing
me, and commending me to God. I shut the door, and tied the keys again to
the Iaylers girdle, because men should not perceive that I had spoken with her.
I went to the Duke, the which did grant me my demand very willingly, and
caused the gate to be opened unto me, and a horse to be delivered me, upon whom
I have done my business hitherto, keeping no way until I was far from
Thrace. And I have bestowed one lincke of my chain for my expenses, and this
habit, the which I have taken and made conformable and meet for the estate of
my Lady. This is it my Lord, that I was charged withal to show you.

Arlande does show her father the king of Thrace, how that the Princes of
Greece have forgiu^n her, and delivered her of the death, that she had of a
long time purchased for them, and for this cause she prays him to receive
them to his amity. In the.10. book, the.62 Chapter.
MY Lord, I have for a time employed all my power to purchase the vengeance of
my brother Balerte, upon those that slew him, as every man might have
perceived: afterward my enemies met with me in such peril, that without their
succor I had lost mine honor or my life. Who then should have so inhumain a
heart to procure his death, ^y who^ he has and holds his life? seeing also
that the accide^^ and chance of my brother does not charge him with any
treason, or unfaithfulness, and is not to be imputed but to the ordinary
hazard and chance of war: I being for this cause delivered by you against my
will to Madasanill, under the condition of vengeance upon the Princes of Greece,
unto whom I was in d^t for my deliverance, at leastwise they are quited
concerning me, for the recompense of good for evil, they have helped me in the
captivity that I was in, and in such sort as ye do see, notwithstanding the
treason of the Duke, as this noble blood is always in Gods protection.
Therefore I beseech you my Lord, to consider my deed with reason, pacifying
your courage for my sake, and making agreement with those, whose aliance
receives no comparison of that of Furio Cornelio. As touching me, I do offer
my self unto you, to dispose me after your own will, as Isaac did to his
father Abraham. And of them I ensure you ye shall not be hindered nor let in
any point of your royal liberty. Ye see here the great king Amadis of France,
see Florisel of Niquea, whose father saved my life upon the sea, there is the
Prince Phalanges of Astre, and the valiant Alastraxeree, the which although
they have you in their hands, desire but your amity.

The Queen Sidonia does write to Morasiel, the which will give her daughter
(of whom he had left her great) in marriage, to him that will bring her his
head, to be revenged by his death of the wrong that he ha^h done her, deceyuing
her under the color of marriage. In the 10. book, the.65. Chapter.
SIdonia Queen of the I Will of Guinday, founder of glorious laws to her own
shame, to thee feigned Moraisel she sends this salutation: to deprive thee
the better, I having presented to thee mine own person and royal lordship,
following the rigorousnesse of my ordinances, thou haste fraudulently accepted
it, notwithstanding thy incapacitie, keeping the one part of the edicte and
law, and violating the other. And having thus unjustly usurped the honor of
my royal bed, haste left me in long heaviness for thy absence, without at
any time afterward aduertising me of the abuse that thou haste brued me, but
of the new bed that thou have practiced, what excuse can ye forge or invent:
but to have willed to by again the life of the gentle Prince Phalanges of
Astre? Ah ah, amity did bind thee to lay thine own life for his, and not thy
honor and mine: whereof I call the Gods to avenge me of thy perjury in our
marriage: and I will purchase it among men, by the fruit that is issued of the
daughter of whom thou did leave me girded and great: the which for the
vantage of beauty that she has above all the fairest of the world, I have
named her Diana, to the likeness of the Plane? that in heaven does de^ace all
other. The which I nourishe for the price and hire of thy head, promising her
with my realm in marriage, to him that shall bring me that present. And for
this, I have caused the towers of Phoebus and Diana to be builded. Wherein she
shall be enclosed not to be seen of any living man, until the coming of my
auenger her husband, the which shall shine in thy place, and she shall fail
in mine, after the company that my soul shall go to do to thine. For the
assurance of those conditions I have signed this letter with my name, and sent
it sealed with her blood in thy presence, as innocent, as thine is evil and
without fault.

The Oration of Dom Florisel of Niquea to the assistance in Constantinople,
where he excuses him of the thing that Sidonia does accuse him of, and gives
assurance to all those, that (upon this quarrel) be willing to combatte and
fight. In the.10. book, the.65. Chapter.
IF, most nob^e Lords, manne ought not by the law of true amity, spare body
nor goods in any business of his freende, what may he then reserve at the
point of the extremity of his own life? into the which the Prince Phalang^s
was run, by the rigorous laws of the I Will of Guinday, if I had not suddenly
succored and helped him: although to the prejudice of the faith that I first
owe unto God, and after to my dear Lady Helen, of whom I hope for no less
pardon, than of the divine majesty in like offense. The Queen that accuses
me is endued with so great grace and perfection, that she alone may enforce
all humayne hearts to her will and pleasure, and if she complain of the too
solemn band of fained marriages, the mishap that is chanced must be imputed
to her self, through the constraint of her own ordinances and laws. For all
that I do for satisfaction of her honor (wherewith they will charge me) I
consent that this present portraiture be t^ed to a cord the which shall be set
up in the court of this palace, and the chances of these poor maidens in
another, that the fact may be the better published, and that the knights
through ignorance fail not her at the enterprise of this quarrel: for the
which even now I swear and promis such assurance, as is convenient in such a
defiance, to all those that are now in this city, and will enter in camp for
her against me, that if the vengeance be due unto her, it be not delayed on my
part.

Certain complayntes extract out of the Eleventh book, the first Chapt^r, in
the which men may see Queen Sidonia complain her inconstantly enough of
love.
O True dissemblyng of him, the which under the image and name of an other did
gather the first flower of my youth: what joy shalt thou bring me, giving me
the means to quench and to mortify the fire of his love by the vengeance that
I purchase upon him for the outrageous rauishment of my honor. For I have
concluded and appointed to give thee with my realm to whosoever shall present
the head of the Father to the Daughter, the which thing I beseech the
immortal Gods to consent and grant for the just punishment of this false
Prince a Grecian, and in witness of my chastity by him fraudulently defil^d,
my will being nothing bespotted nor violated, O dear Moraisel into what
excess of torment haste thou cast me, to enforce my will so affectionated
toward thee, to swear and to prepare for thee an immortal vengeance, as to
sacrifice thy head to my vigorous honor, and afterward to offer up my life
to thy shadow? who ever saw such a confusion of love and hatred, or two
such extremities to extinguishe the mean and the way of honesty?

An other complaynt of Queen Sidonia. In the.11. book, the 1. Chapter.
O Gods, why have ye not fulfilled me with the like fortune to that of this
lady in ioyfulnesse of so excellent a Lord: if ye will not show me so much
grace and favor, what reason had he to cause me to feel and taste the
sweetness of his perfections, and afterward to leave me a famished
martyrdom of the sweetness of voluptuousness? O^ love, I would gladly
complain me of thee, that has so unfaithfully entreated me, if thou dydst not
bear thine excuse by the privilege of thy natural reason, and therefore I
should do wrong to found me in reason against him that uses none: I am in
peace and in mortal war: I fear, I hope, I burn being as cold as ice, I
fly to heaven, being wholly in the earth, and yet nothing is done in deed, I
embrace all, I am in prison that does another open nor shut, they do lace and
unlace me with one lace. Love does bind me together and vnbindeth me, giving
me his grace, and afterward taking it fro me, a good and an evil hour in my
chase do follow me: I see my wealth, and to my hurt I do run, I am equally
both life and death: yea I purchase both life and death, and I would perish,
and I demand succor: in this state I am for Florisel.

Florarlam prays Arlande to declare unto him what she knows of his parents.
In the.11. book, the.5. Chapter.
MAdame, I am enforced then to confess you a heart breaking that does torment
me of the thing that I have (as I consider) received of your grace, to have
been hitherto so well entreated: the obligation whereof does charge me with a
deed that can not well be borne: in as much as I know not yet who I am, nor
who was my father nor my mother: if I knew they were of base condition, I would
so much the more acknowledge that the liberal nourishment that ye gave me was
of your only favor without my deserving, or any of mine: And in case they
were other, I would prepare me to pray them for the satisfaction that I am
indewed unto you, for the great goodness and honor that ye show me.
Therefore madame I pray you to alighten me of my great sorrow that I bear and
suffer, and to certify me of all that ye know.

Arlande does write subtly to Dom Florisel, the which does send him his
son to make him knight: finally she prays God to reward him for his
deceytfulnesse. In the.11. book, the.5. Chapter.
MY Lord I send you a Iuell, whereof in time paste I robbed you, and yet
took nothing of yours, that was subject to the common law of the city, and
yet ye have satisfied me with the greatest goodness ye may wish for in this
world, I trust that the confession that ye make shall discharge me of this
fault, seeing that the restitution does follow. As long as he was in my
possession, I kept him very carefully for my part that I had in him, now
reason would that ye should take care for yours: whereof I am constrained to
advertise you, because ye should no longer pretend any cause of ignorance.
This bearer Florarlan the fair damsel willing to obtain laud, ensuing the
trace of her aunceters, desires to be made Knight at the hands of the
Emperor your father. I pray you to do so much for your self, for her, and
for me, as to present her. In the mean while I affectuously recommende me to
your good grace, without having of any hope, praying God (my Lord) to render
you the reward of your deceytes, in like measure as ye have measured to other.

Florisel does write to Queen Sidonia, that although she pursued his death
by the bringer of the letter, yet he for her love saved his life, and is minded
to do so to all other, letting yet all that he may, that Diana drink not of
the cup that she has promised him. In the eleventh book, the.14. Chapter.
MAdame, I send you the salute, that ye have purchased to take fro me by this
bearer, to the which I have given it for the favor of your service, as my
will is to do to all those that shall reclayme or speak against you, what
danger so ever my life be in. The which I shall save to my power, to cause
other to think upon a better dowry for Diana, and upon a more honest cup to
drink in at her marriage than in her Fathers goblet. Therefore I will sustain
this war that ye deliver me, until I have won and made peace with you,
and till she have found a more kind husband than he, with whom ye would
cause her to couple and to join her hand defiled in my blood, the which is her
own.

A letter from Abra most diligently recomfortyng Amadis of Greece, upon the
death of his wife Niquea. In the.11. book, the.24. Chapter.
MY Lord, if ye should not suffer extreme choler and heaviness for the
decease of your good companion the Empress Niquea, ye should be defiled with
too great inhumanitie and ingratitude, seeing the heaviness that strangers
themselves do make, the which ye should have felt more nearer than all
other. So sweet and so faithful a conjunction cannot be departed without a
great and a natural heart breaking: but after that the first motion has given
his alaruin, the sprite must come to himself again, and take his breath,
considering that tears be but lost upon a thing irrecuperable, and the
torment vain in a case that is without remedy. Do ye desire her yet in this
world? ye are envious and do hate her wealth, do ye sorrow her ill? she is in
a life immortal, much more fortunate than is yours: do ye wish to follow her
to the place that she is gone unto? ye shall offend God to labor to depart
from hence before ye have finished all that he has appointed you to end in
this world. Ye have the renoume of magnanimity among all knights, but if ye
suffer to be thus overthrown of your self, ye shall leese at once all the
victories that ye have won upon other: so if ye show your self strong and
virtuous to resist this grievous passion, ye shall join the height and
fullness to the triumph of all your clear and noble acts. This act of
lamenting is an unworthy act for a man, and much more for a Prince, that
should be an ensample of light. As for the rest ye know that she was borne
mortal, and that we shall not tarry long after her to set the country at
liberty. Advise you then by wisdom to dry up your tears, for unto the
ignorant the time does issue at length, conformyng your self in all things to
Gods will. Abra the Emperesse of Constantinople, and Princess of the Oriental
regions.

Arlande does complain her of the doloures that love does cause her to
endure and suffer: afterward she prayseth the beauties of Cleofila. In the.11.
book, the.89. Chapter.
AH, ah love, wherein have I offended thee, to entreat me thus cruelly? art
not thou of a strange nature to torment and martyr those so extreemely that
hide thee and enclose thee in the closet of their breasts? and if they left
thee forth to give thee air, will thou reward them within with refuse, and
pulling them far from the wealth that they approached unto? love, if this be
to assay the constancy of thy subjects, is not mine sufficiently proved by
the length of time? if this be to cause the sugar of thy sweet drink
Ambrosia, to sauer better by the soreness of thy first iuyces, this thing is
so great that it may dull the taste of the palate s^ greatly, that it shall
have no virtue nor power to feel the sweetness of thy celestial meat. I
say not that the appetite does not awake and quicken through falling and
abstinence, but yet a man may suffer so great famine and hunger, that the
bowelles may shrink, and so the appetite is lost. O love I knowlodge my
crime, in that I have been bold to use such amorous language and words to so
chaste a Lady: I ought to have been contented with her good cheer, with her
amiable devices, with her sweet looks: and to be short with hi^ fair,
simple and her gentle receiving, looking at her discretion for the gift of her
gracious grant. Ah ah false tongue, that do afflict and punish all the
rest of the body by thy forfast, vomiting out at all adventures the thing that
had been better unspoken than spoken: now I would gladly tear him, and tear
him with my teeth, if I trusted not that hereafter with an honorable amends
thou may yet unto her amend thy fault, and render unto this weary body
some pleasure in reward of the ill that thou do cause it now to suffer. O
God, what an evil is it to be depryued of all the goodness that I received of
her riant and laughyng eye, of her Golden mouth, of her hand taking mine: for
there shall never be Lady better spoken, better manered as I believe, nor has
been, nor never shall be. Does Diana auaunce her of her beauty? Cleofila does
not owe her very much, she makes much ado of her whitenes defacing the snow,
the brownnesse of my Queen is well mingled with ruddinesse, the which is not
so very smothe nor wanton: the fashion of her body is slender, and so round,
as it were made after a towr^, her disposition so ioly, that it seems (O
love) that thou art tied to all the ends of her members, and that thou do
dance and play at all her ie^tes and mouings: for she has a perfect grace,
and a certain good comeliness in all thing that she says or does (she has
no name) the which does daily half enrich her beauty, wheresoever she does
meet with her, and where there is any fault, she does ^^uer it with her divine
clearness, and so, that I believe Venus your mother is no other thing than her
grace, or if it be so, her only companion. And who would not perish by the
sight of such a Basiliske? and whose eyes would not vasell at the brightness
and clearenesse of such a Sun?

Dom Rogel does pray Leonida to hold and to take him for her knight. In the.12
book the.1. Chapter.
IF ye knew the greatness of your beauty, as well as it is imprinted within
my heart, I am certain Madame, that ye would easily excuse the boldness
that I take upon me, to declare unto you the dolours which I feel daily to
increase in me^ by the sweet violence of your divine perfections. And for as
much as ye are the only fountain of my wealth, I pray you not to do me so
much harm, as to frustrate me of the consolation that I receive now,
declaring my misery unto you. Yet if I in this thing commit any offense, it
shall please you to consider that the fear the which I have of your chaste
honesty, cannot resist my desire, nor the fire wherewith I burn, will not
suffer me to disguise and hide my anguishes any longer from you. But if your
highness will wholly deny me the convenient remedy of my sickness, at
leastwise ye shall not forbid me at all, or let me to open the evil that I
suffer for your beauty, for if ye may know it, I have the contentation of
this glory without looking for any other help. I then only require for this
day, that I may name me your knight, and that under so great an hour and good
fortune, I may find my self assured against all dangers, praying and
beseeching you Madame, not to refuse me this gift, considering that having set
all my power in you, there remains in me no force, but that the which it
shall please your good Grace to give me.

The answer of Princess Leonida to Prince Rogel. In the 12. book the.1.
Chapter.
MY Lord, content your self with the favor that the hardiness of your
thoughts has granted you upon me, and know, that I a Damsel as I am, I
have no less need of my chastity for the conservation of my honor than you
(as ye say) of my good grace, to come to the head of your enterprise.
Therefore to prove us both at adventure, whereunto wise men shall now conduct
us, my presence shall suffice you if ye should, as ye do say, receive so great
good fortune: for as touching my self, I will content me with yours, and with
the arms of my chastity.

A pitiful complaint of Diana, for the absence of Agesilan her Lover. In
the.12. book. the.6. Chapter.
AGesilan, ye should content you with the name of Daraide, and with the amity
that one Damsel does bear to another, without the increasing thus of my
amorous passions, by the changing of your name, that I in your absence should
suffer the fear of a hundred dangers, in the which peradventure ye are not.
But what say I? For if ye loved me with the like love that I love you, ye
should endure and suffer for me the self same travel, that I now suffer
for you. Alas my dear friend, I think that love would that I should pay by
the anoyance that I receive by your absence, the dolor that ye should now
suffer for being so far from me. O that it pleased GOD, I might hold my
heart in my hand, to the entente I might as well contemplate with the eyes of
my heart my Agesilan, the which is there so lively printed, as I have him both
night and day represented before the eyes of my thought. Alas love, wherefore
is it thy will, that my sufferance far passes his that loue^h me,
constrayning me to keep that secret, the which thou do suffer him to
open? For why, giving me a like advantage, I am sure that the publication of
my dolours, might prepare me some quietness in stead of hyding them, I feel
that daily their fierceness does grow within my courage, after the fashion
and manner of fire straytely kept within the furnace continually doubling his
force and strength. O fountaynes of my tears, succor and help my life in
this danger of the burning flames, in the which ye see that my heart does
consume and burn: and ye heavy sighs, faithful witnesses of my heauinesses,
give me a little air to my embrused breast, that I die not, and that dying I
cause not him to dye likewise, for whom only I enforce me to live. Alas
Daraide, ye have brought me out of this trumperie, by the which ye should
have enjoyed my love, without opening of your thoughts to me, to torment mine
the more with this cruel flame, the which being discovered, could give you
no less alleageaunce, than it gives me now discomfort, assaying me to
hold and to keep my will and mind covert. Alas Agesilan, how should you
hold and think your pains well recompensed, if I were suffered or ever I
die, to cause you to know, that the fear of leesing my life could not win
so much upon me, that I would write unto you the extreme passion that I
suffer for your love. Comfort your self my Lord and friend, by the
consolation that I receive hearing you named only, although I keep this joy
secret^ to my self. Alas Duchess Lardenia, why have ye discovered that
Daraide commanded you to keep secret? O that the reverence and the respect
that she had to my honestye, had greatly ouerpassed your obeysaunce, seeing
that with these cruel martyrdomes, she durst not discover to me the thing,
that ye without any pain that moved you, were bold to open unto me. O
how much should I hate the pleasure wherewith ye have made Agesilan so
greatly in your debt, and me to travel so greatly through dolor and pain? O
how much Daraide are ye bound to her, and I v^rie little to you? O the
grievous heaviness, for why I will hold my peace, but so doing, I pay for my
silence that I owe unto my dolor, seeing that I endure it without hope of any
other reward, and I will endure and suffer it in time to come, with the reason
that I have to endure it, and yet searching al means and ways, by the which I
may come to the rest, that other Lovers desire, and of their Lovers do look
for.

The complaint of Daraide, wishing for death, because he durst not be known
to his Lady. In the.12. book. the.7. Chapter.
ALas, I see now, that my death only shall cause my Lady to know me, seeing
that I dare not discover and open who I am, fearing to leese utterly the
favors that I have received of her. Alas my Lady Lardenia, if ye cannot
succor me by some remedy, at leastwise ye shall succor me by the pity that
I pray you to take of my misfortune. If ye can give me no hope, give me some
consolation, that I in this travel in the which ye see me, do not utterly
despair. O that my destinies are miserable, for why the thing that I seek for
my comfort, that is the sight of my Lady, which does increase my martyrdom
more and more. Alas my dear Lardenia, what good counsel can ye give me,
seeing that my dolor does not suffer it? What consolation, seeing that the
mean from whence I should receive it (that is the presence of my Lady)
causes me to double my anoyance and trouble? What remedy, seeing there is no
hope? what life, seeing that I am in a continual death? Alas my Lady
Duchess, I know that ye cannot give me the thing that I demand of you, nor I
ask it not of you for any other intention, but to take the pity on me, that
does wholly lack in my Lady. O how often do I desire death, and how often
in the self same hour do I fear it, to the end that I lose not the
occasion evermore of continue in my mortal anguishes and pains. O how much
more fortunate should I be, if I wholly had lost my understanding and yet I will
not leese it, fearing to lose with it, the remembrance of the reason which
proceeds from my sense and perseuera^ce, for the great pride of my thoughts.
Alas, it shall be best to hold my peace, that I do my self no wrong, seeing
that I know not, and knowing that I may not speak through the strange
dolours, for the which the desire to die, and the will to live, do torment me.

An amorous complainte of Daraide to the Princess Diana. In the.12. book,
the.8. Chapter.
O Madame, by what means may I at any time recognyse the great favor, that
has pleased you now to show me? O happy words of the heart, seeing they are
so great a cause of so great quiet and rest to the great wounds of the soul.
O celestial hands, the which by your divine beauty may make and cause two
springs of tears to flow out of my eyes to remedy the cruel flames,
wherewith I feel me to be burned. Alas, by what mean shall I reward you ^or
the good succor that ye presently give me to my mortal heaviness? And I pray
you madame, seeing that words do fail me in this dolor, nor that I can not
tell the thing I do endure, that it would please you to supplye this fault,
and to comprehend through this divine spirit, that the Gods have infuded and
put in you the eu^ll that I suffer thus cruelly, and that this little which I
declare unto you, may be equal in his extremite, in the perfections,
wherewyth the Heavens have made you noble above all the Princes of the world.
Alas madame, it seems to me that I do iniurye and wrong to my self, to live
so long^ having so just an occasion to dye, I feel that my life do^th even
now complain it self and lament within me, because that my words would
show you the dolours and pains that I suffer for your love, although they
can no other ways be discovered, but by my death. Alas I die, and I see well
that I die, and yet I cannot cause the nyest end of my life to be known. I am
wholly brought to Ashes, and yet the fire does not cease to martyr me. Alas
Madame, pardon me, if I know not what purpose or communication I hold or have
with you. For it is not to be marvelled at, if I know not what I ought to do,
when I know not what I ought to say. Seeing then that I lack the greatest
good thing that I could have in this world, which is to cause you to know
my evil and pain, I beseech you to consider it by my silence, and the little
power that I have to declare it: or of your self to bestow the sovereign
graces that the Gods have given you, to think upon the default of my
purposes, for why, by this means I am fast and sure that ye shall know the
thing that I s^^fer, although I can not express it.

The complaynt of Daraida. In the.12. book the.9. Chapter.
ALas fair Diana, how greatly does the clearenesse of thy beams negligently
spread in this medowe increase my anguishes and heavy thoughts? For by thy
light as clear as Silver, thou renuest my memory of her, that does shine with
much greater beauty upon my heart, than thou do now upon the earth, the
which with less care than thou, does burn by day through her sight, and by
night by her remembrance, her continual clearness upon me. O Madame Diana,
the too cruel Gods have willed that ye in the night should rejoice you in the
portraiture of your Daraide, whom you have in your company, and that Daraida
separated from you, had only the mean to contemplate her that does shine
throughout all the world with the same name that ye have, but not with such a
beauty.

The complaynte of Daraide. In the.12. Book the.9. Chapter.
Seeing it i^ my Lady Diana, that the Gods have given to your highness a
beauty sufficient to embrace all creatures that may comprehend it never so
little, how can you accuse the flames with the which I burn through your
means, seeing that they discover themselves in the presence of her, that of
her self did kindle them? Alas Madame, behold how your knight is well nighe
brought to Ashes, and how all the tears that roll from his two eyes, (yea
rather from his two Ryuers,) all along his heavy face, could not suffice to
temper the fyres of your unjust and obstinate cruelnesse. O me miserable, what
shall I do more, than to make you know my evil, I undo my self, and those,
that do make me slack to tell you, and so much the more I slack the hope
of my remedy. O love, I pray thee from henceforth to give some rest to my
dolours and pains, either by a more fortunate life, or by a nighe and a short
death. Alas I die, and ye Madame which is the occas^on, have no pity of him,
that pyneth away in a desperate martyrdom and torment for your love.
Consider that if for a time ye should forgette your great and sovereign
perf^ctions, ye would soon remember the greatness of my merits, and of
that, wherein the extreamitie of my passion does bind you to me wards. Alas
Madame, how much the better should ye know my torments, my martyrdom, my
dolours, my sighs, my trauelles, and the burning flames of my love, if ye
would regard them, having no respect to that divine beau^ye, the which
does let, that no man can be worthy to have you, if it be not one of
the high and sovereign Gods immortal. But alas, my extreme evil fortune
wills that I after the fashion of a Pecocke, should deface the fair wheel,
conceived by the hope of my thought, beholding the sylthinesse or foulness
of the feet, which is the least and fewest merits that I know in my self.
Thus madame, the knowledge of your highness, does let you to est^^me my
smalnesse.

The letter of Filisell of Montespin to Marfira, praying her to take pity of
the torment that he suffered for her love, and to give him a mean to speak
with her. In the.12. book, the 13. Chapter.
DOm Filisell of Montespin, does send to the fair and gracious la^^e Marfira,
health and good fortune, the which he himself has lost, by the violence of
her divine beauty. I know not (madame) whereof I should most complain me,
either of the pain that I suffer for your love, or of the thing, that I may
not cause you to know to be such as I feel it: for by this mean, my pain is
so greatly tormented, willing to express it by my words, as I am my self
tormented, that I have not the power to express it. But, O I well fortunate,
seeing that the power which I had to suffer my evil, has continually supplied
the fault that was in me, to cause you to understand it. Nevertheless madame,
I believe, that ye may easily know the extremity of the pain that I can not
express unto you, if at least wise ye would have a respect unto the great
beauty and good graces, wherewith ye far ouerpasse all other ladies of our
time, and of whom I should be unworthy, if my courage dedicated to your
perpetual service, and the force of my dolor and pain had not given me some
manner of occasion to merit them, and the boldness to discover unto you my
passions, to pray you to heal them with the remedy that ye may know to be
necessary for such an evil. This madame, shall be a thing very well syttyng
and convenient for your accustomed graciousnesse, that as ye are the occasion
of my infirmity, so likewise to be in time to come the occasion of my health.
And therefore Madame I pray you to take some compassion of the evil that ye
cause me to suffer unjustly, and to assign me a place where I may have a mean
to open unto you with my mouth, and to testify unto you by my tears, the
thing that I suffer in your service. For why, after your answer, I may
afterward continue my life in a new joy, or to finishe it with my ancient
and old dolors, that by my miserable death I may leave unto you and to all the
world a sure testimony of your inhumaine cruelty, and of my mortal
anguishes. I therefore pray you madame, that after I have a thousand times
kyssed and rekissed your fair hands, to give me the remedy that entierly
does depend upon your pity, if ye love not rather cruelly to cause me to die.
He that has no desire to live, but to deserve your good grace.

A letter from Filisell to Marfira, by the which he complains him of the
rigor that she uses in his behalf. And he prays her to have pity upon
him. In the 2. book the.14. Chapter.
TO the cruel and rigorous Marfira, the unfortunate and miserable Filisell
sends thee salutation from the which he himself is abandoned and put of
through your ingratitude. Alas Madame, with how much glory and pleasure have
ye exalted me to the most highest degree of my contentation? Uerely I thought
that your highness would never abased your self so low, to show me so
great favor, as ye have showed me, if it had not been for the great love
wherewith ye loved me. But what have I done now against you, to be thus
rigorously entreated? what offense might I have done against my Lady Marfira,
seeing that I never thought to offend her? what good right might you have had
Madame, to do me now ^o great wrong? See I pray you, see the outrages that ye
do me in place of favors, of the which ye are indewed so me for the good
will that I bear you. Alas: why do ye recompense my extreme love, with so
extreme batred? behold Madame, that as long as I received your favor, I was
bound to live in perpetual languour because I was so hold to take upon me to
win the good grace of your sovereign beauty, the which then I deserved not.
But since that it has pleased you to show me your favor, and by that means
have caused me to have a virtue in me, the which does make me worthy of an
higher and a more glorious enterprise than a man may say: ye should believe
Madame, that now ye are bound to entertayne me in this pleasant glory, that
you your self have caused and made me to merit. I pray you then to give unto
my evil, the remedy that ye do owe it, and that ye so oftentimes have
promised, or to deliver me out of this tr^mperie and deceyte, in the which I
see my self through the anoyance that I suffer, whereof I cannot comprehend
nor think any other occasion, but that it pleases you by so great and so
rigorous an hatred to keep we from stable and faithful love, the which I
will bear you as long as I live. Thus I shall continue and remain in this
mortal war until it please you to send me peace, who tariyng and looking
for it, does kiss and rekisse a thousand times your fair and white hands.

Marfira does write again to Dom Filisel of Montespin, that he should not
complain of her, seeing that she takes all the pain that she can to keep
her promise with him: afterward she fayneth, not to understand the
trumperie, that he wrote unto her of in the foresaid letter. In the.12. book,
the 14. Chapter.
DOm Filisell, ye have no occasion to complain of me, as ye complain, for if
ye loved me, ye cannot deny, but that I love you in like manner. And if I have
tarried a certain days to do the thing that ye would well I should have
done, it was not for lack of good will (as ye say) in your letter, but for
lack of time and opportunity, the which does abound in you, and does
fail and lack in me. Also ye send me word to deliver you of the trumperie
where in ye are through the anoyance that ye suffer for my love, I answer
you, that it holds not of me that I do it not, but in the defaute and lack
of power: and I assure you, that if ye could do it your self, it should be
one of the greatest pleasures that might chance unto me, and would God it
were his pleasure that ye might so do, for by this mean ye should deliver me
of the pain and travel that I am in, to give you the remedy that ye ask and
demand. Yet seeing that I have promised you, I will fulfill my promise if it
be possible for me, and sooner peradueuture than ye do think.

A letter from Filisel to Marfira excusing him of the trumperie, whereof he
wrote unto her. In the twelfth book, the.14. Chapter.
DOm Filisel of Montespin does send to the fair and gracious Marfira salute,
the which the confusion where your letter has set it, does deny him. If I
have decayued my self in the letter that I have sent you, ye are not less
deceived in yours, in the which ye believe that praying you to deliver me of
the trumperie, I would have spoken of that, wherein there could be none, as
in deed there is none: that is to say, of the stable and faithful love that I
bear you, as touching the which, I in your behalf could not be deceived,
as ye were never in mine, considering that we love one another, our love
has been well bestowed on the one part and on the other. I only demanded
of you, in as much as I could not think on the occasion why ye had so long a
while put me so far from you, that it would please you to deliver me from the
trumperie in respect and consideration of the love that ye bare me, or to say
better that ye should bear me. For it seemed to me, if ye had loved me so
much, as I loved you, ye would not have deferred the healing of my sickness
so long as ye have done. Alas Madame, how far are ye deceived, if ye think
that I at any time have the power to repent, or to go far from the great love
that I have borne you, and shall bear you as long as the spirit shall breath
within my body: for truly there is nothing in ye world that was more
impossible for me. Think not at all Madame, loving you as I do love you, that
euer^ I could fall into any repentance of your love, considering the glory
and pleasure that I find in loving of you. I pray you then to give me life
through your favor to my great joy, or shortly to send me death through your
disfavor to make an end of my anoyance, and of the dolor in the which I
shall continually remain until ye give me rest, and the tranquillity that
your letter does promise me: and looking for so great and good and hour, I
kiss a thousand times your fair and delicate hands.

A letter from Filisell of Montespin to Marfira complaining of the long term
and time that she has set him to have the joyful pastime, whereof he had
already tasted, and he prays her to allege it. In the twelfe book the.14.
Chapter.
DOm Filisell of Montespin does send to the fair and gracious Marfira health,
the which he has los^e by the most grievous sickness that he as yet has
proved. Alas Madam if ever I loved you with good affection, now I die wholly
for your love, and if ever I had any hope to reio^ce of your divine beauties,
now I am at the last in desparation, because the long time that I must tarry
without having any more the joy of the goodness and pleasure, whereof through
your good grace I have tasted and sauored the tranquillity and gracious
sweetness. If before this I have had any desire. I have desired it after such
a fashion, that I knew not the thing that I desired. But now being learned by
experience, I know that I desire the most pleasure and goodness that is
possible to desire, saving one other that I know, but ye may not know it,
although the pleasure that I desire be extreme. Hitherto Madame, I have
tormented my self to see and to behold the apparent graces of your beauty,
by the which ye^ may make subject to your service the fierce hearts of men
more than barbarous: but now I torment me to rejoice and play with your graces
secrets, of the which I among all other have merited the pleasure. Alas
Madame, cause I beseech you, that so great goodness as ye have showed me,
turn me not to greater evil, and deny me not the remedy, which kissing your
fair and white hands, I pray you to grant me as soon as the dolorous
passion in the which I am, does require it.

Filisels letter to Marfira, rejoicing himself, and giving her thanks for the
good hour that she caused him to have, praying her to continue unto him her
grace and favor. In the.12. book the.15. Chapter.
DOn Filisel of Montespin does send to the fair and gracious Marfira, the
salute whereof he enjoys to his great contentation. The glory wherein I am
is so great, that I can not tell with what words I ought to praise it, so that
the praise may be compared to his greatness. O I, the most happiest of all
knights of the world, seeing it has pleased you Madame, to make me worthy
through your favors of the thing that I by my self could in no wise decerne.
This letter is only to cause you to understand my great joy by the which ye
are now indetted to me for the thing that has caused me to merit it, that is,
that I return very shortly unto you, to take and to have the self same
pleasure of your beauty, that it pleased you the last night to grant me, so
that by this new joy, I may reward the anoyance that I endure in the time
that I cannot find the opportunity of so great a pleasure. Wherefore Madame, I
pray you continually to intertaine me in such a good hour, that if ye have
been the cause that I am now exalted to so high a degree, that hereafter ye
be not the cause of my miserable fall and ruin. But to the intent ye shall not
reprehend me of too great importunity, I will make an end of my letter,
kissing a thousand times your white and delicate hands, in remembrance of the
peace that followed the war that is past. I recommend me to my dear Caria,
praying her shortly to purchase me the time so greatly desired, in the which I
may renew the fortunate occasion of my glory.

The complaint of Queen Sidonis. In the.12. book. the.21. Chapter.
O Grave honor of my high and royal lynage, how have thou conducted me to an
evil fortune, whereof I may receyne a just reward of my folly? O love, how
do thou cause to appear in me thy deceytfull force and strength, causing
me to use hatred and cruelty unto him that I loved much more than my self? O
Fortune with what inconstancy and lightness art thou changed, putting me
then in such desperation when I began to have hope, shortly to accomplish the
thing that I desired most in this world? O Gods immortal, with how much
rigor have ye willed to recompense the flerce pride, and the proud
presumption of the Queen Sidonia? O my dear daughter, and yet the daughter of
him that robbed the holy rites of my chastity. Alas, how would ye have paid
me for the thing that ye denied an^ for the love that ye bare continually to
your father, in recompense of the outrages and injuries that I daily sought for
him. O my daughter the first of the world, and none like in beauty, to the
end to make and to render like unlike the delour that I endure now for thy
death? O cruel death, how do thou leave me in so miserable a life? O
cruel life, how do thou leave me in so miserable a death? O Gods
immortal, wherefore do ye suffer so great an injury as is that, which I
receive by my life, seeing my daughter Diana is dead? But what do I say? It is
just, that ye as ye are just, do show me to rigorous justice, to cause me to
take vengeance upon my self, confounding me in a certain dolor and
heaviness, the which I have procured to my self. Alas Daraide, how do
thou give to me and my daughter the duty whereof thou wast indetted unto us:
to me, giving me with thy end, the end of the folly of my vengeance, and in
killing again by thy death, the hope and confidence that I had in thy life: to
my daughter, recompencing her death by thine, the which is the last payment,
whereof thou wast bound to the love that thou did bear her, and to that,
that she did bear thee. O fortunate Damsel, that by thy death had might to
pay the thing thou did owe to my Diana for thy love, although that her
mother could not do so much for her own. O faint Moraisell, how art then
now well revenged of me, and well satisfied of the vengeance that I of so
long time have sought for? O Gods immortal, seeing that ye deny me justice,
leaving me in this miserable life, I will not refuse it, nor deny it to my
own hands, and I will keep the privilege of my frank and free will, the
which I have received of you from the time that I was borne. Well then, and
killing my self with my own hands, I give my self life, the which ye have
denied me, because ye promptly and readily enough gave me not to death.

The Oration of Daraide, giving and causing himself to be known and taken of
Diana, for Agesilan of Colcbos^ In the 12. book. the.22. Chapter.
IF the great enterprises were not accompanied with danger, believe this
Madame, that the praise of those that should chance to have the victory,
should be very little: and for this reason and cause, the greater that the
peril is, so much the more is the honor, the glory, and the mortal renown.
Think not the great things can be ended by small things, nor with little
travail men can not win much praise. Thus Madame, ye may know this, that
to conquer and get you, must be put in adventure, seeing that I assaying now
to win you, put my self in hazard to leese you. Alas, see this is the
occasion that so greatly gives fear unto my words, because that willing to
have and get a great gain, I am in danger of a great loss, and fearing that
seeking you too much, that I leese you not the more: for why, to adventure my
self to leese my self in this pray, I adventure but little, seeing that it
is now so long ago, that I am left in your love, although yet that in part
of the world, I have not had so great gain, as in one fortunable loss. The
cause of my amorous passions is manifest by the excellencye of your beauty.
The dolours past, the which I have suffered in your service, do give you a
sure testimony of the regard and reverence that I have had always to your
highness. The boldness that I now do take, does sufficiently excuse it
self by my pain, and the prowdnesse of my thoughts, through my royal and
noble lynage, accompanied with chaste and lawful desire, wherewyth I have
always kept the reverence due to your honor, and shall keep it all my
life, without desyring or praying you to give me any remedy for my
anguyshes and pains, if it be not under the title of faithful marriage, and
keeping in you your chastity, even such, as ye now may have it. Or else
Madame, with these conditions it may please you to know, that under the name,
and under the habit of Dariade, ye have in your presence Agesilan, the son
of the great Prince the prudent Phalanges of Astre, and of the strong Princess
Alastraxeree. Marvel not that I have thus disguised me, and covered my self
with such arms to win your good grace: for in any other habit, but in one
like unto yours, I could not have hazarded my self in an enterprise, at least
way so perilous, with any hope of victory. Ye know now Madame, the thing that
hitherto I have continually kept secret from you, ye see the dolorous wounds
wherewith in this cruel war of love, your excellent beauty has cruelly
wounded me, I have now defended my self long enough, covering me under the
shield of on^ Daraide disguised: now Madame I confess that ye are
victorious, and to you I render my arms, to set up a triumph at and in the
strength and force of your immortal beauty, beseeching you to take me to
mercy, keeping the fidelity and reverence that I owe unto your highness, and
the which I promise you, and do swear by my immortal God to keep it all my
life under the title of marriage. But if by the rigor of your answer, ye will
refuse and deny me the pity that I require, believe Madame, that very long ye
cannot be rigorous unto me, and that shortly my pitiful death shall cause you
sorrow it, to whom as long as he lived, ye were so cruel. So my unfortunate
soul shall hitherto comfort her self, after that the body be buried, by your
lamentations: O I most fortunate, that has set my heart in so noble a place,
that the ioyfulnesse of my desires, do make me the most fortunatest of all the
earth, and the last of my misfortunes do promise me yet a certain
consolation. Now Madame ye have heard the little that I can say of the great
dolor that I suffer, and the lest of the travel, whereof I feel that I have
traveled. But if I cannot sufficiently enough express unto you the evil that
I endure, ye may easily comprehend it, if ye esteem it so great in me, as
your beauties, and your excellencies he great in you: seeing then that by this
mean ye may know by your self the immortal anguishes that torment me, and if
ye cannot perceive it by your self, I beseech you again by the just pity
that the victor should have unto him that is overcome, to receive me to
mercy, seeing that I ^oe yield me, and to entreat me in your service as him,
whose death and life does depend upon your cruelty, or upon the favors of
your good grace.

The cruel answer of Diana to Daraida, because she was declared to be an
other than a damsel. In the.12. book, the.22. Chapter.
KNow Daraida, that by changing your name, ye have also changed into hatred
the love, of the which by your deceiptfulnesse ye have had so long a pleasure:
and if the next parent that is between you and my accustomed benignity
resisted not the execution of my courage, I would cause you to be chastened
with such a torment as the deceyte wherewith ye have abused me, does merit.
But to leave no occasion to any man, nor not to think that your proudenesse
has found any fragilitie in me, I will not use unto my honor the pity that
I owe unto it, to defend it by your death from the offense that ye have
committed: for I will not ^ha^ men should publishe, that your temerarious ^oly
should by the only sight of me, cause so great glory: neither I will that
ye shall remain without any punishment, although that the pain be too much
unequal for your offense, whereof ye shall excuse you. And therefore I
prohibit and forbid you to be at any time in my presence wheresoever I be,
for my honor in as much as it cannot be done as Daraide, and as Agesilan, does
not suffer it.

The complaynte of Daraide. In the twelfth book, the.22. Chapter.
O Sweet death, why do thou suffer me yet to return to life again? O
miserable life, why do thou deny me death? O love how much hatred have I
proved in thee? O cruel hatred, wherefore do thou take the name of love?
Ah, ah I unfortunate, in searching of love, I have found his contrary, and
thinking to find a necessary remedy for my disease, I have increased it
without any comparison. O my Lady Diana, how often have I feared the cruelty,
that I prove now in you? Seeing then that your will is such, I would it should
not please God to send one thing, that is so impossible to me, as to live any
longer with the disgrace and disfavor of my Lady. O evil hour to much
miserable, for I require nothing, but it is denied me by the thing that I
require it, nor I fly nothing but it is granted me by the thing that I fly.
Alas madame Lardenia, I beseech you to take no pity upon me, seeing I pity
not my self, and that to conform my will to my Ladies will, for I cannot
will, but that she wills, and I hate my self more than she hates me: but
if ye love me, it shall be reason that ye will that I will, that is only to go
to accomplish the promise that I have made to my Lady the Queen, so that all
that I shall do from henceforth, shall be done against my will: for I kn^we that
in fulfilling that I have promised her, I shall yet accomplish the will of my
Lady Diana. Well, now I percei^^ well enough, that the Queen made me not
without occasion such a strange request as she made me: for that was, because
that by the death which I shall receive, she may use the pity toward me, that
my Lady Diana denied me, cruelly to sley me. Certainly I can hope no less of
the valiantness and high Chivalry of the Prince of Greece in this combat
that I have enterprised against him, but that by the death of so feeble and so
disfauored a creature as I am, he shall satisfy his glorious renoume, and
that, unto the which he as a noble knight, was bound to do, repairing the
wrong that I received to live the longer. O fortunate Prince, seeing that all
things prepare themselves to his good hour, and I likewise unhappy, seeing
that fortune, and the Queen, and the will of my Lady Diana, have prepared by
the hands of so great a Lord, the death, which after my law I could not
purchase with my own hands. O mighty God, how thou euerywhere do show thy
sage providence? for in this judgment of my death pronounced by the mouth of
so noble and so excellent a judge, as my Lady is, it was very reasonable that
ye should help her with so excellent a minister to execute her sovereign
justice, with the lamentable sentence of my cruel destinies.

A letter from Balthazar king of Russia, and from Bruzerbe king of Gaza, to
Sidonia the Queen of Guinday, requiryng to mary her and her daughter, and if
they refuse them, they denounce her war. In the.12. book, the.42. Chapter.
Balthazar king of Russia, as well in his own name, as in that of other
sovereign kings of the Orient, whose sign and seal is set to this letter,
does send salutation to Sidonia the Queen of the I Will of Guinday, the which
she may receive if she think it good, receiving those with her good will for
her espouse, the which, otherwise are disposed by force to accomplish their
wills. Therefore Queen of Guinday, ye shall understand and know, that another
the injury received for your love, nor your beauty, nor for that of your
daughter Diana, are not yet out of the remembrance of Balthazar, and of
Bruzerbe kings of Russia and of Gasa. Therefore we have landed in your Ile^
with a mighty army, requyring you before and above all things, to grant us
peace, and you and your daughter in marriage: or if ye will not do it until
force do that with reason that courtesy may refuse and deny, we denounce you
war with fire and blood, and we make the immortal Gods judges of the losses
and calamities that shall chance through your occasion, calling fortune to our
aid, the which seeing our wonderful army, has already given us the
assurance, the which your subjects if ye defend them not shall want,
assuring us of the amendment and healyng of our wounds, whereof the pain,
love, and the injuries heretofore suffered, have wounded our courages until
death: you and your daughter through your beauties holding us in a more cruel
war than that, the which is most cruelly prepared for you, if your
gratiousnesse give you not peace, the which we are minded to conquer by force
of arms.

The answer of Sidonia Queen of Guindaye, to Balthazar king of Russia, by the
which she aduertiseth him, that she will defend her chastity as much as she
may, and that she rather will kill her self, than to obey unto him. In the.12.
book, the.42. Chapter.
SIdonia Queen of Guinday to Balthazar king of Russia, and to all other kings
of his lineage the which are come unjustly with him to invade her I Will, does
send salute and health, the which the Gods should not save very long, in so
unreasonable a quarrel. I would not be so afraid king Balthazar, if it were
convenient for me in time to come to prove against my breast the sword of
Lucrece, as chastity does bind me now to defend me against thine. But if
neither the love that I bear to the Prince of Greece, nor the fear of his
highness, could neither set nor make peace, nor truces to the strong war
that I have prepared against him: scarcely the least war wherewith the king
of Russia does threaten me, can cause me in anywise to fear, and yet it is
less possible, that the hatred I bear him may through his proudnesse be
couerted into love: nor esteem not at all that my mind and will is so fliyng
and inconstant, that hatred shall cause me to seek peace with thee to my
dishonor, seeing that love for my honor constrayneth me to make war against
the Prince of Greece. God forbid that Sidonia should less esteem the
nobility of her courage, than the great force of arms wherewith thou
threatenest me with fire and blood: for with fire and blood I will defend my
chaste will, and I will assay to keep it with the self force, that the Gods
have sometimes suffered that it was kept against themselves. And know, that
making war against me, thou do make it yet more rigorous against thy
honor, and willing to consume my Country with thy fires, thou can not
consume the fire, wherewith the Prince of Greece has enflamed me. It may be
that thou shed the blood of my subjects, setting them upon the edge of thy
swoorde: but when thou shalt have done it, swoordes to shed our blood shall
neither fail my daughter nor me: for we had much rather to die in our chaste
liberty, tha^ to live in a vile servitude. The hatred that caused the Queen
of Carthago to die for AEneas, shall not cause Sidonia to die for Dom Florisel,
but she shall well defend her self from the fear of death, for to defend her
faithfulness that she ought him, for the stable and burning love, that she has
continually borne him, and at this present does bear him. Consider then king
Balthazar that thinking to win me, thou do leese me, and thinking to
offend me, thou shalt offend in nothing, for a sword shall not fail me at
all, to resist thy offense: but thou may well offend me with thy arms:
the laws of the Gods immortal which govern the sword of justice, have
much more force than thine, thou shalt likewise offend the Prince of Greece,
whose right of marriage thou would violate, for although he has playde by
trumperie and deceyte, yet it is so that for his honor he will not let pass
the injuries without reuengyng of them that thou shall do me. And seeing that
for the reverence that he bears me, he in my favor has saved their lives
that sought to have his head, as the kings of Gaza, and of the Massagenes, and
other of thy company, giving sure witness, thou may well think, that now
he shall be as ready to cause them to leese their heads to please me withal,
as he has at other times been pressed and ready for my love to save them.
Wherefore king Balthazar, enterprise not a war whereby, through hatred thou
do hope to win her, that hates and makes war against her self, the
great love that enflameth her, co^strayning nor suffering her honor to be
destroyde, nor shall feel her self. Demand neither love nor peace of her,
that has neither love nor peace with her self, and with thee. So then I am
minded to defend my will, and to resist thine, and continually (saving my
accustomed chastity,) I will sustain my dear country and realm, calling
the Gods to my justice, and men to my defense. And purchasing this peace of me,
I am ready to sustain such war as thou haste denounced unto me.

The Oration of Queen Sidonia to the Citizens of Guinday, incityng her
Vassalles valiantly to defend^ her, and sooner to suffer death, than to let
their renoume be defiled, and of her part she had rather die, than to fall
into the power of her enemies. In the.12. book, the.43. Chapter.
IF the duty whereof we are indetted to virtue (my dear friends and
faithful Citizens) commanded us not rather to sacrifice our lives for the
conservation of our honor, than to suffer it in any thing to be corrupted,
in as much as honor being lost, we during this mortal life, can have nothing
that is good, they may complain them of the uncertain issue of things, and
that with good right, and to sustain their ancient renoume, do give
themselves with a frank courage to the inconstancy of fortune. But seeing
that we be bound to defend our honor even to death, the multitude of
enemies, nor the doubtful chance of one battle, should not put us in fear
for nothing. We should only fear least that the fault and faintness of
heart cause us to incur any infamy, and that the vniustnesse of our enemy
make us not more afearde, than our good right does make us constant: for by
such slothfulness men might doubt of the experience of fortune, the which
gave long since to six thousand souldiars of Greece, the victory of one
million of Perses, of the which there were slain two hundred thousand in the
plain field. The self fortune granted to Lucul the Roman, having but ten
thousand souldiars in his tents, to overcome by his virtue and good right,
the king Tygrane, and his infinite thousands of fighting men, among the
which were fifty thousand horse men. This great army was overthrown and
broken in battle array, and the ensign displayde, and in open field, by
those which were very few in number, but many in magnanimity of courage: for
by the reason of their good right, they supplied the defaulte of their number
and by the strength of their arms, they resisted the fear of fortune, as
knowing that the multitude of armed men, makes the victory never the surer,
and being fewer in number than the enemies, men should not leese the
assurance, and less, the hope to win the glory of the combatte and field.
There is not he that may flee death, when she is appointed him by the
destiny of the high Gods: nor also there is not he, the which dying, is not
bound to save his good renoume, that the shame and infamy of his death do
not desile the ancient honor of his life. Ye do know the good right that I
have in this war, ye may remember the obedience that hitherto ye have showed
me, as to your Queen: And if I be not disceyued, ye do yet remember the
reward that ye have received for your faithfulness. I think that ye abhor
all tyranny, and I think that each of you is ready to chase it from him, as
prepared and bound to receive death for the entertaynement of liberty, in
the which I have always enterteyned you, and have hither to defended you. We
shall have to our aid the Gods immortal, as those which are the certain
reuengers of outragiousnesse, and the sure defenders of innocence. If then
reason, good right, and the aid of Gods fail us not at all in this quarrel,
let us so do that good courage fail us not, and when fortune would envy our
good hour, let us rather choose an honorable death, than a shameful life
with a miserable servitude and bondage. Consider also of your part, that I
refusing the alliances of these barbarous kings, that ye shall not only
defend my private quarrel, but also your public, with your goods, your
liberty, your wives, your children, marking the calamities that in time to
come, ye (if ye have such tyrants to your Lords) shall endure and suffer.
Therefore my friends take a good heart unto you, and now show the
valiantness and virtue that ye have, the which is needful that ye now show,
to defend your selves from those, that have enterprysed your ruin and
destruction. Do so then that men may see their spoils hanging within our
Temples, for an immortal triumph of your victory, and ye shall believe that
the king of Russia shall never triumph of the faythfulnesse that Sidonia does
owe unto him, that she first has received for her husband: but contrariwise,
for the Barbarian sword shall not so soon appear within our walls, but that
mine shall incontinent appear within the breast of my daughter and me, that by
this frank death, I shall deliver my life from subjection, leaving my dead
body upon the cold earth without spot, and satisfying him by the immortality
of this sacrifice, the which (as I trust in your virtue and fortitude) ye would
have made of your selves, before I should see my self in such extremity. But I
am so assured of ye justice of the Gods, and of the force and strength of your
right hands, that I do yet assure my self to be excused of this sacrifice
that I speak of, and that ye shall cause it to fall upon our enemies, to their
great confusion, and to your perpetual glory. Now in this confidence I will
make an end of my words to begin the effect, and I will call to the defense
of our liberty, the favor of the Gods, and the succor of the strange
knights the which are now in my Court: and because my treasures as great as
they be, shall not be sufficient to recompense their virtue, I will pray
them to have a respect to the honor and to the immortal renown that is
prepared for them, for the true and better recompense of the travail that they
shall obtain, daily wandering through the world, to employe the force of
their high chiuarlie: for now they have found in this war a very just
occasion.

A Letter from Queen Sidonia, to king Amadis of France, and ^o Orian^, by the
which she does them to understand the fulfilling of certain Prophecies
already past, and that there be other, of the which they must make an end.
In the.12. book. the.60. Chapter.
TO the right excellent prince king Amadis of France, and to Queen Oriane,
Sidonia, Queen of the I Will Guinday, and all the Princes, Kings and Queens
assembled in her great Citie^ do send salute, the which Fortune has
granted them after many calamities which are past. Understande then, right
excellent King, that the inconstant fortune after that the disguised Daraida,
had set the Prince of Greece, with his hea^e in my power, has brought our
highness in such extremity, that we and ours were ^allen into a miserable
servitude, if the victorious Princes the King Dom Phalanges of Astre, and the
Knightly Queen Alastraxeree, in this need and business had not helped us:
for why my City being almost taken of our enimyes, that then began to
enter into it, these two noble Princes did not only take and recover the
City from the Kings of Russia and Gaza, and the victory the which they now
esteeemed certain, but further, they brake them, and set them and their
confederates in such a rowte, that they set us again in our first liberty,
and in our ancient heritage. By the means whereof, after the Prophecies of
my fair Diana, Daraida being past, Phoebus came, did beheade in my presence
within the Tower of Diana the Image of Dom Florisell, whose head did deprive
me of all sentimentes, and enforced Dom Rogel of Greece, to avenge the death of
his father, for the trespass of Daraide. And afterward the combat was so
great between them two, and with such sheadding of blood, the which they
lost the same day, that even both of them fell down upon the ground as
dead, until that the brave Serpent and the victorious Queen, knowing again
after the Prophecyes her dear son under the habit of Daraide, revealed unto
her by her dolorous cries, and mortal mourning the thing which was the
occasion to leese the name of Daraide, and to recover that of Agesilan, with my
daughter Diana for his spouse, whom he had woonne already by the
faythfulnesse and constancy of his love, in the virtue whereof, they set at
liberty, and out of prison the infant Dom Rosaran, and the duchess of Bauire,
in the inchaunted Tower, whose prisoners they should have remained without
coming forth, until they two the most accomplished and perfect in
faythfulnesse of love, may give them the ways and mean, and to us the
consolation of the heaviness that we suffer by their absence, the which shall
endure until the excellent King and Queen of England, be entered into the
inchaunted Castle, delivering them out of prison, to the great glory of their
faithful loves, and to the consolation of us all. Therefore to find some manner
of peace in this war, we pray you and beseech you by your coming, ye will
find the means we may have it: the which thing shall return to your great
lawde, and to our rest, without the which we shall remain and be, until
by your coming ye make an end of this enchantment, and do set at liberty
these two faithful lovers of your lineage.

Amadis of France, and Amadis of Greece, letters to the princesses of the I Will
Solstice, praying them to accept the peace that they are minded to make
between them. In the.12. book the.64. Chapter.
TO the right excellent and most fair Princesses of the I Will Solstice, Amadis
of France, king of England, and Amadis of Greece, Emperor of Trebisonde,
Prince of Greece, of England, of France, and king of Rhodes, salute, and
therewith peace and rest of your perilous war. Ye shall understand that
fortune and the tempest driving us into this Isle, with the Queens and Princes
of our company, we have perceived the war ye make one against the other:
therefore desiring to set you in amity, we send unto you the fair Duchess
Siria, the which shall tell you from us the thing that we have charged her
withal, praying you to believe her, as our selves. And desyring to make an
end of your travel, we send you peace, the which ye may not refuse, neither
of the one part nor of the other, at leastwise if ye have any sisterly charity
before your eyes.

A letter from the knight Afronteur to the Princes and Princesses of Greece,
containing a certain Prophecy, by the which he trusts to be revenged of
them. In the.12. book. the.66. Chapter.
TO the right excellent Princes and Princesses of Greece, Afronteur of
subtilties, Lord of Cautels, chastener of the vncarefull, counselor of those
that journey, and deceyuer of those that be better counseled, I send you
salute and health, that therewith ye may mainteyne your selves in rest, until
ye have had experience of my stratagemes. I am come out of your power, and now
I find me in mine own, after that I have been as well entreated of the
Damsels, as I am minded to entreat the^, if at any time I may have them in my
power, to render and to do the like unto them. This is it my Lords, that
causes me to wish and desire to have you as many as ye be in my hands, as I
think it shall happen, if the prophecies of my Gods deceive me not: for I
find by them, and ye, if ye think it good, do remember, that shortly the
forces of the fronters and borders shall through a certain ambushmente destroy
the house of Greece, and that the brave Lions of the king Licbrastron shall be
brought under, and the strength of their claws effeblished, until the Lord of
Russia set them again at liberty, by the obscure and dark clouds of his
knowledge, to his great glory, and to the land of him that shall cause them to
enjoy that clemency, for the reward of the rigor that is past: and
considering this war, I will send you peace, without the which it is
impossible to prepare the thing that is necessary for an army.

A temerarious Letter from Bruzarte king of Russia to the Princes of Greece,
threatening them destruction and ruin. In the 12. Book, and the.100. Chapter.
DOn Bruzarte king of Russia, confederate with a hundred and threescore kings
of the Orient, by the counsel and divine sufferance of our sovereign Gods
disdayning at and for so many offenses that have been done unto them by the
house of Greece, having so often times moysted the fields with the blood of
their servant, and set fire in their tents, they have now gathered their
army together: because that the smoke of the burned temples, as it were out of
a censer, is ascended before their divine Majesty's, to require vengeance: and
it is paste and gone into their most sovereign and heavenly Empire. Therefore
we have ordained after the power granted unto us by the Gods, that all the
house of Greece shall pass by the edge of the sword, and all their Cities
shall be burnte with our flames, that within a while after the Russians may
cause them to be edified and builded again to the great glory of their
virtue, and to the immortal glory of our Gods: and calling upon their name, we
send you this arest signed, not aduertising you otherwise of the day, nor of
the hour^ when we shall put it in execution, and because ye shall give entier
credence unto it, we have signed it with our signs, and sealed it with our
royal arms, and have sent them to you by these so very little creatures, as
they shall be great that ought to execute it. And hitherto we pray our Gods to
keep you in health, for your greater sickness, assuring you that for a short
peace ye shall have a long war, in the which we promise to cover the great
seas, and the large champion fields with our armies, and to make them red with
your blood.

A Letter of Amadis de Gaul, and of the Emperors Esplandian and Amadis of
Greece, to all their friends and vassals. In the.13. book, and the first
Chapter.
WE Amadis de Gaul, the King and the Emperors Esplandian and Amadis of Greece,
with all the Kings, Princes, and Knights assembled in the City of
Constantinople, to all our friends and vassals greeting. We let you wit that
the enemy of mankind has inflamed the heart of the king of Russia, to come
against our Imperial City, with an infinite and an incredible army of an
hundred and threescore crowned Kings, besides a number of Califes, Souldans,
and Tamberlanes, meaning to destroy and subvert the same, and utterly to
extinguishe therewith the name of Jesus Christ, and thereupon to advance and
set up their false Prophet Mahumet, as by a letter or writing of defiance to us
in that behalf sent more plainly appears. And for that you may understand
the great importance of these affairs, and in what danger the key of
Christianity stands, we pray and beseech you our good and dear friends,
and command and firmly enjoin you our sub^ects and vassals, that you do
make all the diligence that possibly you can, to present your selves with all
your forces, within our said City. And also that you do show such faith and
fidelity to this Knight the bearer hereof, as you would do to our own
persons.

The end of the extract of Amadis of France.
Imprinted at London by Henry Synneman^ for Thomas Hacket.


