THE COUNTESS OF LINCOLNES NVRSERIE.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and JAMES SHORT Printers to the famous
University. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and approved virtuous LA: BRIGET COUNTESS OF
LINCOLN.
FOR the better expressing and keeping in memory my Love, and your Worthiness;
I do offer unto your LA: the first work of mine that ever came in Print;
because your rare example, has given an excellent approbation to the matter
contained in this Book; for you have passed by all excuses, and have ventured
upon, and do go on with that loving act of a loving mother; in giving the
sweet milk of your own breasts, to your own child; wherein you have gone
before the greatest number of honorable Ladies of your place, in these latter
times. But I wish many may follow you, in this good work, which I desire, to
further by my kind persuasion. And such women as will vouchsafe to read this
little short treatise; may be put in mind of a duty, which all mothers are
bound to perform; and I shall be glad if any will consider, and put in
practice, that which is both natural and comfortable. I hope they will at the
least commend with me such as do this good deed, and no more speak
scornefully of that which is worthy of great praise; and for my part I think
it an honor unto you, to do that which has proved you to be full of care to
please God, and of natural affection, and to be well stored with humility,
and patience, all which are highly to be praised; to give praise to any person
or thing deserving praise, I dare do it, and for this lovely action of yours I
can with much thankfulness praise God, for all his gracious gifts of grace
and Nature, whereby he has enabled you, to do the same: desiring also with my
heart, that you may ever, and every way honor God, who has honored you many
ways, above many women; and I rejoice, that I can bear witness, that God
has adorned you with fair tokens of his love and mercy to your soul: As the
practice of true Christian religion; dedicating your self to Gods service;
answerablenesse to all holy commands of the holy God, which are Testimonies of
Gods love, and does challenge a very great esteem from me, amongst the rest,
that can truly judge and rightly discern what is best; I am full of thoughts
in this kind, or of this matter: yet I say no more but this, Go on and
prosper, Hold fast all that is good, Trust in God for strength to grow and
continue in faithful obedience to his glorious Majesty; And I will not cease to
entreat the Lord of Heaven, to power abundantly all Blessings of heaven and
earth upon you, and your Children, as they increase in number.

Your LA: in the best and fastest love, ELIZABETH LINCOLN.

TO THE COURTEOUS, chiefly most Christian, Reader.
THE General Consent of too many mothers in an unnatural practice, (most
Christian Reader) has caused one of the Noblest and Fairest hands in this land
to set pen to paper. As ashamed to see her sex farther degenerate; desirous for
the glory thereof, to have all both rightly know, and answer their kind, has
made Honor it self stoop to these pains; which now she sends thee to
pervse. Three things easily Inuit to Read what to view is offered. Eminency, or
Interest in the Author. Rarity in the handled Matter; Breuity in the quick
dispatch. These three meet in this won. The Author so Eminent in Honor; thou
can hardly be anciently Honorable; and not be interested in her Honors
acquaintance; scarcely not Alliance. Next for the Rareness, a peculiar tract
of this subject, I believe, is not in thine hands. Lastly its so brief, as I
am persuaded, it smoothly gliding thee along in the reading, Thy sorrow will
be, it lands thee so soon. What may give satisfaction to a Reader, let me
acquaint thee next, is here to be found. These are two things; Usefulness of
the subject; Fulness for the prosecution. If method and soundness can make
Full, this is Full. What, not alone Confirmation vshering in the Assertion, but
Refutation for vshering out Objections can do to making Sound and Through,
this is Such. The Accommodation to these particulars (Gentle Reader) I leave to
thy self, least I become tedious whilst am honoring Breuity. The pay, assure
thy self, will be larger then the promise. The Wine much better then the
Bush. This one word, and I Will stand out of the gate, thou may go in. If
Noble who read, ( likeness is Mother and Nurse of liking) this comes from
Nobility; Approve the rather, and practice. If meaner; blush to deny, what
Honor becomes speaker to persuade to, president to lead the way to. And so I
either humbly take my leave; or bid farewell.

Blessed is the land where Sons of Nobles reign.
Blessed is the land where Nobles teach their train.
To Church for bliss Kings, Queens, should Nurses be.
To state its bliss great Dames Babes nurse to see.
Go then Great book of Nursing plead the Cause.
Teach Highest, low'st, all, it is Gods and Natures laws.
THOMAS LODGE.
THE COUNTESS OF Lincolnes Nurserie.
BEcause it has pleased God to bless me with many children, and so caused me
to observe many things falling out to mothers, and to their children; I thought
good to open my mind concerning a special matter belonging to all
childe-bearing women, seriously to consider of: and to manifest my mind the
better, even to write of this matter, so far as God shall please to direct
me; in sum, the matter I mean, Is the duty of nursing due by mothers to
their own children.

In setting down whereof, I will first show, that every woman ought to nurse
her own child; and secondly, I will endeavor to answer such objections, as
are used to be cast out against this duty to disgrace the same.

The first point is easily performed. For it is the express ordinance of God
that mothers should nurse their own children, and being his ordinance they are
bound to it in conscience. This should stop the mouths of all replyers, for
God is most wise, Isa.31.2.
and therefore must needs know what is fittest and best for us to do: and to
prevent all foolish fears, or shifts, we are given to understand that he is
also All sufficient, Gen.17.1.
and therefore infinitely able to bless his own ordinance, and to afford us
means in our selves (as continual experience confirms) toward the
observance thereof.

If this (as it ought) be granted, then how venterous are those women that
dare venture to do otherwise, and so to refuse, and by refusing to despise that
order, which the most wise and allmighty God has appointed, and in steed
thereof to choose their own pleasures? Oh what peace can there be to these
women's consciences, unless through the darkness of their understanding they
judge it no disobedience?

And then they will drive me to prove that this nursing, and nourishing of
their own children in their own bosoms is Gods ordinance; They are very
willful, or very ignorant, if they make a question of it. For it is proved
sufficiently to be their duty, both by Gods word, and also by his works.

By his word it is proved, first by Examples, namely the example of Eve. For
who suckled her sons Cain, Abel, Seth, etc. but her self? Which she did not
only of mere necessity, because yet no other woman was created; but
especially because she was their mother, and so saw it was her duty: and
because she had a true natural affection, which moved her to do it gladly.
Next the example of Sarah the wife of Abraham; For she both gave her son
Isaac suck, Gen.21.7.
as doing the duty commanded of God: And also took great comfort, and delight
therein, as in a duty well pleasing to her self; whence she spoke of it, as
of an action worthy to be named in her holy rejoicing. Now if Sarah, so great a
Princess, did nurse her own child, why should any of us neglect to do the
like, except (which God forbid) we think scorn to follow her, whose daughters
it is our glory to be, and which we be only upon this condition, that we
imitate her well-doing. 1.Pet.3.6.
Let us look therefore to our worthy Pattern, noting withal, that she put
her self to this work when she was very old, and so might the better have
excused her self, then we younger women can: being also more able to hire, and
keep a nurse, then any of us. But why is she not followed by most in the
practice of this duty? Even because they want her virtue, and piety. This want
is the common hinderance to this point of the woman's obedience; for this want
makes them want love to Gods precepts, want love to his doctrine, and like
step-mothers, want due love to their own children.

But now to another worthy example, namely that excellent woman Hannah,
1.Sam.1.23.
who having after much affliction of mind obtained a son of God, whom she
vowed unto God; she did not put him to another to nurse, but nursed him her
own self until she had weaned him, and carried him to be consecrate unto
the Lord: As well knowing that this duty of giving her child suck, was so
acceptable to God, as for the cause thereof she did not sin in staying with
it at home from the yearly sacrifice: but now women, especially of any place,
and of little grace, do not hold this duty acceptable to God, because it is
unacceptable to themselves: as if they would have the Lord to like, and
dislike, according to their vain lusts.

To proceed, take notice of one example more, that is, of the blessed Virgin:
as her womb bare our blessed Savior, so her papps gave him suck. Now who
shall deny the own mothers suckling of their own children: to be their duty,
since every godly matrone has walked in these steps before them: Eve the
mother of all the living; Sarah the mother of all the faithful; Hannah so
graciously heard of God; Mary blessed among women, and called blessed of all
ages. And who can say but that the rest of holy women mentioned in the holy
Scriptures did the like; since no doubt that speech of that noble Dame, saying,
who would have said to Abraham that Sarah should have given children suck? was
taken from the ordinary custom of mothers in those less corrupted times.
Gen.21.7.


And so much for proof of this office, and duty to be Gods ordinance, by his
own Word according to the argument of Examples: I hope I shall likewise prove
it by the same word from plain Precepts. 1.Tim.5.14.
First from that Precept, which wills the younger women to marry, and to
Bear children, that is, not only to Bear them in the womb, and to bring the^
forth; but also to Bear them on their knee, in their arms, Ver.10.
and at their breasts: for this Bearing a little before is called nourishing,
and bringing up: and to enforce it the better upon women's consciences, it is
numbered as the first of the good works, for which godly women should be well
reported of. And well it may be the first, because if holy Ministers, or other
Christians do hear of a good woman to be brought to bed, and her child to be
living; their first question usually is, whether she her self give it suck,
yea, or no? if the answer be she does, then they commend her: if the answer be
she does not, then they are sorry for her.

And thus I come to a second Precept. I pray you, who that judges aright; does
not hold the suckling of her own child the part of a true mother, of an
honest mother, of a just mother, of a sincere mother, of a mother worthy of
love, of a mother deserving good report, of a virtuous mother, of a mother
winning praise for it? All this is assented to by any of good understanding.
Therefore this is also a Precept, as for other duties, so for This of mothers
to their children; which says, whatsoever things are true, Philip.4.8.
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things be worthy of love, whatsoever things be of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these
things, these things do and the God of peace shall be with you.

So far for my promise, to prove by the word of God, that it is his ordinance
that women should nurse their own children: now I will endeavor to prove it
by his works: First by his works of judgment; if it were not his ordinance
for mothers to give their children suck, it were no judgment to bereave the^
of their milk, but it is specified to be a great judgment to bereave them
hereof, and to give them dry breasts, therefore it is to be gathered, even from
hence, that it is his ordinance, since to deprive them of means to do it, is
a punishment of them.

I add to this the work that God works in the very nature of mothers, which
proves also that he has ordained that they should nurse their own children:
for by his secret operation, the mothers affection it so knit by natures law to
her tender babe, as she finds no power to deny to suckle it, no not when she
is in hazard to lose her own life, by attending on it; for in such a case it
is not said, let the mother fly, and leave her infant to the peril, as if she
were dispensed with: but only it is said woe to her, as if she were to be
pitied, that for nature to her child, she must be unnatural to her self: now
if any then being even at liberty, and in peace, with all plenty, shall deny to
give suck to their own children, they go against nature: and show that God
has not done so much for the^ as to work any good, Lam.7.3.
no not in their nature, but left them more savage then the Dragons, and as
cruel to their little ones as the Ostriches.

Now another work of God, proving this point is the work of his provision,
for every kind to be apt, and able to nourish their own fruit: there is no
beast that feeds their young with milk, but the Lord, even from the first
ground of the order of nature; Grow, and multiply; has provided it of milk
to suckle their own young, which every beast takes so naturally unto, as if
another beast come toward their young to offer the office of a Damme unto it,
they show according to their fashion, a plain dislike of it: as if nature did
speak in them, and say it is contrary to Gods order in nature, commanding each
kind to increase, and multiply in their own bodies, and by their own
breasts, not to bring forth by one Damme, and to bring up by another: but it is
his ordinance that every kind should both bring forth, and also nurse its own
fruit.

Much more should this work of God prevail to persuade women, made as man in
the image of God, and therefore should be ashamed to be put to school to
learn good nature of the unreasonable creature. In us also, as we know by
experience, God provides milk in our breasts against the time of our
childrens birth, and this he has done ever since it was said to us also,
Increase, and multiply, so that this work of his provision shows that he
tieth us likewise to nourish the children of our own womb, with our own
breasts, even by the order of nature: yea it shows that he so cares for, and
regards little children even from the womb, that he would have them nursed
by those that in all reason will look to them with the kindest affection,
namely their mothers; and in giving them milk for it, he does plainly tell
them that herequires it.

Oh consider, how comes our milk? is it not by the direct providence of God?
Why prouides he it, but for the child? The mothers then that refuse to nurse
their own children, do they not despise Gods providence? Do they not deny
Gods will? Do they not as it were say, I see, O God, by the means thou have
put into me, that thou would have me nurse the child thou have given me, but
I will not do so much for thee. Oh impious, and impudent unthankfulness; yea
monstrous unnaturalness, both to their own natural fruit borne so near their
breasts, and fed in their own wombes, and yet may not be suffered to suck
their own milk.

And this unthankfulness, and unnaturalness is oftener the sin of the
Higher, and the richer sort, then of the meaner, and poorer, except some nice
and proud idle dames, who will imitate their betters, till they make their
poor husbands beggars. And this is one hurt which the better rank do by
their ill example; egg, and imbolden the lower ones to follow them to their
loss: were it not better for Us greater persons to keep Gods ordinance, and
to show the meaner their duty in our good example? I am sure we have more
helps to perform it, and have fewer probable reasons to allege against it,
then women that live by hard labor, and painful toil. If such mothers as
refuse this office of love, and of nature to their children, should hereafter
be refused, despised, and neglected of those their children, were they not
justly required according to their own unkind dealing? I might say more in
handling this first point of my promise; but I leave the larger, and learneder
discourse hereof unto men of art, and learning: only I speak of so much as I
read, and know in my own experience, which if any of my sex, and condition
do receive good by, I am glad: if they scorn it, they shall have the reward of
scorners. I write in modesty, and can reap no disgrace by their immodest
folly.

And so I come to the last part of my promise; which is to answer objections
made by diverse against this duty of mothers to their children.

First it is objected that Rebeckah had a nurse, and that therefore her mother
did not give her suck of her own breasts, and so good women, in the first
ages, did not hold the^ to this office of nursing their own children. To this
I answer; that if her mother had milk, and health, and yet did put this duty
from her to another, it was her fault, and so proves nothing against me. But
it is manifest that she that Rebeckah calls her nurse, was called so, either
for that she most tended her while her mother suckled her: or for that she
weaned her: or for that during her nonage, and childhood, she did minister to
her continually such good things as delighted, and nourished her up. For to any
one of these the name of a nourse is fitly given: whence a good wife is called
her husbands nourse: and that Rebeckahs nourse was only such a one, Gen.24.61.
appears, because afterward she is not named a nourse, but a maid, saying:
Then Rebeckah rose, and her maids; now maids give not suck out of their
breasts, never any virgin, or honest maid gave suck, but that blessed one from
an extraordinary, and blessed power.

Secondly it is objected, that it is troublesome; that it is noisome to ones
clothes; that it makes one look old, etc. All such reasons are uncomely, and
unchristian to be objected: and therefore unworthy to be answered, they argue
vnmotherly affection, idleness, desire to have liberty to gadd from home,
pride, foolish finenesse, lust, wantonness, and the like evils. Ask Sarah,
Hannah, the blessed virgin, and any modest loving mother, what trouble they
accounted it to give their little ones suck: behold most nursing mothers and
they be as clean and sweet in their clothes, and carry their age, and hold
their beauty, as well as those that suckle not: and most likely are they so to
do; because keeping Gods Ordinance, they are sure of Gods Blessing: and it
has been observed in some women that they grew more beautiful, and better
favored, by very nursing their own children.

But there are some women that object fear: saying that they are so weak, and
so tender, that they are afraid to venture to give their children suck, least
they endanger their health thereby. Of these, I demand, why then they did
venture to marry, and so to bear children; and if they say they could not
choose, and that they thought not that marriage would impair their health: I
answer, that for the same reasons they should set themselves to nurse their
own children, because they should not choose but do what God would have them
to do: and they should believe that this work will be for their health also,
seeing it is ordinary with the Lord to give good stomach, health, and strength
to almost all mothers that take this pains with their children.

One answer more to all the objections that use to be made against giving
children suck, is this, that now the hardness, to effect this matter, is much
removed by a late example of a tender young Lady, and you may all be
encouraged to follow after, in that wherein she has gone before you, and so
made the way more easy, and more hopeful by that which she finds possible
and comfortable by Gods blessing, and no offense to her Lord nor her self:
she might have had as many doubts, and lets, as any of you, but she was
willing to try how God would enable her, and he has given her good success,
as I hope he will do to others that are willing to trust in God for his help.

Now if any reading these few lines return against me, that it may be I my
self have given my own children suck: and therefore am bolder, and more busy
to meddle in urging this point, to the end to insult over, and to make them to
be blamed that have not done it. I answer, that whether I have, or have not
performed this my bounden duty, I will not deny to tell my own practice. I
know and acknowledge that I should have done it, and having not done it; it
was not for want of will in my self, but partly I was ouerruled by another
authority, and partly deceived by somes ill counsel, and partly I had not so
well considered of my duty in this motherly office, as since I did, when it was
too late for me to put it in execution. Wherefore being pricked in heart for my
vndutifullnesse, this way I study to redeem my peace, first by repentance
toward God, humbly and often craving his pardon for this my offense: secondly
by studying how to show double love to my children, to make them amends for
neglect of this part of love to them, when they should have hung on my breasts,
and have been nourished in mine own bosom: thirdly by doing my endeavor to
prevent many christian mothers from sining in the same kind, against our most
loving, and gracious God.

And for this cause I add unto my performed promise, this short exhortation:
namely I beseech all godly women to remember, how we elder ones are commanded
to instruct the younger, to love their children, now therefore love them so as
to do this office to them when they are borne, more gladly for love sake, then
a strunger, who bore them not, shall do for lucre sake. Also I pray you to set
no more so light by Gods blessing in your own breasts, which the holy Spirit
ranketh with other excellent blessings; if it be unlawful to trample under
feet a cluster of grapes, in which a little wine is found; then how unlawful
is it to destroy and dry up those breasts, in which your own child (and
perhaps one of Gods very elect, to whom to be a noursing father, is a Kings
honor; and to whom to be a noursing mother, is a Queens honor) might find
food of sincere milk, even from Gods immediate providence, until it were
fitter for stronger meat? I do know that the Lord may deny some women, either
to have any milk in their breasts at all, or to have any passage for their
milk, or to have any health, or to have a right mind: and so they may be
let from this duty, by want, by sickness, by lunacy, etc. But I speak not
to these: I speak to you, Whose consciences witness against you, that you
cannot justly allege any of those impediments.

Do you submit your selves, to the pain and trouble of this ordinance of God?
trust not other women, whom wages hyres to do it, better then your selves,
whom God, and nature ties to do it. I have found by grievous experience, such
dissembling in nurses, pretending sufficiency of milk, when indeed they had
too much scarcity; pretending willingness, towardness, wakefulnesse, when
indeed they have been most wilful, most froward, and most slothful, as I
fear the death of one or two of my little Babes came by the defalt of their
nurses. Of all those which I had for eighteen children, I had but two which
were thoroughly willing, and careful: diverse have had their children miscarry
in the nurses hands, and are such mothers (if it were by the nurses
carelessness) guiltless? I know not how they should, since they will shut
them out of the arms of nature, and leave them to the will of a stranger; yea
to one that will seem to estrange her self from her own child, to give suck
to the nurse-child: This she may feign to do upon a covetous composition, but
she frets at it in her mind, if she have any natural affection.

Therefore be no longer at the trouble, and at the care to hire others to do
your own work: be not so unnatural to thrust away your own children: be
not so hardy as to venture a tender Babe to a less tender heart: be not
accessory to that disorder of causing a poorer woman to banish her own infant,
for the entertaining of a richer woman's child, as it were, bidding her vnloue
her own to love yours. We have followed Eve in transgression, let us follow
her in obedience. When God laid the sorrows of conception, of breeding of
bringing forth, and of bringing up her children upon her, and so upon us in her
loins, did she reply any word against? Not a word; so I pray you all mine
own Daughters, and others that are still childbearing reply not against the
duty of suckling them, when God has sent you them.

Indeed I see some, if the wether be wet, or cold; if the way be foul; if the
Church be far off, I see they are so coy, so nice, so lukewarm, they will not
take pains for their own souls. alas, no marvel if these will not be at
trouble, and pain to nourish their childrens bodies, but fear God, be
diligent to serve him; approve all his ordinances; seek to please him; account
it no trouble, or pain to do any thing that has the promise of his blessing:
and then you will, no doubt, do this good, laudable, natural, loving duty to
your children. If yet you be not satisfied, inquire not of such as refuse to
do this: consult not with your own conceit advise not with flatterers: but
ask counsel of sincere, and faithful Preachers. If you be satisfied; then
take this with you, to make you do it cheerfully. Think always, that having
the child at your breast, and having it in your arms, you have Gods blessing
there. For children are Gods blessings. Think again how your Babe crying for
your breast, sucking heartily the milk out of it, and growing by it, is the
Lords own instruction, every hour, and every day, that you are suckling it,
instructing you to show that you are his newborn Babes, by your earnest
desire after his word; and the sincere doctrine thereof, and by your daily
growing in grace and goodness thereby, so shall you reap pleasure, and
profit. Again, you may consider, that when your child is at your breast, it is
a fit occasion to move your heart to pray for a blessing upon that work; and
to give thanks for your child, and for ability and freedom unto that, which
many a mother would have done and could not; who have tried and ventured their
health, and taken much pains, and yet have not obtained their desire. But they
that are fitted every way for this commendable act, have certainly great cause
to be thankful: and I much desire that God may have glory and praise for every
good work, and you much comfort, that do seek to honor God in all things.

Amen.
FINIS.

