A Table of Humane Passions.

With their Causes and Effects.

Written by ye Reverend Father in God F. N. Coeffeteau, Bishop of Dardania,
Councellor to ye French King in his Councels of Estate, Suffragane and
Administrator general of ye Bishopric of Metz.

Translated into English by Edw: Grimeston Sergiant at Arms.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1621

^^easure.


Pain


Hope.


Fear.




TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE, Marquess of Buckingham, High Admiral of
England, etc.
MOST worthy to be most honored Lord; All outward honors and accomplishments of
height, already most abundantly and blessedly adorning you; I thrice humbly
submit to your Lordship, (in as much as this little Volume may contain) as
ample means to all inward addition and illustration: In teaching all Manly and
Lordly government of those inward Passions and perturbations that are evermore
excited by outvvard Pleasures, and all their storme-rockt soothings of security
and license. For no more does the Sun and Wind; exhale and blovv up
pasttemper, Vapors and Tempests; then the graces, and amplifications of Kings;
cause aestures and vprores of affection and Passion* Yet is there not any more
sencible variety of medicine and cure, for all bodily wounds and maladies: then
there are intelligible and reasonable repressions and setlings of all the
unquiet, and raging ouerflowes of our Spirits and minds. Neither is there any
so deadly danger laid open in the one, as abides hid in the other. For as that
tempest is more dangerous that suffers not a ship to repair to her haven, then
that which sustaines not she should sail at all* So most difficult are the
minds storms, that let a man to contain himself; nor suffer him* to quiet
and settle his disturbed reason. And therefore all men floting on the
high-going seas of Fortune, if destitute of Pylots, Cables, and Anchors; and
moved only with tumultuous and unbounded errors, in uncertain and dangerous
courses; may for a time perhaps in safety and pleasure enjoy, and extend them:
But at length (as it were suddenly ravished by the necks) they are driven
helplesly headlong on the more horrible ship-wrackes. Since then your Lordships
disposition to all goodness is in nature most sweet, most flexible; vouchsafe
ear a little to artificial and experimenc't aduices, that may rectify,
accomplish and establish you in all the heights of your honors. Wherein my
humble and poor endeavors obtaining their desired ends; I shall hold my self
happy, and rest in all serviceable devotion,

Your Lordships evermore most submissiuely vowed* Ed: Grimeston.

Of Humane Passions. The Preface.
AS Provident Nature has prescribed certain ends to all the Creatures of this
Universe, whom She has clothed with certain qualities and allurements fit to
inflame them with their Love; So there is not any one in this world but does
endeavor by all means to attain unto those ends which are propounded. As the
Sun having bin placed in the firmament, to contribute to the birth and
preservation of Beasts and Plants; runs continually from one Hemisphere to
the other, to pour out the beams of his influence and light over all. So
after his example, there is not any other cause in all this great World, but is
careful to seek and pursue her end, according to the motions which Nature
has ingrafted. But to make them c^peable, it was necessary that the same
Nature which has prescribed them their ends, should also give them as it were
two wings to raise them up: That is to say, it was needful she should impart
unto them the knowledge, and ingraf^ in them the inclination and desire to
pursue them. Desire alone were not sufficient, for that is fashi^ned in the
Appetite; which is a blind power, and requires some light to guide and conduct
it in its motions; Even as they say the Whale, which has a weak and heavy
sight, has need of a guide to conduct it through the waves of the Sea, lest
that this great and weighty mass which she draws after her, should strike
against some rock and be crushed in pieces. Neither were knowledge alone
sufficient, for that it proceeds from a faculty which being borne to give
light, does necessarily presuppose another power, which does receive the beams
of her light, and as we may say, suffers it self to be guided by that light.
As for example, to cause the King (being incited by the glory of his Ancestors,
or induced by the greatness of his courage) to undertake the sack of
Constantinople, or to repl^nt the Cross^ in Palestina; it were not sufficient
that he knew where Constantinople stood, or in what part of the world Palestina
were; but besides all this it were needful, that with this knowledge the heat
and ardor to carry him to so glorious a Conquest should breed a desire. As in
old time to thrust on Alexander to undertake the voyage of Persia, or of the
Indies, it was not only requisite this Prince should have some knowledge of
that st^tely Empire and of those rich Provinces; But it was also necessary his
generosity should beget in him a passion and will to conquer them. So as no man
imbraceth any design whatsoever, until that knowledge be united with desire,
and desire joined unto knowledge. In this manner then if things knew their
ends and did not desire them, or if they desired them without the knowledge,
they could not be drawn to endeavor to get them: For as much as through the
want of those helps, they should be in danger to labor in vain, and to lose
all the pains of their pursuites. So as to effect it they had need of
knowledge and desire. The proofs hereof are seen in all the Creatures which
make a part of this Universal world. For leaving apart the Angels of heaven,
whose actions show sufficiently that their substance is endued with an
understanding full of knowledge, and a will capable to frame diverse desires; if
we will fix our eyes upon visible nature, we shall find that there is not any
Creature, not only among those that have life, but even among those that have
no souls, in the motions and course of whose actions this truth does not
appear and demonstrate it self plainly. It is true, that in things which are
insensible and without life, it is not necessary that the knowledge of their
ends should remain in themselves, as the desires and inclinations to attain
unto them do reside; but it suffices that they be guided and conducted by a
cause conjoined to their actions. And to return to our last example, as it was
necessary (to draw Alexander to undertake the voyage of Asia and the Indies) he
should have knowledge of the Provinces, yet he might borrow this knowledge from
those which had seen them, and observed them* even as blind men, who led by
their guides go where their affairs do call them; even so, although that
natural things which of themselves are not endued with any knowledge, besides
the inclination which they have unto their end, have yet some need to know it,
to the end they may affect it and seek it; yet having a desire* it imports not
whether the knowledge be precisely in themselves, or that some other cause
supplies this defect, and insinuates it self into this action to guide it. The
reason whereof is, that although they be deprived of knowledge, yet it hinders
not the force of their motions; for that they are united to that great
intelligence which knows all things, and cannot err in her knowledge, but
guides all the natural causes to their ends by her wise providence. But these
things have always need of knowledge and desire, to put them into action,
although that in regard of knowledge it is not absolutely necessary it reside
in them, but it suffices that it be imparted unto them by the influence and
assistance of a more eminent cause. As for those which have life, it may be
plainly observed in the course of their lives. But we must remember that the
soul being the form of living things, and natural forms having this in
particular, that the more Noble contains the perfection of that which is less
Noble, as a quadrangle comprehendes with a certain eminency, all that enters
into the composition of a Triangle; and as the forms of beasts contain the
forms of the Elements; It follows that there being three degrees of Souls;
that is to say, that which gives life, which is the less perfect; that which
gives sense; which is the second rank, and the Reasonable which is the noblest
of all; this Reasonable soul which is peculiar only to Man, contains all the
powers and perfections of the other, and can effect as much as all the rest
together. By reason whereof man has a Vegetative soul, which is common with
plants; he has the sensitive, which he has common with bruit heasts; But he
alone is in possession of the Reasonable soul, whereby he has nothing common
with the rest of the Creatures. After this, either of these souls has a
number of powers befitting the operations which must arise. The powers of the
Vegetative soul are principally those which nourish, which contribute to the
growing and increase, and which serve to Generation: And those have other
powers for instruments to their actions, as the power to draw, the power to
retain, the power to expel the excrements, the power to digest the
nourishment, and others which Philosophers assign unto them.

Moreover, there is a power which is as it were the Queen of all the rest, to
whose command and conduct they refer all their actions: And that is the power
of the natural Appetite, the which (as we have said) is one of those two
things necessary to accomplish the actions of Nature. According unto these
Laws we see that the power we call Attractiue, draws the nourishment unto
her, for that the Natural Appetite does press and command her; and in like
manner the power which they call Expulsive, does cast forth and expel those
things which the same Natural Appetite does abhor; and so of the other Powers
which are ordained to diverse ends. But for that the Appetite which is blind
and void of all Knowledge, is not sufficient in Vegetative things to exercise
their action, but withal it is requisite that they be accompanied with
Knowledge; it therefore happens that the Vegetative soul being not so Noble
that among all her powers, there is not any one endued with Knowledge: the
universal Nature which prouides for all, supplies this defect, and conducts by
her Light the inclination of Vegetative substances to their ends, and by the
same means guides all the other powers which follow her motions in their
actions. So as Nature knowing the substance fitting and proper for the
Nourishment, shows it and instructs the Natural Appetite, and ordaines that
it shall be drawn and disgested, and converted into Nourishment for the
preservation of the Vegetable Indiuidue; and the like may be said of the other
actions; wherein doubtless livings things diff^r not much from those that have
no life, And we must not object that Plants seem to be endued with Knowledge,
for that they can distinguish a Iuic^ which is proper for them, from that which
is pernicious, the which seems to be a mark of Knowledge; for although there
were Pilosophers which did a^tribute unto Plants a feeling of things, which
they said was less pure and less active then that of Creat^^es: Yet it is
most certain that the Nature of the Vegetative soul is too earthly, to be
fit for the functions of the Senses, which require oth^^ Organs then those of
the Plants. And therefore although they draw unto them good Juice, and reject
the bad, it proceeds not from any Knowledge wherewith they are endued, but from
their Natural virtues* and properties, guided by that Sovereign Intelligence
which disperseth her care over all the Creatures how base and abject soever: And
it is also by her motion that the same Plants fly their Contraries, as the Vine
shunnes the Bay tree; and that they show such grace and beauty in their works,
as we see in the Spring time; So as all these things bind us not to believe*
that they are endued with Knowledge.

But let us return to our discourse, and (leaving the Vegetative soul) ascend
a degree higher, and come to the Sensitive. This as the more Noble has in her
self the possession of Knowledge and has no need to borrow it, like unto the
Vegetative soul, (...) things without Life. Moreover she has three kinds of
Powers, that is to say, the fa^ulty to know, the faculty to desire and the
moving power. B^ the moving power, I vnder^stand that which executes the
motion, from one place to another, as it is commanded and ordained by the
faculty where the Desire is framed, after that it is enlightened and guided by
Knowledge.

The Knowing powers are of two sorts, that is to say, the Exterior and the
Interior. The Exterior are the five senses of Nature, as Seeing, Hearing,
Smelling, Tasting, and Touching; the which as messengers (...) to the Interior
powers indu^d with Knowledge, whatsoe^er we can comprehend and desire. These
Exterior powers (...) the senses answers in some ^^rt to the bodies of the
Vni^erse, whereof they comprehend (...) Colors, the Sounds, the ^melles, the
Sauors, the Cold, ^^e Heat, and the other natural qualities wherewith they are
clothed. The Interior powers capable of Knowledge are three, whereof the first
is the Common sense, the which is called by that name, for that it is as it
were the Center, to which do flow the forms which are sent unto it from the
other senses: So as from the Eyes it receives the forms of Colors which they
have seen: From the Hearing the forms of Sounds which have touched the Ear;
from Smelling the forms of Sauors which it has sented; from the Tongue, the
form of Sweetness or Bitterness which it has tasted; and from the body the
forms o^ those things which fall under the sense of Touching. And (...) not
only receives* the forme^ which the other senses send vn^to it, but it also
Compares them, Discernes them, and Judges of them; the which the particular
senses cannot do, for that they are limited and tied to their particular
objects, and never exceed the bounds thereof.

For the Eyes are only employed to judge of the difference of Colors, as
betwixt White and Black, and never seek to ^eddle with that which concerns
the Sound, Smelling, or the other Qualities which have nothing common with
Colors. The Common sense then is necessary to judge thus generally of all the
objects of the other Senses, that by means thereof the Creature may
distinguish that which is healthful from that is hurtful.

But to the end the Knowledge, which this sense does gather from the Objects*
whose forms are presented unto it by the Exterior senses, be not lost by their
absence, it sends all it has gathered Compared and Distinguished, to another
Power merely Knowing, which is called the Imaginatiue; as that wherein are
graven the forms of things which are offered unto it by the Common sense, to
the end the Knowledge may remain after they are vanished away. Besides this
Imaginatiue, there is another power proper to preserve things, which is the
memory, the which although it be not directly ordained to Judge but rather to
serve as a Storehouse and Treasury to shut up, and to preserve the forms of
things which are imprinted in her; yet for that she does continually represent
unto the Common sense the forms which are consigned unto her, she may well be
said also to help to Knowledge. These then are the three Interior powers
capable of Knowledge, to the which although that some add others, yet I will
hold with their opinion who not willing to multiply the powers without
necessity, reject them as superfluous, seeing the Imaginatiue power suffices
to do all the offices which are attributed unto them. There are then in the
Sensitive soul eight knowing faculties, five External, and three Internal as
we have showed.

As for the Appetitiue powers where the desires are formed, there are but two,
that is to say, the Concupiscible or desiring power, and the Irascible or Angry
power: The one of which without the other suffices not for the health of the
Creatures. For if the Lion had no other inclination, nor any other spur of
desire then to run after meat fit for his nourishment, doubtless the least
difficulty and obstacle he should encounter, would hinder the pursuit of his
prey; for that he should be without any desire to surmount this difficulty,
and so he should not be able to preserve his life for want of nourishment.

In like manner men would be daunted for the least crosses they should find
in the pursuit of any good thing, or in the avoiding of evil; and although
the danger were not great nor urgent, yet would they not dare to oppose
themselves and encounter it: And so they would yield to these difficulties, and
not pursue the objects of their desires, how great soever their inclination
were to seek them. Wherefore provident Nature to prevent this inconvenience,
besides the other powers, has given unto the Sensitive soul two Appetites,
that is to say, the Concupiscible and the Irascible; whereof this last, when as
any difficulty arises and opposes it self to the desire of the
Concupiscible, comes presently to succor it; and inflaming the blood, excites
Choler, Hope, Courage, or some other like Passion destinated and ordained to
make him surmount the difficulties which cross the contentment of the Soul.
For that which concerns the powers of the Sensitive soul, there remains none
but the faculty moving from one place to another, which is dispersed and resides
in the sinnewes, Muscles and Ligaments, and which is dispersed over all the
members of the Creature. This Power being commanded by the Appetite, does
presently exercise his office, serving for an instrument to that part of the
blood which for the great subtility and pureness thereof has gotten the name of
Spirit.

To come now to the Reasonable soul, it has two principal Powers, the one
endued with Knowledge, which is the understanding; and the other capable of
Desire, which is the Will; the which being blind as all the Appetites are
naturally, she follows in the pursuit of her objects, the light of the
understanding, by reason whereof she is termed the Intellectual Appetite, but
more properly the Will. The office of our understanding, particularly of that
which we call possible, is to receive, and in receiving to know, and in knowing
to offer unto the will those kinds or forms, which are sent unto it from the
Imagination. It is true, that being a more Noble power then the Sensitive, it
cannot receive those Images and forms, so material, gross and sensible, as
they are of themselves in their particular being, for that they are not
proportionable to the purity and excellency of her condition. By reason whereof
the Philosophers have placed in our souls another power wonderfully Noble,
whose office is to purge and to clothe as it were with a new Luster, all the
Images or forms which are found in the Imagination or fantasy; and by the
means of this Light, to cause those forms which were Material, Sensible, and
Singular, to become so purified from these earthly conditions as they seem
Universal, and so well proportioned to the pureness of our understanding, as
they easily receive the impression. Thus then the powers of all the three
Souls concur in man in regard of the Rational, the which as more Noble then
the Sensitive or Vegetative, comprehends all their powers, and withal adds
many things to their perfection. In the mean time, we must consider that man
has no kind of command, neither over the powers of the Vegetative soul, whose
actions are merely natural; nor over those of the Sensitive soul, which are
destinated to Knowledge, as the Interior and Exterior senses; unless it be by
accident, when as by a resolution of his will; he denies these powers the
means which are necessary to put them in action; but he may well have power
over those of the Sensitive Appetite, which are proper to obey the discourse of
reason, and the command of the Will, as over the Irascible and Concupiscible.

To the end then that amidst the bond of the Intellectual powers with the
Sensitive; and the communication, and correspondency which is betwixt them for
the exercise of their functions, we may the better see how the less Noble,
obey and serve the more Noble, and execute their offices, we must here
represent the form. As soon as the Exterior senses, busied about the Objects
which are proper for them, have gathered the forms of things which come from
without, they carry them to the common sense, the which receives them, judges
of them, and distinguishes them; and then to preserve them in the absence of
their objects, presents them to the Imagination, which having gathered them
together, to the end she may represent them whenever need shall require, she
delivers them to the custody of the Memory; from whence retiring them when
occasion requires, she propounds them unto the Appetite, under the appearance of
things that are pleasing or troublesome, that is to say, under the form of Good
and Evil; and at the same instant the same forms enlightened with the Light of
the understanding, and purged from the sensible and singular conditions, which
they retain in the Imagination, and instead of that which they represented of
particular things, representing them general; they become capable to be
embraced by the understanding; the which under the appearance of things which
are profitable or hurtful, that is to say, under the form of Good and Evil,
represents them unto the Will: the which* being blind referres it self to that
which the understanding proposes unto it: And then as Queen of the powers of
the soul she ordaines what they shall embrace, and what they shall fly as it
pleseth her* whereunto the Sensitive Appetite yielding a prompt obedience to
execute her command from the which it never st^aies, so long as it contains it
self within the bounds and order prescribed by Nature, quickneth all the
powers and passions over which she commands, and sets to work those which are
necessary to that action, and by their means commands the moving power;
dispersed over all the members, to follow or fly, to approach or to recoyle, or
to do any other motion which it requires. And she obeying suddenly if she
be not hindered, moves, the whole body with the Organs which reside in the
parts, and induces them to fly or embrace things according to the command
which she has received.

After this manner Man proceeds in his free operations, if he will observe the
order which he ought. The which I say, for that oftentimes ^ee ouerthrows and
peruerts this order, either by bad education, or by custom, or the organs
being unsound, or for that his will has bad inclination; so as reason cannot
enjoy her power, and subject the Sensual Appetite unto her; but contrariwise
he abandons himself in prey unto this disordered Appetite, and suffers
himself to be transported by his furious motions. So as suddenly when as
fantasy offers to the Appetite, the forms which she receives from the
Senses, under the show of Good or Evil; he without stay to have them judged by
the discourse of understanding, and chosen by the will, comm^nds of himself
the moving power, and makes it to act according to his pleasure. And herein
consistes the disorder which the passions cause in the life of man, which
divert him many times from the laws of Reason. But we have spoken enough
hereof, let us now enter into the subject, and begin by the definition of
passions to know their Nature and Essence.

To his long-lou'd and worthy friend, Mr. Edward Grimeston* Sergeant at Arms;
of his unwearied and honored labors.
SVch is the unequal, and inhumane vice
Of these vile Times, that each man sets his price
On others Labors; And the lasiest Drone
That never drop of honey, of his own
Brought to the public Hiue, distasts all ours
And (in the worlds wit) feeds far worthier Powers.
It Is Noble to be idle; Base to be
Of any Art, Good Mind, or Industry.
Another sort of dull Opinionists,
Consume their stupid lives in learned mists;
Yet would be seen (poor souls) beyond the Sun;
But that like Dolon, in the dark they run,
Other Explorers fearing. And these men
Like Cheaters, foyst in false dice to their Den,
To win men's thoughts of the only truly learnd,
And feed on that conceit, before it is earnd.
To strengthen which, their Marke^s are the Marts
Where sounds and Names of Artsmen, and all Arts
They stuff their windy memories withal;
And then when ere their Creditors shall call
They pay them, with these Tokens, all they owe;
Then, Honest men they are, then all things know.
When all employed in private conference;
They count all rude that are of open brains
Fear to be fools in print, though in their Cells
(In Learned men's vizards) they are little else.
They that for fear of being called fools, hide,
Like hid men more they stir the more are spied,
Whose learnings are as ignorantly applied,
As those illiterate Peripaticke souls,
That all their lives, do naught but measure Poules;
Yet never know how short or long it i^,
More then their lives, or all their idle bliss.
In short, All men that least deseruing^ have,
Men of most merit ever most deprave.
How ever (friend) it is in us must assure
Our outward Acts; and sign their pass secure.
Nor fear to find your Noble pains impeacht,
But write as long as Fox, or Nowell preached*
For when all wizards have their bolts let fly,
There Is no such proof of worth, as Industry.
E merito solers Industria reddat honorem.
George Chapman.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Treaty Of Humane Passions.
CHAP. 1. What Passion is. fol. 1. CHAP. 2. Of the number of Passions. fol. 29.
CHAP. 3. Of the quality of Passions, and whethey they be good or bad. fol. 51.
Of Love, the Preface. fol. 78. CHAP. 1. Of the beginning of Love. fol. 83.
CHAP. 2. Wherein the Essence of Love consists. fol. 103. CHAP. 3. Of the
persons to whom Love extends. fol. 121. CHAP. 4. Of the Effects of Love. fol.
152. CHAP. 5. Of Jealousy, whether it be an effect and sign of Love. fol.
175. CHAP. 1. Of Hatred and Enmity. fol. 184. CHAP. 1. Of Desire and Cupidity,
and of the flight and horror we have of things. fol* 216. CHAP. 1. Of Pleasure
and Delight. fol. 244. CHAP. 1. Of the Effects of Pleasure. fol. 297. CHAP. 1.
Of Grief and Heaviness. fol. 317. CHAP. 2. Of Mercy and Indignation. fol.
354. CHAP. 3. Of Indignation. fol. 375. CHAP. 4. Of Envy and Emulation. fol.
389. CHAP. 1. Of Hardiness and Courage. fol. 411. CHAP. 1. Of Fear or Dread.
fol. 428. CHAP. 1. Of Shame. fol. 473. CHAP. 2. Of the Effects of Shame. 494.
CHAP. 1. Of Hope and Despair. fol. 507. CHAP. 1. Of Choler. fol. 547. CHAP. 2.
Of those against whom we are angry. fol. 575. CHAP. 3. Of the Effects and
remedies of Choler. fol. 598. CHAP. 1. Of Mildness and Gentleness. fol. 633.
CHAP. 1. Of the diverse Passions of men according to their ages and conditions.
fol. 654.
A Table of Human Passions.
CHAPTER 1. Wherein is expounded what Passion is.
SEeing there can be no better order observed, to express the nature of
things, then to begin by the definitions, which have usually given us a full
light of their essence, we must enter into this treaty of passions, by the
definition which Philosophers give. That which is called passion, say they, is
no other thing, but a motion of the sensitive appetite, caused by the
apprehensio^ or imagination of good or evil, the which is followed with a
change or alteration in the body, contrary to the Laws of Nature. Whereby it
appears, that passions, to speak properly, reside only in the sensitive
appetite, and that they are not fashioned but in the irrational part of the
soul: so as if we should give the name of passions to the motions of the
understanding, or of the will; it is by a kind of improper and figurative
speech, alluding to the passions of the senses, with the which they have some
resemblance. The reason why passions are not found in the rational part of the
soul, is, for that this part does not employ any corporeal organs in her
actions, and that her office is not to alter or bring any change unto the body;
the which notwithstanding, is an action which does accompany the passions
inseparably. But seeing they are not to be found in any other part of the
soul, but in the sensitive appetite: there rises here a great question,
whether this appetite shall be divided into the irascible and concupiscible or
desiring power, as into two different and distinct powers, or whether it makes
but one power of both. The common opinion is, that as their objects are diverse,
so they are two distinct powers: whereof the reason is gathered, by that which
experience does show us in all other things subject to corruption; for we see
in other corruptible creatures, that they have not only an inclination and
power to seek after those things which are fit and convenient for them, and to
fly those which may hurt or anoy them; but moreover, they have another faculty
or power, to resist and fight against that which may cross their actions, or
destroy their being. As for example, fire is not only endued with lightness,
to fly up high, but it has also received heat from nature, by means
whereof, it does resist and fight against any thing that is contrary to his
action. In like manner it was necessary for the good of man, that he should
have two kinds of inclinations, the one to pursue those things which are
pleasing and agreeable to the senses, and to avoid those which may any way
anoy him: and this we call the concupiscible or desiring power; and the other,
by means whereofhee may encounter and vanquish whatsoever opposes it self,
crosses his inclinations, or that tends to the destruction of his being, or
the decay of his contentment, which is that we call the irascible or angry
power. This differs from the concupiscible, for that the concupiscible tends to
the sensible good, absolutely considered, and without any crosses; whereas the
irascible does always aim at the good which is environed with some
difficulty, the which she strives to vanquish to the end she may take all
obstacles from the concupiscible power, which cross her content, and hinder
her from enjoying the good which she desires to attain unto: so as the
irascible is as a sword and target to the concupiscible, for that she combats
for her content, and resists any thing that may cross her.

There are many things prove, that they are two different and distinct powers:
For as Mathematicians having noted diverse apparent irregularities in the
Planets, and observed, that they seem sometimes to hasten their course, and
sometimes to slack it; sometimes they stand as it were fixed, and sometimes to
return back in the Zodiaque; sometimes they seem near to the earth, and
sometimes they appear far off; they have held it necessary to multiply their
heavens, and to give them many to avoid all disorder in these excellent bodies
of the Universe. In like manner the diversity of passions in man, the contrary
motions and desires, wherewith his soul is tossed, have let philosophers
understand, that there is in him not only a concupiscible power, but also an
irascible: for that many times we have a desire of that which we strive
against, and resist with vehemence; and if we suffer our selves to be
vanquished, we are grieved; as he who desiring to see the bodies of such as
had been executed, suppressed this desire, and diuerted his eyes from this
infamous spectacle, yet suffering himself to be vanquished by his curiosity,
and having cast his eyes thereon, witnessed his grief and sorrow which
remained, to have given so brutish a contentment to his eyes. Whereby it
appears, that desire and anger are two diverse faculties, seeing that one
power is not carried at one instant to contrary desires. And we find in our
selves, that often times we are inclined to angry passions, and are not much
moved with those of the concupiscible, or to the contrary. In like manner
there are creatures which have desires, but no motions of choler: as for
example, Sheep, Pigeons, and Turtles, make show to have impressions of
desires, and yet there appears in them no sign of anger. So as to observe
their dispositions well, we may call in question that which Aristotle says,
that there is no creature but has some touch of choler: finally we may
observe, that sometimes the irascible makes us to pursue things which are
absolutely contrary to the concupiscible, as when with the hazard of life
(which is so dear and precious to all creatures) we seek to revenge our
selves of a powerful enemy which has wronged us. For this revenge which puts
our life in danger, cannot proceed from the same power which desires
passionately to preserve it: and so the irascible and concupiscible, are two
different powers. And there is no part of passion properly taken, but in these
two sensitive faculties, which is one of the things we gather from the
definition we have given.

It appears also by the same definition, that the passions of our soul should
always be followed with a sensible alteration in the body, by the impression
of the sensitive appetite, touched with the imagination of good or evil, which
presents it self. And here first we must not wonder if the ^oule does impart
her motions, and causes such great alteration in the body, seeing that the
body does impart his pains, when as it suffers any violence. For if it be laid
on the rack, broken on a wheel, or cast into the fire, the soul groans under
the burden of his torments: the which happens, for that being united as form
and matter, and making but one body which grows from their union; of necessity
all things must be common unto them, except those things which repugne, and
cannot agree with their particular natures; and therefore by a certain
contagion they communicate their passions one unto another. But in this subject
there is a stronger reason for the which the soul excites these alterations in
the body by her passions, that is to say, for that the soul does not only
reside in the body as the form, but does preside there in quality of the
moving cause, by means whereof, she does change and alter it at her will. For
as the intellectual power, which mooues a heaven, applying her virtue to move
it, makes it to change place, and draws it from East to West, or from West to
East, even so the soul which has a moving power commanding over the body,
changes his natural disposition, and by her agitation pulls him from his rest,
wherein he was before she troubled him; in this manner.

Moreover, we must not wonder if the sensitive appetite in particular, make so
great an impression in the body. This proceeds from the sympathy which is
found in those powers, which are governed by the same soul which imployes
them: so as the sensitive appetite, coming to play her part, she does stir
up the moving faculty of the heart, the which dilates it self, or shrinkes up,
according to the nature of the objects which have made impression upon the
sensitive appetite, whence grow all the alterations which are made in the body
of man. And here we must remember, that nature has fashioned the heart in such
sort, as it is in perpetual motion, according unto which it sometimes extendes
it self, and sometime retires of it self, with a certain measure and
proportion; the which continuing within the bounds which nature has prescribed
it, as conformable unto the condition of the creature, this motion is wholly
natural: but if it once come to break this law, and show it self more
violent, or more slow, then the nature of the creature requires, the natural
harmony is broken, and there follows a great alteration in the body of the
creature.

Of all the powers of the soul, those of the sensitive appetite only cause
the alteration of this motion, whose actions alone may make it more violent, or
more slow, then the laws of nature do allow. And hence it comes, that none
but the actions of the sensitive appetite are made with a visible change of the
body, and with a sensible alteration of the natural constitution. Yet as in
this change the heart receives an alteration, so the spirits, the blood, and
other humors, are agitated and moved beyond ordinary, the which does wholly
trouble the natural constitution of the creature. The which happens after this
manner: The objects of the senses strike first upon the imagination, and then
this power having taken knowledge of the^, conceiues them as good or bad, as
pleasing or troublesome, and importune: then afterward propounds them as
clothed with those qualities to the creature, which apprehending them under
this last consideration excites the concupiscible, or irascible power of the
soul, and induces them to embrace or fly them, and by the impression of its
motion, agitates the spirits which we call Vital, the which going from the
heart, disperse themselves throughout the whole body, and at the same instant
the blood which deriues from the liver, participating in this agitatio^, flows
throughout the veins, and casts it self over all the other parts of the body:
So as the heart and liver being thus troubled in their natural dispositions,
the whole body f^eles it self moved, not only inwardly, but also outwardly,
according to the nature of that passion which does trouble it. For in motions
of joy and desire, the heart melts with gladness. In those of sorrow and
trouble, it shrinks up and freezeth with grief. In those of choler and
resolution, it is inflamed and all on fire. In those of fear, it grows pale
and trembling. A Lovers words are sweet and pleasing, and those of a choleric
man are sharp and rough: Finally, there rises no passion in the soul, which
leaves not some visible trace of her agitation, upon the body of man.

Lastly, we may gather from the definition of passion that this alteration
which happens in the body, is contrary to the laws of nature, for that (as
we have said) it transports the heart beyond the bounds, which nature has
prescribed it, and does agitate it extraordinarily.

Hence it grows, that among all the motions of the sensitive appetite, those
only are prop^^ly called passions, which are accompanied with some notable
defect. For as we call passions of the body diseases, wounds, pains,
inflammations, incisions, and all other violent accidents which happen
extraordinarily: So we properly call passions of the soul, those infirmities
wherewith she is afflicted and troubled; as pity, fear, bashfulnesse, or
shame, love, hatred, desires, Choler, and the rest.

For, in this subject the word Passion, is not taken in that sense, whereas we
say that a subject suffers, when as it receives some new form, be it that at
the coming of this form, it lose any thing of its own or not, as when the
air is enlightened with the Sun beams, without losing any thing of her first
constitution: nor in that sense, wherein we say, that a subject suffers, when
as it receives a new quality which does expel another, whether it be
concurrent to its nature, or contrary unto it, as when water grows cold, or is
made hot.

But the word Passion is taken here for a change, which is made in man,
contrary to his natural constitution and disposition, from the which he is as
it were wrested by this change. In which sense the Philosophers say, that
things suffer, when as they are drawn from their natural disposition, to a
course that is contrary to their nature.

In the mean time you must not wonder, if we ground the irregularity of the
change, which these passions breed, upon the disorder which the sensitive
appetite (stirred up by the sensible objects) casts into the heart, being a
thing which we must constantly believe, that this power of the soul, be it
the irascible or co^cupiscible, has its se at and mansion in the heart: The
which cannot be denied in the subject of fear, for that such as are
transported therewith, call back the blood and heat unto the heart, as to the
place where fear does exercise her tyranny, therewith to defend themselves:
considering also that those creatures which have the greatest and largest
hearts, are most fearful, for that their heat is more dispersed, and
consequently less able to resist the assaults of fear. Some have not
believed, that it was so of other passions, but have appointed the^ their
seats elsewhere, and have maintained, that some did reside in the liver,
others in the spleen, and some in the gall; and as for anger, they have lodged
it in the gall, whereas choler resides, which does inflame it. But they have
given love his quarter in the liver, for that the sa^guine complexion is
inclined to love: and for joy, they have seated it in the Spleen, for that
melancholy proceeds from the distemperature of this part. But notwithstanding
this, it is most certain, that both the powers of the sensitive appetite, I
mean the Irascible, and Concupiscible, reside in the heart; the which being
the fountain of life, and of all vital operations, must also be a lodge and
retraite to those appetites which nature has gigiue^ the creature to preserve
his life, and to chase away those perils which may threaten it. Whereby we see,
that the passions of desire or anger, are felt presently in the heart, and
trouble the natural co^stitution as soon as they rise; whereby follows a
strange alteration throughout the whole body, for the springs cannot be
troubled but the streams will feel of it. And therefore the passions being too
vehement, and making a violent impressio^ upon the heart, they cause strange
accidents in man. As for example, a furious anger drawing the heat violently
from the heart, to those parts which are most remote from the Center of life,
and by the same means inflaming choler, which by her natural lightness mounts
up to the brain, may deprive man of the use of reason, and make him furious
and mad.

In like manner an extraordinary fear, drawing the spirits and heat forcibly
to the heart, whereas she means to fortify her self against her enemy, may
quench the natural heat, and suffocate the man: shame may do the like,
whereof we have prodigious examples in histories, which testify, that great
personages have died with shame and grief, for that they could not find the
knot, or expound certain riddles or difficult questions, which had been
propounded unto them: yea, they say, that great ornament and Gemme of
Philosophy Aristotle, died with grief, for that he could not find the cause
of the flowing and ebbing of Eurypus. Whereby it appears, that the heart which
is thus oppressed by Passions, when they are violent, is the seat of both the
powers of the sensitive appetite, that is to say, of the Irascible, and
Concupiscible. And whereas they object to the contrary, that Choler resides in
the Gall, inferring thereby that the Irascible power should reside there also:
It is easily answered, for that the Choler which remains in the Gall, is not
the reason for the which Anger is inflamed, but for that it is a hot and dry
humor, the which are fit qualities to produce that effect. The like may be said
of Love, and that the abundance of blood does not make men more inclined to
the Passions of love, forthat the Concupiscible power resides in the liver,
which is the place where the blood takes his form; but for that they which are
of a sanguine complexion, have a hot and moist temperature* which is proper to
that passion. And as for joy we cannot conclude that it resides in the
Spleen, for that it being infirm, many are oppressed with melancholy; for the
reason why melancholy does torment them which are troubled with the Spleen,
is not for that joy resides there, but for that adust choler prevailing,
causes a troublesome and importune heaviness.

Yet we will not so restrain these two powers, within the bounds and extent of
the heart, but we will confess, that although they have their chief
residence there, yet they disperse themselves through the whole creature;
whereof we have good proof in Lizards, which being cut in pieces, feel pain
in all the parts where they are offended. For the last of our observations upon
the subject of passions, it remains to show, whether of the concupiscible and
irascible powers, be the more noble and excellent: some give the pre-eminence
to the concupiscible, for that it is destined to serve the soul, and to make
it enjoy the objects of her passions. The which made Aristotle to say, that
beasts put themselves into choler, and fight for their desires. But this
reason does nothing abase the Irascible power, but contrariwise it shows how
much it is more excellent then the Concupiscible.

For as those soldiers are most valiant which maintain the shocke of a
battle, and defend the weaker; even so by consequence, the Irascible power
must have more generosity then the concupiscible, seeing she is ordained by
nature for her defense. And as the noblest virtues, are formed in the most
excellent powers, so we see that force or valor, which resides in the
Irascible, is a more worthy and more commendable virtue then temperance which
has her seat in the Concupiscible. We find also that it is more shameful not
to bridle the motions of the Concupiscible, then those of the Irascible, for
that these are less offensive to reason. In regard whereof we blame them more
which abandon themselves to pleasure and voluptuousnes, then those which are
subject to motions of choler.

Of the Number of Passions. CHAP. 2.
AS they that have treated of the Nature of the Winds have written diversely,
some setting four, others eight, some eleauen, and some two and thirty, to the
which they assign diverse points in the horizon: So the Philosophers which
discourse of the Passions of the Soul, agree not of the number, some naming
more, some less. Yea there was an Ancient affirmed, that as there are many
Passions, whereof we know the names, so there are an infinite number which we
know not.

Wherefore he compared man to one of the monsters of antiquity, which they
represent unto us, composed of the members, and forms of diverse creatures: for
that his Cupidities and Passions are so prodigious, and so many in number, as
they are able to amaze any one, that shall iudiciously consider of the
multitude and diversity.

First of all, there were some which have believed, that as there were four
chief winds which excite diverse storms, be it at land or sea; so there are
four principal Passions which trouble our Souls, and which stir up diverse
tempests by their irregular motions, that is to say Pleasure, Pain, Hope, and
Fear: and in truth these four have as it were the Empiry over all the rest,
which propound themselves as the objects of their motions; for whatsoever men
do, either they fear or desire, or afflict themselves, or are contented; which
be the effects of these Passions. Others will have only two, that is to say,
Pleasure and Pain; and some assign but one, and that is Love, to the which
they refer all the rest as to their center and root. Others have multiplied
them, and have made twelve, and some eleauen. Amidst this diversity of
opinions, that is the tr^est which is received at this day, and embraced by all
those that make an exact profession of Philosophy: that is to say, that there
are eleauen primitive and general Passions, whereof all the rest are but as it
were budds and branches. These general Passions are, Love, Hatred, Desire,
Flight, Pleasure, Pain, Fear, Courage, Hope, Despair and Choler. And thus
the Philosophers find out the number. Of Passions, say they, some regard the
good or evil absolutely and simply considered. And these belong to the
Concupiscible power. Others regard the good or evil accompanied with some
difficulty, and they appertain unto the irascible: those of the Concupiscible
power, are six in number, whereof three have for their objects the good, that
is to say, Love, Desire, and Pleasure; and the other three have for their
object the evil, that is to say, Hatred, Flight, and Pain: for presently that
the object which has the form of good, offers it self unto the Concupiscible
power, she presently feels herself surprised, and Love is framed. If this
object be present, she receives Pleasure and Delight: if it be absent, she is
touched with a Desire to enjoy it. And in like manner as soon as the object
presents it self unto the self same power, under the show of evil, it does
presently stir up a hatred contrary to love: and if during this horror it be
absent, then Flight or Au^rsion, contrary to desire discouers it self: but if
it be present, she then conceiues grief. In this manner we find out the
number of the passions which reside in the concupiscible power: those of the
irascible are but five, as fear, courage, hope, despair, and choler: for if
the object which has some show of good, presents it self being accompanied
with difficulty, and that man conceiues with himself that notwithstanding all
that, it is in his power to obtain it, then hope is framed; but if there be
no likelihood, despair pulls him back and diuerts him. And touching that which
regards the good we enjoy, there is no passion in the irascible that concerns
it, seeing that which is in our power is not accompanied with any difficulty,
neither is it needful the irascible should move or work for this subject.
But if the evil which presents it self, be full of horror and difficulty, it
must either be present or absent; if it be absent, it excites courage or fear;
Cour^ge, if we strive to surmount it; and fear, if we apprehend it as too
doubtful. If it be present, it inflames choler which carries us to revenge,
to repel the injury that is done us. And thus we find out the number of the
Passions of the irascible power, the which with the six of the Concupiscible,
make eleauen in a^l. But we must remember, that notwithstanding this
determined number, yet we find as it were a swarm of others, which
notwithstanding take their beginning, and spring from these, as we have
observed. In this number the Philosophers put Bitterness, Envy, Emulation,
Shamefastnes, Impudency, Mercy, Humanity, and a thousand others which were too
long to relate. But for that there are some, without the knowledge whereof this
treaty were imperfect, we will speak of them according the exigence of the
subject, when occasion shall be offered: here it shall suffice to observe, that
as the general Passions, regard their objects without any restriction, but
that of good or evil, which presents it self; so the more particular
Passions, contained under these general, regard the same objects limited to
some special condition: as for example, Desire taken absolutely is a general
Passion, which regards the object of good, without any other limitation then
under the appearance of good: but if we come to prescribe bounds to this good,
and that we consider it under the form of some particular good, be it of
H^nor, of Riches, of Beauty, or of any other thing; the desire must also be
limited, and then it shall be a desire of honor, which is called ambition; or
a desire of riches, which we call covetousness, or a desire of beauty, the which
attributes unto it self, the name of the gender, and is called love. And the
like may be said of the other limitations of this object: so as these Passion
of Love, Riches, and Honor, are more particular Passions then the desire, which
is as it were their gender and spring. So grief taken absolutely is a Passion,
which regards the object of evil in its general extent, without any other
limitation then that of evil. By reason whereof if this object come to be
restrained by us to some special condition, as to the misery or prosperity of
another man, or to our own infamy; then this grief shall also be limited and
restrained, and shall become a grief for another man's misfortunes, and then it
shall be a compassion; or it shall be a grief for another man's prosperity, and
then it sha^bee called an indignation or an envy and despite: or else it will
become a grief for our own infamy, and then it is a shame, and so of the
rest. These Passions may be infinite under the diverse limitations of objects
which are infinite, and therefore they can hardly be rancked under a cert^ine
science: neither have they particular names, but borrow them from the
limitation which the object gives them; yet there are some which have their
proper names, as Envy, Jealousy, Compassion, Shame: but the rest many times
carry the name of their Genders.

In the mean time a question is here propounded, whence it comes that
considering the object of the Concupiscible appetite, which contains the good
and evil simply taken, that is to say, without show of any difficulty added
unto it; we have put joy as a Passion, which arises from the presence and
enjoying of the good, and grief as a Passion which grows from the present
evil which cannot be avoided; and yet considering the object of the Irascible
power, which comprehends the good which cannot be obtained but with difficulty,
and the evil which cannot be avoided but with pain, we have not set any
Passion that rises from the enjoying of that good, or from the presence of
that evil which cannot be eschued. Whereunto we answer, that this difficulty
were allowable, if these two appetits had their actions separated one from
another; but they are always united, and march jointly to the pursuit and
enjoying of good, and to the flight and avoiding of evil. So as the Irascible
appitite never stirs but jointly with the Concupiscible, for that it is
ordained to succor and assist it, whenever there appears any difficulty in
the object which he is to pursue or avoid. In regard whereof, notwithstanding
any difficulty that may be incountered in the fight or pursuit of this object,
yet when it is obtained or avoided, all the pain or difficulty which did
enuiron it, vanishes away, and is dispersed. It is not therefore necessary to
ascribe any other Passions, which grow from the enjoying or flight of this
object, then the same which arise from the enjoying or flight; when as there is
no apparent difficulty which does cross the possession or make the avoiding
difficult: and to the end we may the better know what order these two
appetites observe in the execution of their offices, we may thus represent
their motions, and the order of the Passions which are framed in the one, and
the other. As soon as any object presents it self unto the sensible power,
under the form of an apparent good: as for example, the beauty of a fair
Hellen, whether that the acquisition be accompanied with any difficulty or not,
this beauty does first of all stir up a passion of love, from the which
presently does grow a desire which makes him seek to enjoy her; and if in this
pursuit there appear no difficulty, the possession will be obtained without
the assistance of the irascible appetite, whence will arise joy or pleasure.
But if during the heat of desire, there appears any difficulty to obtain it,
then if the Concupiscible appetite were not assisted, it would be danted with
the least difficulty that should present it self, and would cease to desire
the thing, or strive to enjoy it: for this reason the Irascible to prevent
this, causes hope to arise to succor the concupiscible, which supports desire
and makes him strive to attain unto it; and in this case it breeds no other
joy then that which had succeeded if it had bin obtained without any
difficulty, considering that the enjoying makes him forget all the precedent
pains. But from the beginning and breeding of desire, or during the whole
continuance thereof, be it with hope, or without expecttance of the enjoying
of the object, if it appears to be a thing absolutely impossible to enjoy,
then not to suffer desire to consume it self in a vain pursuit, the
Irascible stirs up despair, to the end the Concupiscible power may not spend
it self in a design which cannot succeed. And in like manner if an object
presents it self unto the appetiue power, under the form of evil, as for
example, a powerful enemy prepares himself to wrong us, then first of all
hatred rises in us, and makes us apprehend the evil which does threaten us
apparently, and then inclines us to seek the means to avoid it, be it in
putting our selves in defense, or in retiring our selves and seeking some
shelter for this storm, or else in avoiding it by some other means, the which
breeds in us the Passion of flight, by the which we understand no other thing
here* then our striving to fly the evil. But in case that in this seeking of
means to avoid it there appear not any difficulty, then the irascible power
does not trouble it self to assist the concupiscible. And for that to escape a
danger and to avoid a mischief is a kind of good, this happening it begets
joy. As on the other side if we fall into a misfortune which threatens us,
although there appear not any difficulty in the avoiding, it will cause
grief. But if whilst I seek means to avoid the storm which threatens me, I
find that I cannot do it without pain and difficulty; then for that the
least obstacles amaze and hinder the concupiscible power which never strives to
surmount them, the irascible excites courage which goes to succor it, and
supports the motion of this Passion, which we term flight or auersion from
the thing, until the evil be wholly avoided and dispersed; and then arises
the same joy which had happened if it had not incountered any of these
difficulties. And if amidst this resistance and striving of courage, the evil
does notwithstanding ariue, then grief is framed after the same manner as if
this accident had happened without any encounter or difficulty. But if whilst
we seek the means to avoid the evil, we discover much difficulty to
preserve our selves, and that there approaches an eminent danger to our
persons, then the irascible does succor us with fear, which makes man
discreet and advised, to the end that his too great hardines may not
precipitate him into the danger which he would avoid. Besides all this, when as
the object which presents it self under the form of good, seems at the same
instant impossible to be attained unto, then not only hope dies, but even
desire is banished, so as the first Passion which then springs up in us is
despair, which the irascible stirs up, to the end there should grow no vain
desire, for that naturally no man desires things which are impossible, and
vain and unprofitable actions are enemies to nature.

As for the contrariety which may be found betwixt some of these Passions, we
must understand that this contrariety may be considered after two manners, that
is to say, either by reason of the diverse motions of the appetite which is
inflamed; as for example, we say that hope and despair are contrary Passions,
not in respect of their objects, seeing they both regard the apparent good,
under the condition of difficult obtaining, but by reason of the diverse motions
they excite by their nature in the appetite, for that hope strives to seek and
enjoy the object, and despair to fly from it and avoid it. Whence it grows
that if we compare hope and cour^ge, we shall find them contrary Passions, not
in regard of the motion of the app^tite, seeing that both agitate and stir up
the spirit, and serve it as a spur to make it more ready in the pursuit of
their object, but in respect of the object, for that hope looks to the
apparent good, and courage to the evil.

In like manner fe are and despair are contraries, by reason of their objects,
and not in regard of their motions, for that both serve rather to retire and
stay the striving of the appetite, then to excite and stir it up. Next,
desire and flight are contrary Passions, by both reasons together, considering
that the one has the good for object, and the other the evil. And moreover
desire stirs up the appetite to seek the object, whereas flight makes it
retire to avoid it. We may make the same comparisons of the rest of the
Passions. But this will appear more plainly when we shall treat of them in
particular.

Of the quality of Passions, whether they be good or bad. CHAP. 3.
AMongst the questions which have been seriously disputed in the Schools of
ancien^ Philosophers, there is not any one has been more famous* nor whose
subject has been^ argued with greater contention, then that which concerns
the quality of the Passions of the Soul, that is to say, whether they be good
or bad, and if they be compatible with any eminent virtue, or can subsist with
it. The Stoics severe Phil^soph^rs* and dissenting from the common opinions of
the world, have maintained, that a Soul^ in which virtue has taken deep
root, and which enioyes all the ornaments of true wisdom, should have gotten
such a power over all her motions, as it should never be transported with any
perturbations. The reason which moved them to this opinion, was, for that they
held it an unworthy thing for a wise and virtuous man to see himself subject
to the infirmities of the soul, which is the name they give to Passions. But
the Peripatitians have held the contrary opinion, and did believe that it could
not be denied, but that the greatest Spirits, and most accomplished in virtue
and wisdom, had sometimes a feeling of these Passions, the heat whereof
wisemen knew how to bridle and restrain. And they ground their reason, for
that they rise not in us* by our election, but are as it were siences of
Nature, which spring out of themselves. This controversy has seemed to many
great Personages to be more verbal then material. But whatsoever it be, it is
certain that the wisest cannot exempt themselves from the motions of natural
Passions, and yet their virtue is nothing diminished or made less perfect. We
must then remember that these kinds of Passions may be considered in two
manners, first in their particular extent, that is to say, as motions of the
sensitive appetite, which of it self is not endowed with any reason, and which
is common to us with beasts; and in this consideration they are neither
commendable, nor blame worthy, seeing that the weight and merit of that which
parts from our soul, depends of reason: secondly, they may be considered in as
much as reason may subject them to her command and prescribe them a Law. And in
this consideration they may be good or bad, according to the quality of the
will that gouernes them. So we see both good and bad, fear, desire, and
rejoice alike. But the wicked have bad fears, wicked desires, and bad joys,
whereas the good have none but good fears, good desires, and good joys, for
that the branches do always participate of the nature of the root. For
although the sensitive appetite of her own quality be destitute of liberty,
yet by reason of the strict union that it has with the intellectual and
reasonable, it does participate as it were with a beam, and some kind of
borrowed liberty, in regard whereof some have maintained that it is capable of
virtues, as of temperance and fortitude, which reside in this part of the soul.

If the Stoics had well observed this consideration, they should have seen
that a wise man by the guide of reason may so moderate his Passions, as they
may be commendable and worthy the profession he makes of virtue. The which is
nothing doubted of by Christian Philosophers, seeing that he who was never
subject to sin, and whose soul was advanced to the height of graces and
virtues, had Passions and humane affections, the which could never command over
reason, or transport it, but receive a law from it. But on the other side we
want no reasons to convince and overthrow the opinions of the Stoickes. For
first of all, virtue (how eminent soever) never ruins that which is wholly
conformable to reason. But what is more reasonable then to see a man moved with
pity and compassion of his like, of his friends, or of his kinsman? what
inhumanity were it for a mother to see her child in the throat of wild beasts,
or exposed to shipwreck, or broken upon a wheel, or torn in pieces by
tortures, or only sick of some violent infirmity, and not to have her soul
sensible of grief? would we that a virtuous man should not be touched with
indignation to see crimes honored, and the wicked advanced to the height of
dignities? Shall we condemn the spurs of an honest emulation, wherewith he
is touched that reads the glorious exploits and virtuous actions of great
Person^ges which ^aue gone before him? will you have him that owes his life, and
honor, and whatsoever ^ee enjoys, to his friend, insensible of the offices of
his friendshp? would they that the ^eares of an honest wife should have no
power, over an husband that were ready to abandon her? All these motions being
so just were it not a great cruelty to seek to suppr^sse them, as it were in
despite of nature? But who knows not that these Passions ^re exercises of
virtue? To apprehend evil, to fear punishments, to attend recompenses with
joy, to long after promises, are they not so many incour^gements to piety,
temperance, and other virtuous actions? who is it then that will blame so
commendable a thing? Nay, is it not to quench the fruits of virtue; and to deny
it the content which is due unto it, in cutting off thus generally all
Passions? For who knows not, that she does usually plant in the souls of
men an ardent love of the goodly fruits which she produces* What just man but
feels* certa^ne pleasure and sweet^nes in the effects of Justice? what sober
man but receives content in the actions of sobriety? what valiant man but
suffers himself to be transported with the love of brave exploits, and a
desire to seek glorious death in combats? And who will believe that ever
virtue (like unto Polipus which eats his own arms) will ever ruin her
proper objects? Who does not know but the Passions of our souls are the
objects of many excellent virtues, which do moderate them, and reduce them
unto reason when they seek to fly out? Fortitude is nothing but a mediocrity
betwixt fear and hardines: That is to say, it is nothing but a virtue by
means wher^of we do moderate our exceeding fear, and our immoderate
boldness. Take then fear and hardines from fortitude, and it is no more a
virtue. And by the same reason you overthrow all courage and magnanimity,
whereof the one makes us to undertake the most terrible and difficult things
with resolution, and the other gives us a luster in our greatest actions. You
shall in like manner overthrow all patience, and perseverance, whereof the one
makes us constantly and willingly to endure all the miseries of this life; and
the other confirms us against all the crosses of this world, so as we remain
inseparably (...) to that which we hold conformable to reason; for all these
virtues have for their object the Passions of the Irascible appetite.
Temperance is no other thing, but a mediocrity which we keep in the pleasures
of taste and feeling, and in the griefs and sorrows which befall us. That is
to say, it is a virtue by means whereof we govern our pleasures and pains.
If then you take all pleasure and Pain from temperance, you give it the name
of virtue in vain. And withal you put modesty and honesty out of the number
of the virtues, whereof the one makes us apprehend infamies and reproaches; that
is to say, induces us to fly whatsoever has any show of dissolution. And the
other filling our souls with goodly things done with a certain grace, makes
us to fly whatsoever is filthy and worthy of reproach. You shall also put out
of the same number of virtues, abstinency, Sobriety, chastity, and pudicity,
whereof the two first moderate the delights of the mouth, and the other the
pleasures of generation: For that all these ver^ues have for their object the
Passions of the concupiscible appetite.

After all this the sensitive appetite is a present of nature, which God (who
is the Author) has freely bestowed upon us; but virtue never destroys nature,
but adds unto it the perfection which it wants. It must then suffer the
sensitive appetite to act according to his inclination, yet moderating his
motions and restrayning them under the laws of reason. And without doubt it
seems the Stoics have not observed in man any other composition then that of
the body and the soul, and that they were ignorant of the diversity of the
intellectual and sensitive powers of reason, and of sensuality. For otherwise
they would never have suffered the sensitive appetite to have been idle in man,
as it must of necessity remain, if it be once freed from all motions of
Passions. And as for those wonderful praises they give to a wise man, whom
they imagine to be freed from Passions, they are like unto the stately titles
which are given to great ships, and to all that rich equipage, and furniture
wherewith it is adorned, and yet it is subject to the fury of storms, and
suffers shipwreck as well as the smallest vessels. We have always seen
those which have made profession of this sect, grow pale and wanne, as well as
other men in dangers at sea or land; they are always seen subject to the
common desires of men, and they have in that regard more vanity then constancy.
So as they have been forced to excuse these first motions, and to confess that
it was not in the power of man to suppress them, but they would sometimes
break forth. What remains then but to confess that reason must govern them,
and reduce them to a mediocrity which is found in virtue? For as health does
not consist in the ruin of contrary qualities which are found in man, but in
the temperature which a good constitution gives them: And as to make a perfect
music, we must not take away the diversity of tunes, but reduce them to a
good accord to make the harmony perfect; so the striuings of virtue consistes
not wholly to root all natural Passions out of the soul, but to moderate and
govern them by the rule of reason. It is true, there are some Passions full of
offense, and which we detest to hear named, as Impudency, Envy, Hatred; and
these we make no question but they ought to be suppressed. But there are others
whose very names are pleasing, as Pity, Modesty, Honest Love, and the like;
and these need not any thing, but to receive a tincture from reason and virtue,
to make them altogether commendable.

But to prescribe us a man that is not moved with any Passion, were to deprive
him of all humanity, and to make him a stone or a god. They that make
profession of this proud and arrogant Philosophy, cannot but laugh when as
they read in the writings of Poets, that there has been men of that
constitution, and as we may say, of that temper, that no swords, lanc^s, or
other arms, could pierce them or wound their bodies. And they that have had
most credit among them, have derided those Philosophers which believed that
there were certain Islands and Countries in the world, as Delos and Egypt,
which had never felt the violence of earthquakes, and which had continued for
ever immovable, amidst the motions of all the other parts of the world. And
these people paint us out a wise man so perfect, so eminent, and so fortified
with virtue, as all the storms of Fortune, yea the most violent, Shipwrackes
tortures, and infamies cannot make any impression in his soul; so as he
continues immovable in the midst of flames, wheels, gibbets and all the
fearful horrors of death and shame. What is he that will not laugh at this
strange vanity? But the Stoickes say, that it is a thing unworthy of a wiseman
adorned with perfect virtue, to see himself transported with passions, which
are the diseases of the soul. Whereunto we answer, that Passions considered
as they submit themselves unto the laws of reason, are no infirmities of the
soul, but in that sense they are the instruments and objects of virtue, and as
it were lively sparks which inflame desires in our souls; and as Aristotle
speaks, they are the arms of reason. It is true that (as one says) the
flowers of Egypt being continually charged and watered with the Vapor of Nilus
(which are gross and earthly) ye^^d not such pleasant smelles as they would do
without this obstacle: even so souls troubled with Passions, cannot produce
the virtuous actions which they would do without this agitation: for that the
motions and impressions which they make in our souls are like unto the force
of a violent torrent, which tears up stones, overthrows plants, and draws
after it whatsoever opposes it self against his violence; for that they
quench the reason, deprive us of judgment, smother the understanding, and
suffer not any image of virtue in a soul that is transported. But this happens
to those which abandon themselves wholly to Passion; and not unto these who like
unto wise pilots prepare against a storm, and when it comes endeavor to avoid
it, not loosing his judgment in an accident which terrifies others. We tame
Elephants, Tigers, Lions, Panthers, and other savage beasts, and are not moved:
and will they not allow us a power to suppress the brutishness of the
sensitive appetite, and to moderate the Passions when as they advance
themselves against reason, without great perturbation?

Finally, when as these motions of Passions prevent the reason and anticipate
all the resolutions of man, we cannot hold them bad, seeing they are mere
motions of nature without any show of liberty. And it is most certain that not
only an ordinary wisdom is subject thereunto, but even the most excellent
souls, (I speak not of those which have special gifts from God) yea those
that are endued with Heroical virtues, feel agitation; seeing that virtue how
eminent soever, cannot so subject the sensitive appetite, (over which she does
not command as a slave, but as a Citizen) but it will anticipate the Empire of
reason. And this the Stoickes are forced to confess, seeing they affirm that
it is not in the power of a wise man to free himself from perturbation, when
as some fearful forms presents themselves suddenly to his eyes, so as
whatsoever he does in those accidents, he will grow pale, he will be amazed,
and his heart will shrink up. Yet, say they, all this will happen without
consenting to these motions, for that it is in his power not to consent. They
add, that there is this difference betwixt a wiseman and one that is
distracted: for that an unreasonable man yields to passions and obayes them
wholly; whereas the wiseman although he suffers the motions, yet he resists
them still, and generously preserues in his soul the laws and love of virtue;
herein truly they approach near to the doctrine which we teach. But we must
still remember that the office of reason is not to pull out of the soul of
man, all the roots of Passions, neither were it expedient or necessary she
should do it: But her duty is to prescribe them their bounds, and to reduce
them to a mediocrity as virtue requires. As for example, let us presuppose a
brother which has lost his brother whom he loved passionately, and they
conjure him not to lament for this loss, not to afflict himself, nor to show
any sign of mourning to preserve the reputation of a wiseman and absolutely
virtuous. Is it not rather a mere stupidity then a true constancy? They that
make these discourses show that either they have no natural disposition, or
else they never fell into these calamities: otherwise so sensible a grief would
have pulled out of their spirits this arrogant Philosophy; and had forced them
to confess that humanity cannot suffer them to remain insensible at such
cruel accidents. In the mean time as these Passions preventing reason, cannot
be held good nor bad, so when as they suffer themselves to be moderated and
governed by reason, they get us great commendations; whereas when they fly out
and exceed the bounds of virtue, they procure us nothing but blame and infamy.
To conclude, Passions are in the soul, as the sinnews in the body; for as by
means of sinnewes we extend ^r bend the members* so by the operations of
Passions, we carry our selves to good or evil, and if we will employ them to
good, they are as it were spurs and objects: But if we turn them to evil,
our sensuality makes use of them; like unto him that keeps a slave, who makes
use of his chain to draw him where he pleases. So as the triumph of virtue
consists not in pulling away or rooting out the Passions, as monsters; but in
ruling and reforming them like unto insolent and disobedient children* for they
grow in us and are as the fruits and buds of our sensuality, which have only
need to be made subject unto reason. Finally, they that have any other opinion
must remember, that we cannot wholly pull away the defects which proceed from
nature: And that may by our industry correct and moderate that which is borne
with us, but not vanquish it and suppress it wholly; wherefore wisdom may not
promise unto it self any thing in this subject, seeing she has no power. The
Passions are absolute and depend not on the Empire of virtue. They present
themselves uncalled.

Of Love. The Preface.
AN Ancient said, that to expel Youth out of our towns, were to cut off the
Spring time of the year. But we may maintain with no less truth, that to
banish Love from a civil life, and the conversation of men, were not only to
deprive the year of her goodliest season, but also as it were to pull the
Sun out of the firmament, and to fill the whole world with horror and
confusion. For what is there in this life, be it amidst honors and glory, in
riches and treasures, yea in delights and pleasures, that can give a full and
sound content unto man, without the communication of the sweetenes thereof to
friends? Wherefore an excellent Philosopher said, that if any one were raised
above the heavens, from whence he might behold all the wonders of nature and of
the world, and see with amazement the reuolutions, periods, order, diversity,
and beauty of the Planets and Stars, and had no friend to whom he might impart
this admiration; all these things in steed of fullness of joy, would become
displeasing and importune to his thoughts. For as colors which are the most
exquisite ornaments of nature, how lively and glistring so ever they be, will
notwiths^a^ding be darkened and give no pleasure to our eyes, if they were not
enlightened, and as it were inspired by the light which discouers unto us the
singularities, and perfections: so what wealth or honor soever we enjoy in this
life, we cannot taste the sweetness thereof but in representing unto our selves
the contentment which comes to the^ we love, and whom we think have an equal
Passion on our behalf. Epaminondas gloried to have won 2 battles, his Father
and mother being yet living; as if the joy that those persons conceived which
were so near to him, had made his victories more stately, and increased the
glory and pomp of his triumphs. In like manner there is no man living, which
in the course of his prosperities does not feel as it were an increase of
happiness, when as he imagines that his friends are spectators and partakers
of his felicity. And moreover what can be sweeter to our thoughts then the
image of a true and constant love, which we are assured our friend does bear
us? What happiness to have a friend to whom we may safely open our heart, and
trust him with our most important secrets, without apprehe^sion of his
conscience, or any doubt of his fidelity? What content to have a friend whose
discourse sweetens our cares? whose counsels disperse our fears? whose
conversation charms our griefs? whose circu^spection assures our fortunes, and
whose only pr^sence fills us with joy and content? Seeing then love is a Passion
which does produce such sweet and ple^sing contents in the society of men, we
will endeavor to show what his beginning is, wherein his essence consists, to
what Persons it extends, and what the effects be.

Of the beginning of Love. CHAP. 1.
AS it is the custom of men to refer the noblest effects to the most excellent
causes; many considering the dignity of love, have imagined that this Passion
came from a particular impression, which God makes in our Souls, inspiring
into them with the nature, the affections which transport them, and which makes
them seek the objects which are pleasing unto them. The which they strive to
prove by the example of the natural inclinations which he has given to other
Creatures. We see, say they, that God as the Author of nature, has ingrafted
into light things an inclination to rise upward, to seek the place of their
rest, by reason whereof the fire does always send his flame toward heaven. And
in like manner he has imprinted in heavy things a natural inclination which
makes them tend to the center: so as stones, marbles, and such like, do always
bend downward, and do not hang in the air, but with violence and contrary to
their inclination. In the same manner, say they, God has ingrafted in man a
certain inclination to those things which have some beams of beauty or bounty,
so as when these objects come to encounter his eyes or mind, he is ravished,
and then presently there is framed in his heart an ardent desire to seek and
pursue them. They confirm this opinion by the diverse inclinations which shine
in the life of men from their birth. For we see some love painting naturally,
others take delight in Geometry, some are passionatly affected to the Liberal
Arts, others embrace the Mechanics; some love Hunting, others burn with a
desire of Play; some are borne to War; and others are inclined to Mildnes and
peace; some have no contentment but in solitariness; and others cannot live
without the mannaging of affairs. And whence, say they, proceed these so
different inclinations, but from the author of nature? The which they confirm
again by the example of things which happen often in the love which men bear
one unto another; for that it will sometimes fall out, that by a certain
simpathy of minds, we shall love at the first encounter a man whom we have
never before seen nor known. So as it seems, this affection does not then
disclose it self in our souls, taking form so suddenly and sweetly, but it
is rather quickened and awaked by the presence of the object, which makes us to
see that which we love instantly without delay, for that we knew him not,
finding him so conformable to our humors and inclination. The which has made
some presuppose, that the beams of their eyes, which love incountering with
the beams which proceed from the object which inflames them, makes so sweet a
mixture, as their union is as it were the fullness of all the delights which may
be tasted in this life: And contrariwise at the first encounter we shall have
a distaste of some other person whom we had never seen before: Does not this
prove (say they) that it is nature which frames in us this Passion? and so they
conclude, that it cannot proceed but from the Author of nature: others prefer
the cause of love to the Planets, Stars, and constellations, and presuppose
that the reason why Achilles loved Patroclus, Alexander Hephestion, and the
Queen of the Amazons, Alexander; And to come to modern examples, that Charles
the ninth loved the Marshall of Raise, that Henry the third loved the Dukes of
Ioyeuse, and Espernon, and Monsier de Terms; that Henry the fourth loved the
Duke of Suilly; and that the King now gloriously reigning loves the Duke of
Luines and his brethren; are all effects of the aspects of the Planets, which
incountered at the natiuities of these Princes and Noblemen. Others seek the
cause in the Parents, as if they which bring us into the world, with our being
did transfer and infuse into us their Passions. Others refer it to the good or
bad education we receive, according to which we frame our desires and
affections. The Platonicians imagine that we must seek it in the degrees of
the harmony which is found in Souls; which they believe are compounded as of a
consort and proportion of numbers, the which incountering equally in two
persons, incites them to love one another. But this is very mystical, and
requires a spirit accustomed to the imaginations of Plato.

To come then to the point, it is certain that God has infused into our
souls the seeds of love, seeing that he has given us the powers which are
capable. It is also certain that the influence of the Planets may co^tribute
to this Passion; for that it resides in the concupiscible appetite, the which
is a sensitive power, and depends of the body, over whose motions the Planets
have a kind of power. It is also visible, that nurture and education, and
sometimes the inclinations which our Parents have ingrafted in us, may have a
share in the motions of our affections. But to speak according to the rules of
Philosophy, we must say precisely and absolutely, that the bounty of things,
whether they be found in them, or that we imagine them to be, is the Spring,
beginning, and moving cause of the love we bear them. For God the Author of
nature, who has created all things in number, weight, and measure, has also
imparted to all Creatures, inclinations and motions necessary to attain unto
their ends. So he has infused into his understanding an inclination which
makes him passionately to seek the truth, and to embrace it when he has
found it. And in like manner he has ingrafted in the will a desire and love of
good, which is the only object which may move it and inflame it to pursue it.
And as colors are the object of the sight, which draw it by a certain
attraction, which grows from a natural simpathy which is betwixt them, like
unto that which is betwixt our understanding and truth, betwixt the eye and
colors; and betwixt the hearing and sounds. Hence it grows that there is so
strict a co^nexion betwixt the will and the good, as the will cannot love any
thing which has not a show of good. So as if it be at any time deceived, and
imbraceth the evil, it is under a veil and show of good, which is employed to
abuse it; and the like may be said of the sensitive appetite, which in its
motions follows the same instincts that the will does. But when as we say,
that the good is the object of our will and love, under this good we
comprehend that which is fair, for that goodly things have an equal power
with those things that be good, to inflame our wills: as also beauty and
bounty in effect are all one, and differ not but only in our imagination. The
which the Platonicians demonstrate by excellent reasons, calling love simply a
desire of beauty. Yea to show that beauty is lovely of it self, as well as
bounty, they add that beauty which shines in the body, is as it were a beam
or image of the infinite beauty which is in God; wherefore we admire it and
love it passionatly, when it presents it self unto our eyes; and then, say
they, the beauty of the body is also an image of the beauty of the mind: for
that the internal perfections engender the external, as the luster of
precious stones and pearls grows from the perfect mixture of the four
Elements which are found in their constitution, as flowers and leaves of trees
borrow their beauty from the root; and as in beasts the good interior
constitution is the cause of the beauty which appears in the countenance. So
then we conceive that the external beauty of the body proceeds from the
internal bounty of the mind, so as bounty seems to be the root of beauty,
and beauty the flower of that bounty which shines in creatures. And therefore
he that contains himself within his bounds and in the innocence of love,
seeing the beauty of the body, imagines (as it is true) that this pleasing
object is a beam of the infinite and immense beauty, whereof the essence of God
is as it were the center, from whence she deriues and takes her beginning: and
consequently, that it is as it were a sience of the interior beauty which
shines in the soul, from whence the body has taken life. Thus the
Platonicians prove that beauty as well as bounty makes an impression in our
wills, and proportionably inflames our desires, and begets affections and
Passions, which makes us to seek it. But leaving all other reasons to prove
this assertion, we will content our selves with the saying of Aristotle; That
to demand why we love beautiful things, were a question fit for a blind man,
for that the eyes feel and know how powerful the charms are to make an
impression in the Soul. By this which we have spoken it is easy to be
gathered, that love has for object and moving cause the bounty and beauty of
things, which by the sweetness of the beams they cast forth, make so powerful
an impression in our souls, as they remain as it were ravished or rather
charmed with so pleasant a luster; so as to ascend unto the Spring and
fountain, we must eleuate our selves to that great and immortal Essence, which
is as it were a notion of all the graces, of all the beauties and of all the
bounties which are infused into all the creatures. We must, I say, raise up our
selves to that infinite and most happy Essence, which is as it were the center,
from whence all the perfections which represent themselves so goodly unto our
eyes, and so pleasing unto our sense, borrow their luster and take their
beginning. And in this manner we shall tie our affections to an object worthy
of the generosity of their motions, which should always imitate the nature of
fire, which remains unwillingly in the earth, and strives continually to mount
toward heaven.

Finally, we must remember that Love is divided into five branches, and that
there are five kinds which differ much one from another: for there is a love of
natural things, there is a love of creatures; there is a love of men; there is
a love of Angels; and there is a love of God. The Love of natural things is
nothing else but the inclination which things destitute of knowledge have to
unite themselves unto their ends, and to attain the perfections of their
nature; to which sense an Ancient said, that the love of the bodies was nothing
else but the weight wherewith they are balanced, be it that the weight keeps
them down, or that the lightness raises them up on high: for God has
ingrafted these inclinations into all natural things, to the end they may
attain to their perfections, and preserve them when they have once gotten
them. The love of creatures is nothing else but a vehement impression made in
their senses, surprised with things which they conceive to be pleasing. This
Passion is many times blind, importune, obstinate, and insolent, and is common
to men, and brute beasts, which suffers themselves to be transported with the
motions of a dishonest pleasure.

Human Love is a Passion which should follow the motions of reason, and which
being guided by the light of the soul should only embrace the true good, to
make it perfect: for containing himself within these bounds, it should no more
be a violent and furious passion, which filles the world daily with so many
miseries by her exorbitant and strange disorders. The Love of Angels flies yet
higher, for that those happy spirits enlightened with a more excellent light,
and illuminated with a more pure and perfect splendor, love the sovereign
Good more ardently then all the creatures, and by a reflux of this great Love
take an incredible care of the affairs of men; and being never wearied in the
service they do them by the commandment of God, assist them, and procure their
safety, with constancy, and joy full of amazement and wonder. The Love of God
enters not into comparison with any other, for that as there is no proportion
betwixt things finite, and infinite, his motions being infinite, they appear
with another luster, and show themselves with a greater endeavor toward that
he loves, then the creatures can do. From this spring flow the admirable
beauties which shine in the heavens, in the Stars, Planets, Elements, in
bodies both simple and compound, and in great, mean, and small things; all
which do feel the effects of his bounty, and the perfect assistance of his
providence. From this spring proceeds the care which he has of men, the
graces which he imparts unto them, the good desires wherewith he does inspire
them, and the means which he offers them to raise them up to the height of
his glory, and to make them enjoy the felicity of Angels. But we will not
treat of this kind of love, whereof we had rather feel the flames then
describe the perfection. Neither will we discourse of that of Angels, which
we may better admire then set forth: we will not in like sort busy our self
with that of natural things or of creatures, which is too base for our
subject, but we will represent the Love which is a human Passion, whereof
moral Philosophy teaches us to discourse, and whose essence we mean now to
set down.

Wherein the Essence of Love does consist. CHAP. 2.
AS in other subjects we dovsually ascend unto the knowledge of the cause by
the search of the effects, so in this matter to attain unto an exact knowledge
of the nature of Love, we must first understand what it is to love, to the end
the branch may discover the nature of the root. Love then is no other thing,
but, To will good to some one, not for our own private interest, but for the
love of himself; procuring with all our power what we think may be
profitable for him, or may give him content. Whereby it appears, there are
four things to be considered in Love. The first is, that we be careful of
his good whom we Love; the which grows, for that love unites the wills
perfectly, and makes us esteem the good which befalls him we love, as our own
particular: wherefore the Ancients said, that Love was one soul in two bodies.
The which it seems that Alexander would give Darius mother to understand, when
he said that Hephestion was another Alexander: For he used this speech in
regard of the great affection he bare him, the which was such as he held him
another himself, so as he would have him a partaker of all his honors and
glory. After this manner then we should desire to our friends the same honors,
the same glory, and all other felicities which we wish for our own proper
contentment. And when they succeed, we must rejoice as if we our selves
enjoyed them, seeing that all things are common among friends.

But secondly we must wish all this good to those we love for their ownesakes,
and not for any private interest of our own, or for any profit we expect to
reap by them; for the Epicures opinion (who will have men love for profit, or
pleasure) is infamous, and makes Love either mercenary or of small continuance.
We must then remember that there are three kinds of friendship; that is to
say, honest, profitable, and pleasing. Betwixt the which there is this
difference, that the two last kinds are no true affections; but rather shadows
of Love; whereas the first, that is to say, honest friendship, which has
virtue for her object, is solid and true, and moreover it is constant and of
long continuance; whereas the profitable and the pleasing last little, and are
dissolved upon the first alteration which happens in the subject whereunto they
are tied. As for example, they that love only for profit, continue no longer in
this affection, then they whom they love, may be beneficial unto them; the
which ceasing, they renounce the duties of friendship which they had formerly
showed; for that the cause ceasing, the effect of necessity must cease. Hence
it grows that the friendships of Court are so inconstant and variable, for
that Courtiers commonly ^^e their affections to those which are in favor, and
have some kind of credit, to the end it may be an entry, for them to offices
in the Estate. But if there happen any alteration in their fortune by a
disgrace with the Prince, and that they see them unable, and incapable to
assist them, they presently abandon them, and make no more account of them then
of an image overthrown; yea they would have men think that they never
observed them. So in Tiberius time, Seianus possessing his master absolutely,
and receiving the favor of this Prince with full sails, so as all the honors,
all the dignities, and all the offices of the Estate, depended of the
inclination he had to those that courted him; all the world adored him, the
people and Senate erected statues unto him, he was publicly praised, his
house was never empty, all the Orders went to consult with him as with an
oracle, or rather as the soul of the Empire. But as soon as his favor began
to shake, presently he saw the affections of such as had so shamefully
flattered him, decay and die; and when it was wholly fallen, there followed so
prodigio^s a change in the affections of the Court and people, as after they
had unworthily massacred him, they drew his body through the street into the
river of Tiber, his statues were beaten down, all his kinsfolks persecuted,
his memory detested, and the name of Seianus was held in execration to all the
world. But this is the ordinary course in Court, whereas Fortune is always
adored.

As the affections which depend upon profit decay as soon as the profit
cease, in like manner that friendship which is supported only by pleasure,
continues no longer then the subject of pleasure indureth. For they that love
in consideration of beauty, when as age or infirmities makes it to wither and
decay, their affection is gone, and they esteem no more that which they had
formerly honored. So as there is no true nor solid friendship but that which is
grounded upon virtue and honesty. The rest having inconstant and wandering
objects, are also inconstant and mutable, and the interest and pleasures
ceasing, they die: whereas honest love propounding unto it self a constant and
durable object, knows no change. They that Love in this sort wish all good to
him they love, for his own sake, and not for their private interest. The third
thing we must consider in Love is, that we are bound to employ all our means
to procure good to them we love. For as the Sun should not deserve the name
of Sun if it gave not light to the whole world, so we cannot esteem him a
true friend which does not employ himself with all his power and means to
bind him whom he makes profession to love. And this admits no limitation nor
bounds, for there is not any thing which Love will not make him do that loves
perfectly, even to contemn his own life for the safety of him he loves. It
is true, that a perfect friend should wish that he to whom he has engaged his
affection, should have all things happy and prosperous in the course of his
life, that he be never shaken with any storm, and that he never feel any
crosses of fortune; but as the condition of man is frail and exposed to a
thousand calamities, if it chance that he fall into any infirmity, he must
participate of his pain. If a tempest carries him through the waves of the
sea, he must hoist sail to follow him; yea if the billows ouerset his ship,
he must seek him in this shipwreck. If Tyrants seize upon him, if they cast
him into prison and load him with chains, he must offer his own body to
free his bonds; and if they send him to execution, he must present his head to
redeem his friends. If he see him assaulted by his enemies, who seek to
murder him, he must present himself to bear their blows. And if he see him
in the throat of lions, exposed to the rage of wild beasts, he must hazard
himself to free him from danger; and if he die, he must in like manner abhor
life. He that loves perfectly, said Plato by the mouth of Phedro, will rather
abandon himself to death, then expose that he loves to dangers. And there is
no man so faint hearted, whom Love does not fill with courage and inflame with
a force, to make him in this subject equal to the most generous souls. For
that which Homer says, that the Worthies are inspired with a divine force and
fury, is more truly verified in those that love, who^ love has often
inspired with a divine fury, which has made them to contemn death, to
preserve the life of those they have loved.

The last thing that is to be considered in Love, is that we wish unto our
friends; the things which we think truly are good for them, that is to say,
that we desire for them the things that are just, and that are adorned with all
the circumstances of virtue. In regard whereof he spoke wisely, which answered
his friend, who would have him forswear himself, that he was a friend even
unto the altars, having no intent to serve his friend against his conscience.
In this case then Love admits bounds and limitations, and it were to abuse the
name, to bind him that loves, to commit unjust things in favor of them to whom
he wishes well. So when as Charles of Burbon (to revenge his private
disco^tent) abandoned France and his King, and embraced the party of Spain and
the Emperor, the Princes and Noblemen his friends, (whereof he had many in
Court) did not hold themselves bound to follow him, and to make themselves
confederates of his despite and rebellion. So as these words which are at this
day in the mouth of many, that they are ready to turn Turks for their
friends, yea and to follow them into hell, is the speech rather of a fury, then
the discourse of men transported with true Love: for Love must co^taine it
self within the bounds of justice, honesty, and virtue, and not make us do any
thing which may breed us shame. And moreover, they that make these impious
protestations, have them more in their mouths then in their hearts; and I know
not how they can make them without blushing. By all this which we have said, it
is easy to gather wherein the essence of Love does properly consist, the which
we may define in this manner.

Love is a wellwishing, which we testify with all our power to those, to whom
we have an inclination, procuring them for their own sakes, all the good we
think may give them content. According to which he is a friend that loves, and
is reciprocally beloved; for love being as it were a torch which lightens
another, friends must believe that affections are reciprocal, and that as they
love, so they are beloved; wherein they must not show themselves unpleasing or
importune, to sound the hearts one of another, which will bewray a diffidence
and distruct: But content themselves with the true signs of love, which their
friends show them. These signs of true Love are reduced to three principal
heads. The first is, that friends rejoice and grieve for the same things:
wherefore Homer describing Agamemno^s affliction, when as he was forced to
sacrifice his daughter Iyhigenia, he represents al his friends accompanying him
to this sacrifice, with mournful countenances and full of sorrow; and at
Rome, when as any one was accused and brought in question for his life, al his
friends changed their robes with him, to show that they did participate with
his affliction. The reason is, for that sorrow and joy are the marks of our
affections, and of that we have in the soul, which rejoices or afflicts it
self, as the objects which present themselves are pleasing or distasteful. And
for this reason, sorrow and joy discover the inclination we have to any one.

The second is, that friends share equally betwixt them the good and evil.
They say that there are images of wax, upon the which inchanters deliver such
powerful spells, as being made to represent any person, as soon as they are
wronged, the body of him for whom they were fashioned, feels pain. In this
sort there is such a bond of affection betwixt friends as the harm which
happens to the one, afflicts the other, and fills him with bitterness, so as
many times we have seen true friends die with sorrow, for the loss of their
friend. Yea, profane histories are full of Persons which have slain
themselves, for that they would not survive them whom they have loved dearly.
In like manner the prosperity of friends passes from one to another, so as the
tryumphs of Alexander are the co^tentments of Ephestion, and the glory of
Ephestion is the joy of Alexander. The third is, that they which love should
have the same friends, and the same enemies. They say the Adamant or Loadstone
does not only make an impression upon iron which it draws, but does also
impart his virtue by his touching; so as the iron which it has touched, draws
other iron unto it, and makes as it were a continued chain. In the same
manner, a friend brings his friends to him he loves, and he reciprocally
imparts unto him his friends; whereof there is framed a common bond, which
makes them ready to succor one another, as if they were members of one body.

To what Persons Love extends. CHAP. 3.
ALthough that love has for his general object the bounty and beauty which
shines in those things which present them selves unto our eyes and souls; yet
there are diverse particular considerations, and diverse beams, which excite
this Passion and fashion it in the hearts of men. Aristotle numbers fifteen
causes, the which are also divided into other branches, whereof we will treat
as briefly as we may, taking only that which shall belong unto our subject.
First, says he, men love them which do them good, or whom they think have a
will to do it, or to their friends. In truth there is nothing that more binds
the hearts of men, and induces them more to love then benefits. For even
brute beasts feel the good which they receive from men, and there is no
creature so wild, whom good usage does not make gentle and tame. They that
govern Lions fear not their rage, but play about them without any
apprehension of their fury, for that this generous Creature knows him that
has a care to feed him. By continual feeding they bring Elephants to do what
service they desire. And we must not object against it, that it has been a
common complaint in the mouth of men in all ages, that most of the benefits
that are bestowed in the world are lost, for that they fall upon ungrateful
souls, who do not acknowledge themselves in any sort bound. For (as an Ancient
has observed) this proceeds not from the nature of the benefits, which
contrariwise have a particular virtue to draw the affection and to charm the
will: but most commonly the fault proceeds from our selves, for that we either
err in our election, doing good to unworthy persons: or we distribute it ill,
if we take away the grace. For we must not think that our benefits bind a
friend, if we suffer our selves to be too much courted, if we make him to
languish in the pursuit, or if we do it with a kind of unwillingness; for by
these means we take away all the merit and bond of the benefit, for that no
man will think himself beholding for that which he has purchased so
dearly: wherefore an Ancient called benefits of that nature, a loaf filled
with stones, which no man can use. Men therefore think themselves bound to
those from whom they receive benefits, whether they be great and worthy to be
acknowledged, in regard of their greae show and magnificence; or that they
which are the authors, bestow them freely without importunity, and with a
singular demonstration of Love; or that such as give, have made a sit choice of
time to bind them, assisting them when as they or their friends had extreme
need, and when as they think that for their own sakes they have bound them
by these benefits.

They also Love the friends of their friends, and such as have any conformity
with them in the subject of their affection, and that Love those whom they
Love, and who also make profession to be enemies to their enemy. The reason is,
that reputing their friends good as their own, they believe, that the good
which is done unto their friends extends unto them^selues, and that they do
participate wholly thereof. In regard whereof they love the spring and
fountain. And contrariwise they believe, that the auersion and distaste they
have of their enemies is a token of the love they bear them. They also love
those that succor them with their means, or bind them with the hazard of
their lives. For first of all, men love bountiful friends passionatly,
imagining that they are borne for the good of mankind. As for the second, men
love great courages, imagining that they are supporters of their lives; and
that they will never suffer wrong to be done unto the weak and feeble. They
also love such as they hold to be just, and resemble not the Harpeys or
ravening birds, which live of spoil, but content themselves with their own
fortunes, committing no outrage, nor offering violence to any. And in this
rank they put laborers and handicrafts men, to whom all the world seems to
bear an affection, in regard of the innocence of their profession. They also
put in the same rank, temperate persons, in whom they see some great modesty
to shine, which show that their souls are not inclined to any kind of
injustice. They again esteem those that lead a peaceable life, which have no
curiosity, and which pry not into the lives of other men, but content
themselves to order, and govern those that are submitted to their care and
charge, presupposing that such as contain themselves within these bounds,
think not of any injustice or wickedness. Men also Love famous persons, who
by their virtue have attained to an eminent glory, and an extraordinary
reputation, be it generally in the world, or only among good men, or among
such as they have in admiration, or by whom they themselves are admired; and
they especially make great show of their affection, when as they presume, that
these Persons in all their dignity and greatness disdain them not, but are well
pleased with the testimonies of their Passion; so we have seen people run
by whole troops from all the corners of the world, to see conquerours and such
as did triumph; men of holy life, and Persons endued with rare knowledge or
wisdom, above the common sort of men. The reason is, for that virtue,
generosity, sanctity, and eminent knowledge, are not only lovely things of
themselves, and which have powerful allurements to cause them to be affected
and admired in the subjects where they reside, but also men believe there is a
kind of glory to be admitted into the favor of such illustrious persons,
whose glory seems to communicate with those that have the honor to come near
them. But men Love particularly these famous and virtuous Persons, when as they
discover, that they disdain not the affection and Love of those, which make
show to honor them with Passions; for it is a testimony of their moderation and
of the bounty of their nature, not to be puffed up with the glorious advantages
which they have gotten above the ordinary sort of men. They also Love such as
are of a sweet conversation, and that have a mild and pleasing humor, that is
to say, they Love those that are not fantastical, and of a troublesome and
importune behavior. They also Love such as reprove them not odiously of their
faults, they love those whom they see enemies of contention, and which make
show, that they have not a desire to be superior in all disputes which rise in
companies; but acco^modate themselves wisely and moderately to that which is
contested. The reason is, for that these wayward spirits, they that are
licentious in their answers, and such as will always in their arguments have
the upper hand, seem to be borne to contradict and control the opinions of
the whole world: the which is a sign of the alienation of wills, and
dissenting from others; which makes them to be hated: whereas contrariwise they
Love such as have none of these bad humors, and which accomodate themselves in
company, without making any show to be self conceited. Moreover men have as
it were a natural inclination to Love those which have a quicknes and grace in
their incounters, or to jest pleasantly, but withal can endure to hear a
witty return: hence it comes that in Court, buffoones and ieasters, which have
biting and Satiricall spirits, are so much esteemed; and yet many times these
people, bite private Persons too sensibly and indiscreetly, and draw upon them
the just wrath of those whom they have licentiously offended. In the mean time
the reasons why they Love such as are sudden in their incounters and sharp in
their ieasts, is, for that it seems this quickness, and wittiness to
encounter, proceeds from the subtilty and force of their spirits. And then we
are inclined to hear men evil spoken of; wherefore we Love them that do it
with a good grace. And for that we Love particularly such as take liberty to
jest at others, and are content to be iested withal; that proceeds, for that
we believe that such as will endure that which they themselves practice to
others, have no bad intent nor any bitterness in their hearts, but are carried
to these incounters, more through a quickness of wit, then by any spleen.
Moreover they love such, as seem to make great esteem of the good parts and
qualities which they believe they enjoy. Wherefore we suffer our selves to be
surprised by flatterers, who insinuate into our favors, cover our defects, and
seem to admire our actions. This misery happe^s particularly to such as
distrust themselves, and who fear to want those virtues which they desire to
attain unto. For this distrust b^ing dispersed by the praises which they give
them, they think themselves bound to such as bring this support unto their
weakness.

They also love those persons which affect neatness in all things, who take
delight to carry a pleasing countenance, and to attire themselves properly: for
that this neatness and hansomenesse is as it were a sign of the desire they
have to insinuate themselves into the hearts, and to gain the affections of
men, who f^r this cause think themselves bound to love them: they in like
manner love them, that lay not their faults before them to shame them, nor
reproach them with the benefits wherewith they have bound them. The reason is,
for that both the one and the other redounds to our disgrace; and it seems,
that such as enter into these reproaches, will make us contemptible, either by
discovering our defects, or in accusing us of ingratitude. They also love such
as remember not injuries past, which are not obstinately bent to revenge, and
who are always ready to pardon such as have offended them. Wherefore the
Romans did wonderfully admire the first of the Caesar's, for that he forgot
nothing but injuries, the remembrance whereof he held unworthy the greatness
of his courage. Wherefore when as this Prince had erected again the statues of
Pompey, Cicero (that great ornament of the Roman Eloquence) pronounced to his
commendatio^, that in erecting the statues of Pompey, he had assured his own,
as having won the Love of the whole world, by this act o^ humanity, which he
showed to his enemy oppressed with misery. The reason of this Love which men
bear to those which forget injuries in this manner, is, for that they presume
when they have offended them, they will show themselves in like manner to them,
as they have done to others.

They also love such as are not il tongued or detractors, which observe not
their imperfections, nor those of their friends, but only regard their virtues,
either to admire them, or to frame themselves after their example. For that
these things are the offices of good men, and of persons endued with singular
integrity, and great probity. Moreover, they love such as resist them not when
they are in choler, or that importune them not in the midst of their most
serious employments: for that they which take pleasure in these oppositions and
importunities, seem to love contention, and to be enemies to all society. They
also love those that admire them, which have an opinion that they are virtuous,
and make show that they take delight in their conversation, and are officious
unto them: But principally, when they make show of this affection and liking in
those things wherein they would have their industry admired. As for example, a
man that loves Philosophy, takes delight to hear his profession praised: he
that takes delight in Arms, has a singulat content to hear his exercise
commended: wherefore both the one and the other love those tha^ give glorious
testimony of that which concerns their profession. Above all, they have an
inclination to love their like, being a thing which nature teaches us daily,
that resemblance ingenders Love, not only among men, but also among other
creatures: for every creature loves his like: Tigers and Panthers troop
together with beasts of their own kind: And birds of one fether fly willingly
together; such power has resembla^ce to unite affections: the which we must
believe is more powerful in man, who can have no sweeter conversation the^ with
his like. The reason why every man loves his like, is, for that man loving
passionatly above other things, loves consequently any thing that has any
corresponcy with him; so as respecting him whom he loves as another himself,
he cannot but be inflamed with this consideration. The Platonicians had
another reason, the which in my opinion concurres with this. Love, say they,
makes an impression in the soul of him that loves, of the Image and form of
the thing beloved. But man loves not only his being, and his true and real
form, but also his imaginary form; as appears by pictures, and
looking-glasses, in which we behold with content our portraicts and forms.
Wherefore there is a certain Passion for the thing beloved, in whose soul he
does contemplate his form which Love has engraven. After this manner,
resemblance breeds Love, and unites the affections of men. The truth hereof
appears, for that men do commonly love those, that are allied unto them in
neernesse of blood, so as Kinsmen do commonly love one another: or by some
conformity of humors and complexions, which makes melancholy men love the
company of their like, and Iouiall spirits delight in the company of them that
are pleasant: Or by some commerce of profession, which makes Philosophers to
love Philosophers; and Painters delight in Painters: Or some equality of age,
which makes young men delight in the company of youth, and old men to converse
with them that are grave: Or some coherence of manners, which makes good men
love the virtuous, and the wicked seek after such as are wickedly affected.
But notwithstanding that which we have said, that commonly men of one
profession love one another, must be understood according to the true nature
of things, for by occasion and accident, this co^formity of professions may
engender hatred and envy, that is to say, when as they of one trade and
profession, living of their art and labor, hinder one another: as for example,
when as a tradsman having gotten some reputation, does hinder the profit of his
companions, then jealousy rises amongst them, according to the saying of an
Ancient, The Potter enuies the Potter. The Philosophers give an excellent
reason hereof: He that loves, say they, loves himself more dearly then all
other things besides: for that he is united to himself by Essence and Nature,
whereas he is not conjoined to him that he loves, but by some accidental and
external form. And therefore if this conformity crosses his private good,
and be prejudicial unto him, he finds himself more strictly tied unto
himself, then to his like: wherefore seeing his loss concurring with his
passion, he whom he loved, being an obstacle to his desire, he grows odious
unto him, as opposite to his good.

Men do also love those that aspire to the same honors and dignities, at the
least when they may attain unto them, and enjoy them together, without any
obstacle or wrong one unto another. For competency causing an hinderance, as it
did in the pursuit of the Consulate at Rome, it happens (as we have said of
men of the same profession) that it excites envy and hatred: Wherefore in the
love of women they can endure no corriuals, for that with honesty they cannot
be enjoyed by two. They also love those with whom they have any familiarity,
which is not scrupulous, having free liberty without apprehension of disdain,
to do and say things in their presence which they would not act or speak
before the world. As for example, they affect those before whom they may freely
discourse of their loves, of their pursuites, and of their other Passions. But
we must remember that there are some things which are dishonest of themselves,
the which a good man may neither do, or speak before the world, or before his
friends. But there are others which are shameful only in the opinion of the
world, and not according to the truth of things: and these a good man, using an
honest familiarity with his friends, may do and speak in their presence,
although he would not do it in public before the world: like unto King
Agesilaus, being in private with his children, played with them with a fatherly
liberty, but being surprised by one, who knew not how far the love of a
father might extend, he was discontented.

Men also testify, that they love those before whom they are ashamed to do or
say those things which are of themselves shameful or dishonest; wherein we
may say, that the Persians gave good testimony of their love to their wives,
when as they caused them to retire from their banquets, being unwilling that
their eyes should be spectators of their excess, and admitting none but their
Concubines. For this respect and reverence which they gave them, was a sign of
true Love, for that we are ashamed to commit any unworthy Act before them we
affect. They also willingly embrace such as they have seen faithful, and
constant in their affections, and who love equally both present and absent. For
which consideration they desire to insinuate themselves into their friendship
which testify their love unto the dead, who adorn their Tombs, erect
Statues, and make other monuments for them, to preserve their memory among men.
They also affect such as abandon not their friends in the crosses and injuries
of fortune, whereof we have a worthy example in the subject of Damon and
Pithias, whereof the one being condemned to die, by the tyrant Dionisius, and
desiring some respite, to go and settle the affairs of his house, his
companion yielded himself a pledge for his return, with this condition, that
if he returned not back within the prefixed time, he should undergo the
rigor of the same sentence: but the condemned man presenting himself at the
day appointed, the tyrant was so rapt with admiration, to see the faith which
he had unto his friend, in a matter of that importance, and of so great danger,
that in stead of putting him to death, he coniured these two perfect friends,
to accept of him as a third man in their friendship. Behold how the most savage
and untamed spirits are forced to love those, that show an unviolable constancy
in their affections. Men do also love such as they see full of freedom, and
without dissimulation toward them. In which rank they number such as make no
scruple to discover their errors unto them, and who entertain them freely with
their private passions: For, as we have showed before, we blush not to say or
do in private with our friends, that which we would not do publickely before
the world. Wherefore, as he that is ashamed to do any thing before another,
shows that he loves him not perfectly; so he that has not this apprehension,
gives a manifest testimony that he has a full confidence in his friendship:
wherefore, we love such as make show to rely upon us, even discovering their
imperfections unto us. Again, they affect those whose authority is not
fearful unto them, and whose power they think they shall have no cause to
apprehend: for no man ever loved him whom he feared seruilely; and herein
Tyrants abuse themselves, thinking to se^le their Authority by the terror of
Arms, and the terror of punishment: yea, they have always detested the
furious words of him that said, I care not to be hated, so I may be feared. It
were good among bruit beasts, but men must be managed and governed by
mildness. And they willingly embrace such as they may trust; and whose power
is not fearful unto them. Behold the persons to whom the Love of men does
commonly extend.

In the mean time the true means to purchase Love, is to bind those whose
friendship we affect, by all sorts of benefits and good offices. And to this
end they must do good before it be demanded or that they be forced to discover
their wants unto us: for that were to put them on the rack, to make them
confess our magnificence and bounty. Moreover he must be careful never to
reproach the favors which he has done them, nor proclaim them to others,
with a vanity which seems to turn to their contempt. He that observes this
mean in the benefits and favors which he bestows, seems to have propounded
unto himself, the only good of him whom he has bound, without any other
particular interest: In regard whereof he is also bound to acknowledge and Love
his freedom, and bounty.

Of the Effects of Love. CHAP. 4.
AS the Ancient Romans observing of the one side, the conquests, victories,
triumphs, and glory, which Caesar by his valor had purchased to their Empire;
and on the other side weighing the ruins, miseries, massacres, and slaughters,
which he had caused in their Estate, they were wont to say, that it was
difficult to judge whether his birth had been more fortunate or fatal to their
Common wealth. Even so it is hard to say, whether that Love causes more good
or evil in the world. It is true, when as this Passion contains it self
within the bounds of honesty, it is a lively spring and fountain of all good
things in the life of men. It is also true, that the author of nature has
ingrafted in us the first motions and beams; and it is true, that it is borne
with us, that it increases with us, and that it does always accompany us, so
as it cannot subsist without us, nor we Love without it. It is an immutable
law, which men have not ^^^nd out, lawgiuers have not prescribed; neither does
it depend upon the examples or customs of nations, but was graven, as we may
say, by the hands of nature in our Souls. But when like a wild and untamed
beast it exceedes the bounds of reason, there is no misery which it brings not
into the world, nor any disorder which it causes not in our lives. It is as it
were a fatal source, from whence flow all kinds of horror, uncleanness,
adulteries, incests, sacriledges, quarrels, wars, treasons, murders,
parricides, cruelties, and violences; besides the particular torments it gives
unto the souls of such as give themselves to be surprised, filling them with
enuies, iealousies, cares, melancholies, terrors, yea and madness; drawing
them many times to despair, and to do things whereat heaven and earth blush
and are ashamed: wherein it is the more to be feared, for that as the first
heaven by his motion does violently draw whatsoever is beneath it, so Love
prescribes a law to our other desires, and to all our other Passions; so as we
may term it the key and beginning of our tho^ghts, of our words, of our
actions, and of whatsoever we do in this life: So it makes the first
impression in our souls, where it excites the desire of that which we resolve
to pursue; and then it fortifies this desire by hope, which inflames us to the
pursuit of that we desire; and if there appear any obstacle, it imbraceth
Choler, and has no rest until it has vanquished and surmounted all lets,
wherein she settles her co^tentment and rest. And as the thunder breaks
whatsoever resists it, so this furious Passion, being once inflamed, strives to
overthrow whatsoever opposes it self against her rage and violence. Yet as the
winds fill the sails of Pirates ships, but are not the cause of the murders
and thefts which they commit at sea; But all these miseries proceed from the
bad inclination and covetousness of these infamous Pirates: So although that
Love be an assistant in many villainies which men commit, yet it proceeds not
from the malice of this Passion, which contrariwise is framed to bring all good
to the society of men; but it grows from the liberty and excess of men, who
pervert the use of all things, and convert the causes of their felicity, into
instruments of their misery. Let us then see what be the proper effects of
Love, not staying at those which rise from the mere malice of men. We will
reduce them to three or four heads, the explanation whereof will give
sufficient light to the rest of the subject.

The first effect they attribute to Love, is, that it has an uniting virtue,
by means whereof it causes him that loves to aspire to unite himself to the
thing beloved: whereunto we may refer the fable of Androgenes, where of Plato
does so much triumph; but we must swallow so many fopperies, before we shall
come to the mysteries of this fiction, as it were better to pass it over in
silence, then to spend time to explicate it. So it is that profane and unchaste
Love seeks the union of bodies, which is found even among brute beasts, and
for this reason may be called brutish, if it be not sought with an honest
intent by a lawful marriage. But chaste and honest Love seeks the union of
affections and wills, and exceeds not that which is decent and virtuous. They
which love, said Aristophanes, would passionately desire to be tra^sformed, and
changed one into another, and of two bodies to become one. But for that this
transformation cannot be without the destruction of their being, they strive to
recompense this defect, by a civil and honest union, which te^ds not to the
ruin of their nature, but contents their affections; that is to say, they
converse continually together, entertain their Passions, and are as little
absent as may be one from another: Moreover they have the same thoughts, the
same desires, the same affections, the same wills, the same delights, and the
same distastes, and seem to be but one soul in two bodies. So as that which
is pleasing to him that loves, is in like manner to the party beloved, what he
affects the other imbraceth; and what he reiects the other flies, and does
abhor. So as their wills being thus strictly united, all their actions and
carriages conspire to the same end, and propound unto themselves the same
object. For when as we have graft the sience of one tree upon another stock,
the fruits which grow follow the nature of the graft, and savor nothing of the
stock: so the will of the lover, being transported into that of the party
beloved, takes the tincture, and does not any thing but what is conformeable to
his desires and intentions. But whence comes the power which this Passion has,
thus to unite the subjects where it works? This cannot well be explicated
without the aid of Philosophy. First of all, Love, say the Philosophers, is a
desire to enjoy the good we propound unto our selves, as proper for our
content, and capable to make us in some sort better by the fruition. But this
enjoying and participation cannot be effected but by uniting the object to our
affection, which is the same good we propound unto our selves; wherefore it is
of the Essence of Love that it produces this union. Hence it proceeds, that
the presence of the party beloved is so dear and precious unto us, and that we
feel our selves filled with content, when as we may enjoy him to entertain
our thoughts, to taste the sweetness of his company, and to discover our
Passions: whereas his absence and separation gives us a thousand torments, and
afflicts us with a thousand sorrows and discontents, which we would redeem
with our lives. Wherefore when as death does take violently from us those whom
we love dearly, and by this means has condemned us as it were to a
perpetual absence, we strive to ease our grief, and sweeten our loss, by
transporting our selves often to the places where we were accustomed to see
the^, representing unto our selves their portracts and images, reading over
their letters, and still handling all the gages and monuments they left us of
their affection. Sometimes the same gages and the same momuments of their
affection displease us, and we do so abhor them, as we cannot endure to see
them, nor handle them, but this grows from the grief of their absence, for
that we then represent them as infallible signs of our loss, which they
figure unto us as irreparable; by reason whereof their pictures fill us with
bitterness. But on the other side when as the same things seem unto us to
supply the presence, we Love them dearly, and cannot be weary to entertain
our selves with those thoughts. And if amidst all this we can invent any thing
that may serve to preserve the memory more lively in our souls, we embrace
the invention, and are wonderfully pleased with this art. Wherein doubtless
Artimesia Queen of Caria, showed an act of wonderful Passion toward her
husband Mausolus. For death having taken him away, this desolate Princess not
knowing how to pull the thorns of her sorrow out ofher soul, she caused his
body to be reduced to ashes, and mingled them in her drink, meaning to make
her body a living tomb, whereas the relics of her dear husband might rest,
from whom she could not endure to live separated.

The most subtle Philosophers give a second reason of this union which arises
from Love. Love (say they) has her feate in the Will (they do not consider it
as a Passion only, which rises in the senses, but also as a quality which in
the end becomes spiritual;) but there is this difference betwixt the
understanding and Will: the understanding goes not out of it self to join
with his object, but rather he draws the object unto him, whereof the Image is
framed to produce his action, like unto a seal which prints its form in the
wax. But the Will being touched with the Love of her object, suffers it self
to be drawn to his Image; and going out of it self, unites it self unto him
to take his form; like unto the wax which receives impressions of the seal.
So as by this reason, Love is thought to cause the union of him that loves with
the party beloved; for that his will ravished by his love, has no other
Passion but to see her self united unto her. But these meditations are too nice
for our subject.

The second effect they attribute to Love, and which is as it were, a branch
and bud of the first, is, that it causes the soul of him that loves, to be
more where it loves, then where it lives, and that reciprocally the soul of
the party beloved, is more with the lover then with his own body. The reason
is; for that the souls of such as love, are perpetually attentive to
co^template the image of that they love, and have no other thought nor greater
pleasure, then that they receive by this sweet entertainment: By reason
whereof the soul making show of a more exact presence, where it does most
frequently work, it follows thereby that it is more with the party beloved,
then in its own body.

But let us hear the opinion of the Platonicians upon this point: The soul,
say they, which is touched to the quick with Love, dying in i^s own body,
finds life in that it loves. And when this Love is reciprocal, it dies but
once, whereas it reuiues twice. For he that loves dies truly, when as Love makes
him neglect and forget the causes of his life, to think wholly upon the party
beloved; but he recouers his life doubly when as he sees himself embraced and
entertained by the party beloved; and that he finds in his arms his deer
Image; which he preserues more carefully then his own life. Who will not then,
say they, hold this death happy, which is recompensed by two such sweet lives?
But this discourse of the Platonicians presupposes an equal correspo^dency in
Love, without the which they maintain that this Passion is full of despair,
and leaves nothing in our souls but importune and troublesome thorns.
Wherefore the Ancients said, that to make Love grow, she had need of a
brother. But we have treated sufficiently of this Subject.

They attribute other effects to Love, that is to say, languishings, ecstasies,
and amazements; but that Love must be very violent which does produce them.
And moreover we may consider these ecstasies, and rauish^ments which may happen
in a violent Love, after two sorts. First, we may observe them as a true
alienation of the senses, which arises, for that the spirit and will of him
that loves, being wholly employed in the contemplation and enjoying of the
thing beloved, suffers himself to be so transported with this content, as
the soul remains as it were quenched and without motion. The which may also
proceed from a more powerful cause, that is to say, either from God or from
evil spirits, which sometimes stir up these rauishments and extraordinary
ecstasies. Secondly we may consider these ecstasies and rauishments, as a kind of
madness, which transports them that Love, and makes them to commit many follies;
wherefore an Ancient said, that Jupiter himself could not be wise and love at
one instant. These ecstasies and rauishments produce sometimes prodigious
effects in their souls that are afflicted with this Passion. For that his
soul that loves entirely, is perpetually imploy^ed in the contemplation of the
party beloved, and has no other thoughts but of his merit, the heat
abandoning the parts, and retiring into the brain, leaves the whole body in
great distemperature, which corrupting and consuming the whole blood, makes the
face grow pale and wanne, causes the trembling of the heart, breeds strange
convulsions, and retires the spirits in such sort, as he seems rather an image
of death, then a living creature. These accidents are followed with passionate
and heartbreaking sighs; as it appeared in young Antiochus at the sight of
Stratonice: Or when as they only make mention of her, as if the spirit were
eased and free from a heavy burden, and received content by this thought or
presence. Tears in like manner fly to succor this afflicted soul, for that
the heat which is mounted up to the brain, causes the humor to dissolve and
discharge it self by the eyes. But this poor soul thus agitated, has no
certain consistence, but floting betwixt hope and fear, she sometimes gives
signs of joy, sometimes marks of sorrow; she is sometime frozen and
congealed, sometimes all on fire: she goes, she comes, without any stay or
rest, and does many things which show that she is as it were incensed. For she
proclames the merit and glory of that she loves, and gives extraordinary
commendations, which are the signs of her rauishment. Suddenly changing her
humor, she makes her grief and discontent ascend up into heaven, she
accuses the innocent Stars, she complains of destiny and fortune, and
blames that which she loves; and suddenly returning to herself, she condemns
herself of wrong. Then she powers forth her spleen against such as she thinks
have crossed her rest and hindered her content, so as she suffers cruel torments
in this agitatio^. Many times even in the heat of his Passion, the party touched
with love can endure no longer discourse; his words are short and scarce
intelligible, for that the soul being thus tied to the object which it loves,
it cannot give it self the leisure to speak of any other thing. And that which
is full of admiration, this Passion does so change and tra^sform men, as it
makes the wisest to commit great follies; it humbles the grauest to services
unworthy of their rank, it makes the most glorious to become humble and
meek, the covetous to be profuse and prodigal, and cowards to show themselves
hardy and valiant. But for that some of these effects exceed the ordinary of a
moral Passion, we will leave them to discourse particularly of Jealousy, upon
which subjects there are great controversies and disputes, that is to say,
whether it be one of the effects of Love, as the Vulgar sort imagine; or
whether it be rather the poison of Love, as others presuppose; but we will
refer the discourse to the following Chapter.

Of Jealousy, whether it be an Effect and sign of Love. CHAP. 5.
THE Vulgar sort think, that as the Sun runs not his course without light,
so Love cannot be without Jealousy; and they add, that as lightning is an
infallible sign of Thunder, which breaks forth, so Jealousy is a certain
sign of Love, which desires to show it self powerfully. But they that have a
more exact and particular knowledge of Humane Passions, maintain, that as the
Sun being come to the South (which is the point of the perfection of his
light) casts no shadow, but spreads his beams all pure upon the earth; so a
true and perfect love is not subject to the inclinations of Jealousy.

And they say moreover, that this unjust Passion is no more a sign of Love,
then storms and tempests are shows of fair weather; this opinion is more
probable: for to begin with the proofs, how can Jealousy subsist and remain
with Love, unless we will overthrow the Laws of Nature, which suffer not two
contraries to subsist in one subject? Is there any thing more contrary to Love
then Jealousy? Can the world see a greater Antipathy, then that which is
observed in these two qualities, whereof the one does participate with the
condition of monsters, and the other is the very Idea of perfection? Love
unites the wills, and makes that the desires of them that love, strive to take,
as it were, the same tincture, to the end they may resemble one another. And
contrariwise, what does so much distract the Wills, and divide the hearts, as
Jealousy? Love binds us to interpret favorably of all the actions of the
party beloved, and to take in good part that which we ought to believe she has
done with reason: whereas Jealousy makes bad interpretations, not only of her
actions, but even of her very thoughts? Is there any innocence that can be
sheltred from the outrages of this inhumane fury? If the party beloved has any
joy, it then presupposes a rival; if she be pensive, they are suspicions of
contempt: if she speaks to another, it is Infidelity; if she have wit, they
apprehend practices; if she be advised, they imagine subtilties; if she be
plain, they call it simplicity; if she be well spoken, it is affectednesse;
if she be courteous, it is with a design. So as Jealousy is like unto those
counterfeit glasses, which never represent the true proportion of the face: and
what more sinister judgments could the most cruel enemy in the world give of
the party beloved? But not content thus to blemish the particular perfections
of that she seems to love, she seeks to deprive it of the sweetest content
in this life, which is by communicatio^ with men of honor and merit, who do
not visit her but for the esteem they make of her virtues: So as many times
to please an importune, who is himself a great burden to them that suffer
him, she must forbear all good company. What justice can force a soul well
bred, to endure this brutish rigot? Love is a lively fountain of joy and
contentment, which banisheth all cares and melancholy; but Jealousy, what is
it else but a nursery of grief^ and waywardness, whereas we see thorns of
despair and rage, to grow up among the sweetest and most pleasing flowers that
Nature can produce? How then can any man believe that these two contrary
Passions can subsist in one subject? If they oppose heereunto experience, and
the testimony of many persons worthy of credit, which protest that they have
loved sincerely, and yet were never without Jealousy; and will thereby
infer, that at the least, Jealousy is a sign of love; which is the second
thing we must encounter, to satisfy that which has been formerly propounded:
it suffices to answer, that although for respect we yield to those personages
what they publish of their Passions: yet as one Swallow makes no Spring, so
that which happens to particulars, cannot prescribe a law to the general. But
to contain our selves within the bounds of our first proposition, we say, that
these persons are much deceived in this subject: and their error grows, for
that they cannot give proper names to things, for that of a respective fear
competible with love, whereof it is full, they make an unjust Jealousy, with
the which Love can no more subsist, then water with fire. They that love
entirely, are in truth, full of respect to the party beloved; honor her with
all the passions of their souls, fight for her honor, and hold it a punishment
to offend her. But these are not the effects of Jealousy, which contrariwise
violates the honor which is due to the party beloved, and by a prodigious
manner to blind the world, will have her favor by wronging her, treading her
merits under foot. We must then put a difference betwixt a respective fear,
which always does accompany those that love perfectly, and Jealousy which is
never found but with an imperfect passion, which cannot judge of the
perfections of the party beloved. They which know that these things are
diverse, and as remote one from another, as the earth is from heaven, will
easily pass on this side, and yield, that Jealousy is neither competible
with Love, nor is any sign thereof. Yet if we shall yield any thing to the
opinion of the Vulgar, we may freely confess, that Jealousy, in truth is a
sign of Love, but as the fever is an argument of life. It is unquestionable,
that a fever is a sign of life, seeing the dead are not susceptible of this
bad quality. But as a fever showing that there are some relics of life in the
patient that is tormented, accompanies him to his grave; so Jealousy is I know
not what sign of Love, seeing they which love not, cannot have any Jealousy.
But it is certain, that if we expel it not, it will in the end ruin Love,
like unto a thick smoke which smothers the brightest flame. This is all we
can yield unto the Vulgar, so as according to this opinion which we have held
the most probable, Jealousy is to Love as thick mists are to flowers, hail
to harvest, storms to fruits, and poison to our lives.

Of Hatred or Enmity. CHAP. 1.
AS the Laws of Love and Hatred are directly contrary; by that which we have
spoken of Love, it will be easy to judge, wherein Hatred consists, and how
far her effects extends. Hatred then is An auersion and horror which man has
of all that seems contrary to his good, or prejudicial to his contentment: Or
else Hatred is an horror which the appetite has of that which seems
pernicious unto it, so as the sheep hate the wolf, as the enemy and
persecuter of his life.

But we must here observe, that as all that is befitting Nature is put in the
rank of good, so on the other side, whatsoever is opposite unto it, must be
placed in the rank of evil. Wherefore as the good is the object of Love, so
the evil is the object of Hatred. To understand this, we must remember, that
whether it be in the mind or in the body, there is a befitting estate, and as
it were a natural harmony, which makes us to abhor that which may dissolve
this consort. This harmony considered in the body, is no other thing then the
good constitution, by means whereof, we enjoy a perfect health; the which
being impaired, our nature receives pain, as when we endure great hunger and
thirst, or when as we receive any hurt or wound. As for the soul, this same
harmony may be considered: first in the senses, as well external as
internal, and consist in the proportion they have with their objects; which is
such, as they hate whatsoever pulls them away, or which diuerts them by any
kind of violence. As for example, the eyes hate darkness and obscurity, and
our imagination is terrified and troubled by the fearful apprehensions of
dreams, which it frames during our rest. This same harmony considered in
reason, either it regards the simple knowledge of the truth, which our
understanding conceiues with pleasure; or the use and execution of things which
depend on wisdom, which we do with content. In regard of the first, our
spirit is enemy to lying, although at some times it takes delight in the art
wherewith they color a thing to give it some show of truth: So as the wisest
are delighted in the reading and report of fables, when as the intention has
any grace. And as for the second, there is such diversity of judgments in
human actions which are as it were the Element of prudence, as it is a thing
in a manner* incredible: for hardly shall you see two persons which have the
same feeling and apprehension of affairs, in regard whereof this life is full
of Hatred and factions which grow from these diverse opinions.

As for that which concerns the will, her harmony consists in the proportion
and Love which she bears to the good, which makes her detest and abhor
whatsoever presents it self unto her, under the show of evil, as pernicious
and hurtful to her content and rest. And therefore the harmony of the
sensitive appetite consisting in the familiarity and concurrence it has with
the good of the senses, it does abhor and bears an irreconciliable hatred,
to whatsoever shall offend them; hence it comes that we so much abhor
whippes, tortures, punishments, hunger, thirst, wounds, and such like which
tend to the destruction of our being. This Passion was ingraft in us by nature,
to the end that at the first approach, at the first taste and imagination of
evil, we may retire our selves and fly it, lest we run into ruin. This
kind of hatred then is proper to the concupiscible which is offended at diverse
things, yea at small things, and many times at those which have no subject of
offense, for you shall see some which cannot suffer the presence of certain
creatures, and others cannot endure the sight of certain fruits, though
otherwise they be exceeding pleasant. Finally there is no creature so
fantastic in his Appetite, nor so sudden in the motions of Hatred and
distastes of things which present themselves unto his senses, as man, who not
able to endure any thing, makes himself insupportable in a like manner to all
creatures: but principally to his like.

But to give more light to this discourse, we will observe that there are
diverse sorts of Hatred and Enmities, which may be referred to four chief
heads: for there is a natural Hatred, and a brutish Hatred, a melancholy
Hatred, and a human Hatred. The natural Hatred takes her beginning from a
certain antipathy, and contrariety of nature which is found in creatures, the
which as it were abhor one another, and cannot frequent or converse together,
although the subject of this Hatred appear not, and that shows it self more
in the effect then in the cause; whereof we have prodigious examples in
nature, in plants, in beasts, and in men. Brutish Hatred is rather a rage then
a Passion, for that it seeks a furious destruction of that it hates, and to
see the last relliques consumed; so as it is more fitting for ravening wolves,
or for monsters then for men. Such is the Hatred of those who not satisfied to
have slain their enemies, make their bodies to feel their fury, practizing a
thousand cruelties upon their carcasses, and making them to suffer after death,
all the indignities their rage can devise. This detestable Hatred sometimes
passes to such a furious transport, and so full of excess, as they eat the
flesh of their enemies, and have a brutish delight in the fume of their members
being cast into the fire: This only befits Canniballs and those monsters which
have laid aside all humanity. Melancholy Hatred grows from the great
abundance of adust choler, the which does so torment and agitate those
miserable wretches which are afflicted therewith, as they abhor all the
honest pleasures of life, fly the light of men, and wish evil unto themselves,
so as they cannot endure to be seen, neither will they speak to any man, but
seek deserts and solitary places, where they confine themselves, and consume
themselves with the discontent and Hatred they bear to mankind: like unto that
cursed Athenian, who had conceived such a mortal Hatred against all men, as he
imagined it was not in his power to bind his fellow Citizens unto him more
strictly, but in planting of trees which might serve them as Gibbets to hang
themselves.

Some among the Idolaters would have tied this aspersio^ and infamy to the
profession of religious men among Christians, comparing these holy souls, to
birds which fly the light, and never show themselves but in the darkness. But
these reproaches are the fruits of impiety, which is not capable nor can
comprehend the motions, nor force of the inspirations of the spirit of God, who
drawing his elect from the vanities and pleasures of the wo^ld, leade^ them
into these holy solitudes, where being far from the conversation of men, they
approach near the comp^ny of Angels; or rather unite themselves to him who is
the sole joy and sovereign good of Angels. If they which have thus soug^^ to
blemish and defame this holy profession, which begins his paradise on earth,
would have taken the pains to search into and sound the condition, the
manners, and the life, of those which renounce the world, and the pleasure
thereof; they should have found, that the Sun in the whole world does not behold
souls more contented then those, in whom there appears no sign of sadness,
nor any show of melancholy: But a perpetual joy which no troubles interrupt,
nor any discontents do cross. But this belongs not to our subject.

It rests that we speak of that Hatred which plants her roots simply in the
hearts of men. This is an infirmity of the soul as we have described it, which
has human causes, and to the which also they bring human remedies to seek
to cure it, of the which we now treat. In the mean time there is great
difference betwixt Choler, Hatred, and Envy. And first of all there is this
difference betwixt Choler, and Hatred, that Choler grows from injuries which
we have received, and which offend us in our own particular; whereas Hatred
may spring from things which concern not us in particular; but which touch the
Public. As for example, we may hate and detest those which kindle a fire of
discord in the remotest parts of the Estate. We may hate such as commit
villainies a hundred leagues from us; but to inflame our Choler, the injury
must touch us and offend us, either in our own person, or in that of our
friends. And Choler does always presuppose particular men; but Hatred may
extend it self to all mankind, there being no man but does detest and
generally abhor all thieves, al murderers, and all slanderers* Moreover
Choler may be cured with time, for that it is a short fury which may be
pacified with patience. But Hatred is in a manner incureable, and grows more
bitter with time and remedies. Wherefore the Poets describe Etrocles: and
Pollinices, continuing the effects of their Hatred even in their tombs: For
when as their sister Antigona had cast their bodies into the fire, to perform
their ordinary obsequies, they could not remain together, but the flame
dividing it self cast their bodies one from another; whereupon miserable
Antigona cried out, that their Hatred suruiued their death.

Moreover, he that is transported with Choler, not only desires to be revenged
of the party that has wronged him in making him to feel the effects of his
wrath* But withal will have him know that he is the author of this revenge,
and of the pain he feels. But he that is possessed with Hatred, desires only
to see his enemy ruined, and does not care to have him know that he is the
Author thereof, so as he may behold his destruction. Besides, Choler is
accompanied with pain, by reason of her vehemence: But Hatred is without
pain, never filling her subject with this extreme ard or, but suffers him
coldly to attend the ruin of his enemy. Finally, Choler has bounds, for if
he that is incensed against any one, sees any great calamity befall him, which
exceedes the limits of a common revenge, he has pity, and does wish that his
misery had not mounted to that height. But the man that is full of Hatred,
never sees his bad inclinations satisfied; and how great soever the calamity be
which befalles his enemy, he has no feeling nor pity: the reason of this
difference is, for that he which is in choler, desires only that the party
against who^ he is ince^sed should know, that it is in his power to revenge the
wrong he has done him. But he that merely hates, seeks absolutely the ruin of
his enemy, and is not satisfied until he see him utterly lost: let us now
observe wherein Hatred differs from Envy. The diversity appears first, in that
hatred has for object the evil which we conceive of the party whom we hate,
presupposing him to be wicked, either in our own respects, or generally toward
all men. For we find it daily by experience, that men are disposed to hate
those, from whom they think they have received some injury, or who^ they know
are accustomed to outrage all the world: whereas Envy has for object the
felicities and prosperities of another: the which is most apparent, for that
we never envy the miserable. And Hatred also extends even to bruit beasts, for
as we have said before, there are some which naturally hate certain creatures;
yea, we have seen a great Prince who could not endure the singing nor sight of
a Cock. But Envy powers forth his poison only among men: for we do not envy
birds for their goodly feathers, nor Lions for the greatness of their courage;
nor Stags for their swiftness; ^or Elephants for their greatness and force:
but we only envy the glory of our like. Moreover, envy is always unjust; for
what show of reason can be found in a passion which does afflict us for the
prosperities of another man, as if he did us some injury in being happy? But
there may be Hatred full of justice as those which make us abhor the public
plague, and troublers of the peace of the State, the enemies of the Country,
men desperately wicked and vicious, and the enemies of God and religion: yea,
this Hatred of the wicked is a sign of a good soul, as the envy we bear to
them that are fortunate, discouers a wicked disposition: wherefore we disse^^ble
not the Hatred we bear to such as we know are wicked, whereas we disguise
all we can the envy we conceive against them that are happy. Again, Envy
kindling in our hearts by the great prosperity of another, when as they
decline, and that we see them overthrown by some notable accident of
misfortune, it relents, and is by little and little quenched: yea, it is most
certain, that envious men are glad to have some cause of pity; whereas Hatred
and enmities never ceas^e for all the calamities which befall their enemies;
but when they are once framed and fixed to any one, they never abandon him
neither in good nor bad fortune. Moreover, Hatreds and enmities are sometimes
cured and quenched, by letting the party (that is tormented with this passion)
know, that he to who^ he wishes evil, has not done him any wrong, or that he
has changed his inclination, and is become a good and virtuous man; and
moreover, that he has done him some kind of pleasure, in occasions which have
bin offered to oblige him. But although you persuade a man, that he has not
received any wrong from him that is happy and fortunate, yet it does not quench
his envy; and in stead of suppressing it with this consideration, that he is a
good man and that he has indeauoured to do him favors, yet he will show it
the more, and let the world see, that he can neither endure his prosperity nor
his benefits; for that the one proceeds from the good fortune which does
accompany him, and the other is an effect of his virtue, which are two
recommendable things, and consequently subject to Envy. Lastly, these two
Passions differ, in regard of the diverse ends which they propound unto
themselves: for Envy has that in particular, that she does not always cause
us to wish great miseries to those we envy: for we see it daily by experience,
that there are some which envy their own kinsme^ or friends, yet they would be
loath to see any great misery befall them, or an affliction which might tend to
their ruin; contenting themselves to cross their prosperities, and to hinder
the luster and glory of their fortunes. But Hatred passes further, still
watching for an occasion to ruin his enemy, and is never satisfied with his
miseries until they have brought him to the period of his downfall: So as
she induces us to procure irremediable mischiefs, and extreme calamities to
those whom she pursues with obstinacy.

We must now seek the source and fountain of Hatred, and show what the
causes be that frames it. As she consists in the auersion of things which are
contrary to our senses, it may spring from three causes principally; that is to
say, from choler, from reproaches, or slanders, and from the crosses or
discommodities which we receive. As for the first, an Ancient had reason to
say, that hatred is an inueterate or rooted choler; not that time does change
one of these passions into another: for the Philosophers will never confess,
that one kind may pass into the nature of another but for that choler having
exasperated our courage, if we entertain long the form of an offense which
does gall us, in the end we lay aside choler, and begin to hate him against
whom our wrath was kindled: So as choler is not of the Essence of hatred, but
many times the cause.

As for the second, it is certain, that nothing does more excite our Hatred
then slanders and reproaches, the which may even trouble the wisest and most
virtuous; for we have seen great Personages, who had, as it were, renounced
all feeling of the other Passions, yield o the grief of detraction, and have
suffered themselves to have been so carried away with grief of mind, as they
have fallen into a general disdain of all the world, and to abhor all
Mankind, by reason of the fury of such as had defamed them. So as slander is
like to a huge wave which wrests the helm out of the Mariners hand: for that
she troubles the most virtuous, and makes the^ to give way to the griefs of
Hatred. Besides, if they which slander us, give us other crosses, and are the
cause of some notable prejudice; as if they accuse us before the Magistrate, if
they bring us in question of our lives, if they cause us to lose our goods, if
they persecute our kinsmen, if they torment our friends; all these causes
together frame a deep Hatred in our souls, the which retain for ever the
form of these bloody injuries, unless they make some great and solemn
satisfaction.

Finally, the reasons why choler, detraction, and crosses, or discommodities,
engender Hatred, is, for that all these things tending to the destruction of
the being, or honor of men, they are so many subjects and spurs of Hatred
against those that procure them those displeasures. Yet Hatred is not framed in
our hearts by these causes only, but there are other particular motives from
whence it may proceed, as when we see our selves deceived in our trust, and of
the good opinion we had of men to whom we were tied by affection. Wherefore an
Ancient had reason to say, that Hatred is commonly framed in our souls, by our
bad elections, for that we love before we know, and before we have tried the
merit and fidelity of those to whom we will trust so rich a treasure as
friendship. We are too easily persuaded that they are virtuous, and worthy of
all favor and confidence, and in the mean time we find them treacherous and
unworthy: so as we fall into such a disdain, and do so abhor them, as we
cannot inindure to hear them spoken of. Finally, to draw to a head the causes
of this Passion; we hate ugly and deformed things, as the monsters and
scorners of nature and art, and those which are filthy, troublesome, and
importune: for that we esteem them as enemies to our senses and content. As
for those which are subject to the motions of this Passion, we observe, that
faint and base minds, are sooner moved then generous spirits: The reason is,
for that Cowards fear every thing, so as their hatred is inflamed against all
such as they think may hurt them, be it in their person, in their goods or in
regard of their friends. Hence it grows, that great men which have no courage
are commonly cruel, as we have monstrous examples in Nero, Caligula, and other
effeminate Princes, whose rage no murders could satisfy. And for the same
reason they that have offended a great Personage, who has means to revenge
himself, hate him irreconciliably; which makes them to desire his death, to
see themselves freed from fear. Whence grows that famous saying, He that
offends never pardons. The proud and envious are also subject to the motions of
Hatred. The first, for that they think they are not honored as they should be;
and the last, for that all the prosperities of their equals offend them.

They that love themselves too much, are wonderful apt to the same motions,
for that they take every thing as an injury, and are so nice as they cannot
endure any man. But as Love springs from a feeling of good, and Hatred from an
apprehension of Evil, it happens that for that the good things we enjoy in
this life are never pure, nor much durable, they make no great impression,
neither do they leave any great remembrance nor Love of them in our souls: But
contrariwise evil things being very sensible and long, take deep rooting in
our hearts, where by reason of our corruption, they are are as it were in their
proper Element, so as we do more easily preserve the seeds of Hatred then of
Love: Wherefore an A^^ient said, that he which (...) with grief, remembers it;
but he that enioyes pleasure, forgets. Finally if we would make good use of
our Hatred, we must employ it against vice, and against those objects, the
Love and pursuit whereof may pollute our hearts, and blemish the Image of God
which shines in our souls. This Hatred must take her course from causes
contrary to those, which we have formerly said, are proper to induce Love. As
for example, to root out of the soul a dishonest Love, we must leave to
think of it, and divert our minds and senses from the continual contemplation
of the image which begins to make us to feel her power, lest that the beams
of so pernicious an object, kindle and nourish in our hearts bad desires: and
moreover, to fortify our Hatred, we must iudiciously weigh the defects which
may encounter in the subject which we Love. And of this sort, from the most
perfect creature in the world, being subject to great imperfection, we may
easily if we will, find occasion to separate our selves.

We must in like manner represent the miseries which do commonly accompany the
pursuites of Love; we must also set before our eyes the shipwreck of so many
famous pe^sonages, which have lost themselves upon this shelfe: We must
represent the infidelities, cares, crosses, pain, and torments, which this
wretched Passion does cause. And above all, a Christian should apprehend the
wrath of God, and the horror of his judgments which he powers out upon
vncleaenenesse. But this belongs to another Discourse.

Of Desire or Cupidity: and of the flight and horror we have of things. CHAP. 1.
AS NATVRALL things being far from their center, have no rest until they
attain unto it; so man having a particular inclination to good, as soon as he
propounds unto himself the object, and ties it to his imagination; if the
enjoying be denied him, he feels himself surprised with a certain
vehemence, which makes him to seek it passionately. And if it be a good of
the mind, his will is inflamed; and if this good concerns the contentment of
the body, his senses receive the impression and long to enjoy it. According to
this last motion, Philosophers affirm that there is Passion in man which they
call Cupidity or Desire, which concerns those things which we possess not,
and which we think are fit and proper to give us content This Cupidity or
Desire is no other thing, but a Passion we have to attain unto a good which
we enjoy not, and which we imagine is fitting for us. It differs from Love and
Pleasure, for that Love is the first inclination, the first taste, or (as we
may say) the first sweetness we feel of good things, or of those which are
goodly or fair: which ravish our senses, and breed in us this desire and
longing to enjoy them; after which, hope does arise, the which succeding, the
effect filles us with joy, and contentment, which is properly the pleasure we
conceive when the thing has succeeded. Or to deliver it more plainly, Desire,
differs from Love, and Pleasure, for that Love is the first motion, and the
first Passion we have of any good thing, without respect whether it be present
or absent; Desire is a Passion for a good that is absent, and pleasure a
contentment we have to enjoy when we have gotten it. Whereby it follows,
that Desire as we say, is a particular Passion, for that it regards a sensible
good, under a sensitive consideration, that is to say, under this consideration
that it is absent, and that in this absence it draws unto it the affection of
man to pursue it. For the sensible good which is the object of the sensual
appetite, moves otherwise when it is present, then when it is absent.

For when it is present, the Appetite is at rest by the presence of the thing
beloved, whereas being absent, the Appetite is moved and agitated with a desire
and longing to pursue it and get it. But there are two kinds of Desires and
Cupidities, which may make impression in our senses, the one is natural, the
other rise from our choice; the natural are those which agree with the nature
of the creature, as drinking, eating, sleeping; and these are common to men and
brute beasts, for that both the one and the other, have objects befitting their
nature. Those which arise from our election, are such as regard the things
which are not altogether necessary for the creature, but man has invented them
for his greater ease and commodity, as the delights of drinking, and eating,
baths, play, sights, riches, honor, reputation, and such like. As for natural
desires they are not infinite, but have their bounds; for that as nature
contents it self with a little, so she prescribes unto her self certain
limitts, within the which she contains herself, tying herself to the object
which is fitting, without any diuersion.

But those which follow our election have no bounds, so they grow infinite. For
as they depend of the imagination of man, as this power represents the forms
and images of infinite objects; so these desires multiply infinitely to pursue
all those good things which the imagination has propounded. Whereby it happens
that representing at one instant any thing that seems pleasing or profitable,
we desire it passionately, and then changing opinion we wish another, and
after it a third.

So as we feel as it were a swarm of desires disclose themselves in our
thoughts, which draw us to diverse objects, without rule or measure. For as no
abundance of water can satisfy them that are sick of the dropsy, so there
is no kind of goodness or pleasure that may content our desires. The ancient
Philosophers compared the first matter to an infamous strumpet, who is never
glutted with present pleasure, but does still meditate upon new imbracings; for
that the first matter is never content with the forms which she enioyes, but
still desires new, not caring whether they be more noble then that wherewith
she is adorned. But we have more reason to apply this comparison to our
Cupidities and Desires, which show themselves insatiable in all they pursue,
with what kind of Passion soever. And herein appears the great misery of man,
who having means to pass with few things necessary for the entertainment of
his life, plungeth himself in superfluities as into a gulf, whereas he
finds neither bottom nor bancke, and afflicts himself with a thousand
torments in the pursuit of his vain desires, making his condition much more
miserable then that of other creatures. For they having quenched their desires
by the enjoying, remain fully satisfied, and torment themselves no more,
until that nature quickens again their appetites.

When as the Lion has pursued a Bull or a Goat, he deuoures what is necessary
to satisfy his hunger; but he hides not the remainder in the ground. The Bore
drinks until he has satisfied his thirst, and then leaves the water. The
Wolf (though a ravening beast) runs after his prey, when hunger drives him;
but being satisfied he leaves his chase. Leopards and Tigers being pressed by
necessity, kill their prey, but having fed they are quiet. Bulls having
taken their pasture, return content. But there is nothing able to satisfy the
desires of man, his imagination being always fertile and intentive to furnish
him with new toils and cares to seek for new, by the distaste he has of
those which he enjoys.

So as to comprehend them all together, there is not glory enough, nor wealth
sufficient, nor objects of pleasure and delight in the whole world, that can
make him absolutely content. Whereby we may see a man grown from a base estate
to a glorious fortune, complain of his estate; never looking to them that are
inferior unto him, but only to such as exceed him. Let him be advanced to the
first office of estate, yet this glory will be a spur unto him to aspire unto
a greater. He would play the prince, he would contemn his King, and would enjoy
the glory of his Diadem.

Finally, he would see how high fortune can raise him, and does not consider
that she grows weary, and that her consistence is as brickle as glass, and
that her luster is like unto those false lights, which deceive Seafaring men,
and guide them upon Rocks and Shelfes, whereon their ships are broken, and they
suffer shipwreck. Ambition has no bounds, if she has surmounted the earth,
she will defy heaven. So those proud Princes of Antiquity, not satisfied with
the glory of their Crowns, and having nothing more on earth to be desired,
would counterfeit the thunder and lightning, to have themselves held powerful
in heaven. But if ever Prince made show that Ambition is insatiable, it was
Alexander; for that after so many battles, after so many glorious conquests,
having past from Macedonia through Asia, eue^ unto the red sea, yet he sent
forth his Lieutenants to discover new worlds, there to find out a new harvest
of triumphs: the Scythians though Barbarians, could well reproach him with this
in^atiable passion of glory. If the gods (say they) had given thee a body
equal to thy courage, the whole world would be too little for thee: with the
one hand thou would touch the East, and with the other the West: and after
all this, thou woldst yet know where the brightness of that great Divinity
were hidden. But we must not imagine, that this passion is proper only to
Alexander, for there was never great Monarch whose abundance of treasure, and
extent of Empire could limit his Ambition. There was never any one whom death
has not found plotting of new designs, and making of new proiects for
conquests. The cupidities and desires of riches are no less insatiable: the
more we enjoy, the more we desire, and the Passion grows more violent by
abundance; like unto the flame of a great fire, which increases when they cast
wood into it. Give me a man in whose house (to speak with the world) fortune
has heaped up all the treasures of Perou, to whom she has imparted so much
gold, silver, and precious stones, as he not only enjoys it, but also treads
under his feet Pearls, Rubies, and Diamonds; yet amidst all this riches and
glory, I dare boldly affirm, that his soul is not content, but in this
abundance he represents unto himself other riches, which he imagines are
more exquisite, and more precious then those which he enioyes. So as in being
rich, we do not learn to leave to be passionate for the love of riches, nor
by enjoying many superfluous things, we do not get the contentment not to
desire more. And when will mighty men cease to extend the bounds of their
possessions? The lands, the houses of their neighbors, do they not stand in
their light? and do not their Desires inflame them to buy the^, or take the^
away by vioence? If there be a branch of a river that may fit their buildings,
must they not have it either by love or force? Do they not cut down mou^tains
and Rocks, divert the course of rivers, make valleis even; yea, and remove the
very foundations of the earth to satisfy their desires? Poor men, which
having but so little a body to lodge, build such ample Palaces.

And for all this are their desires satisfied? nay rather, the end of one is the
beginning of another. This is a miserable Passion, seeing that she her self
fights against her own satisfying and content: and seeing that by a prodigious
violence she enflames us to the pursuit of riches to enjoy them; and when we
have gotten them, she forbids us the use: she begets a longing in us, and
denies us the pleasure And as we more abhor the Cantharides and Tarantules,
then Lions, Tigers, and Bears; for that they kill men and reap no fruit of
their death, whereas savage beasts do feed themselves, and satisfy their
hunger: so of all the Cupidities and Desires, there is not any one that we
should so much detest, as that of Covetousness: for that this monstrous
Passion draws no contentment from that it gathers together, nor suffers him
rhat is possessed with it, to take any pleasure: whereas other desires, at the
least, aspire to the enjoying and content which may grow by the possession of
their objects. Interdicting thus the enjoying, she stirs up new Desires, to
get new treasure; and having gotten it, we find, that the pain we have
taken to enjoy it, is nothing in regard of the torment it gives us after that
we are owners. And yet we stay not there, but plunging our selves still in
this gulf, we find sooner an end of our lives, then of our Covetousness.
These are the thorns which spring from riches, which are gotten with pain,
preserved with care, and lost with grief. Pleasures and delights are also
infinite, not only for that they cannot give a full contentment to our
desires, but also for that the number is so great, as we can hardly reckon
them, or at least give them names. There are Desires of the eyes, which
represent sensible beauties, of which we find a thousand fashions, the search
whereof should be innocent if it had any bounds; but the excess of our Desire
does blemish the pursuit. As for example, Pictures, Images, Statues, Porphyrie,
Marble, Amber, C^ystal, Iuory, Flowers, tapistries, Diamonds, Rubies, and all
other things, where the eye discouers the wonders of nature and the Art of man,
are the objects of an innocent pleasure, if we could use them moderately. But
we suffer our selves to be transported with so furious a Desire, and we seek
them with such an enraged heat, as it is rather a madness then a Desire. An
Ancient said, That nothing had more distasted him from love, and the Passion of
all those things, then to see the stately Triumphs of Rome where they exposed
to the sight all the gold and silver of that great City, to serve for an
ornament; and carried the Pictures, Images, Arms, plate, precious stones,
Treasure, Tapistry, and the Mooueables of vanquished Kings, and the spoils of
their rich Provinces, to increase their glory. And his reason was, for that
(said he) all this pomp, all this luster, all this glory, and this abundance
of treasure, was seen in one day, and then vanished: So as in a short time our
eyes might behold all the pride not only of Rome, but of the world. This was to
make a man wise by sights, whereas others become mad.

There are other pleasures of the eyes, which pollute by the excess of our
cupidities, and by the disorder of our desires: as when our eyes not content to
behold the beauty of a woman, conceive an unchaste desire. Besides these diverse
pleasures of the eyes, there are others of smelling, hearing and feeling;
wherein we observe as little measure as in the rest. Perfumes are exquisite
presents of Nature; but our effeminate delicacy has made the use infamous and
shameful. Music, consorts, and the sweetness of Instruments, were things
which we might use honestly without offense; but we have converted all into
Luxury, which prophanes the use. And amidst all this abundance, neither do our
eyes satisfy their Desires, by so many objects which they behold; neither do
our ears find their heat quenched, nor our other senses their passions, by
whatsoever offers it self to their desires. The other pleasures whereunto man
is addicted, as play, combats, huntings, exercises, companies, and whatsoever
he does to ease the cares of this life, cannot satisfy nor give any full
contentment to man: but amidst all these roses he still meets with some
thorns, and seeks daily after new contentment; so insatiable are his Desires.

The same Cupidities also vary according to the ages, complexions, and humors
of those which are touched with this Passion. Young men are passionate after play
and women, and exceed in these pleasures. The sick wish for health, as the
sovereign good of his life; old men desire good wine, and good fare, which
seems to make them live again, and to add new vigor to their bodies. Princes
and generous spirits breath nothing but glory, tryumphs, and trophies, which
serve to advance them beyond the ordinary of men.

They which are of a sanguine and hot complexion, have a Passion fit for all
things, and they pursue them with great heat; but it lasts not long, and is
like a fire of straw, inconstancy and change accompanying them still in their
pursuites. Whereas they that are of a cold constitution, have no great desires,
by reason of the heaviness of their humors: But they are obstinate in their
pursuits, and can hardly be diuerted from the object, whereunto they are tied.
They which have the least feeling of the motions of Desire, are such as have no
apprehensio^ of the disco^modities and miseries of this life, as they that are
young; great spirits; men overtaken with wine; and finally all such as have
much blood and heat gathered together about the heart. As in like manner, they
are not much transported, which have never felt any urgent necessity. For as
fear and distrustes increase Desire, to provide all things necessary for the
preservation of this life, they which have tasted of crosses, apprehending to
fall into their first miseries, do Desire infinite things, to fortify
themselves against all accidents; supposing still that nothing can secure them
sufficiently. They also which have little blood about their hearts, and that
but lukewarm, have naturally cares and ardent desires to gather; for that
they fear to see themselves fall into want and poverty; and the importune care
they have to prevent this misery, afflicts their souls, and tortures their
minds. Hence it comes, that we often see men who have been prodigal and very
profuse in their youth, so change their inclinations, as when they come to age,
there can be nothing noted in them but base covetousness in all their actions:
whereas on the other side we commonly see that wine and Love make covetous men
bountiful.

Finally when we have gotten with much pain the goods which we enjoy, we show
more vehemence to keep them. The which may arise from two causes, either for
that we fear to fall again into the necessity in which we have been, and
apprehend to see our selves forced to take new pains, and to undergo new
toils to recover our estates. Or else for that the things which we have gotten
with sweat and danger, are more dear unto us, then those which come without
labor and pain. So we see a young Heir, which comes to a great Estate by the
death of his father, will bountifully bestow his gold and silver, and dissipate
within few days, what his miserable father had been long a gathering, and
which he had not gotten but with infinite torments both of body and mind.
Whereas a Merchant, who has tried the dangers of traffic; who has grown
pale a thousand times at Sea during his voyages; who has seen himself often
near death, and ready to fall into the hands of Pirates or thieves, will not
thrust his hand rashly into his coffers, nor distribute his money but with great
stayednesse, and wonderful discretion, which may make him to be held base and
covetous. Doubtless we have seen in our times the most generous Prince of
the world, who showed no such magnificence in the bestowing of his excessive
treasures, as the glory of his birth and the splendour of his other actions
seemed to require. So as many had a conceit that he feared to fall into his
first necessities; but doubtless his good husbandry was far better then our
profusions.

We have spoken sufficiently of this Passion of Desire, the which having in a
manner all things common with Love, it shall not need any longer Treaty, nor
more words to explain it. As for the Passion which is contrary unto it, as it
has no name, (although it be the same which makes us abhor and fly that
which we think is hurtful to our nature,) so it is not needful to seek out
the conditions and particularities, seeing they are in a manner the same which
we have observed upon the subject of Hatred. Moreover, that from the nature of
Desire, we may gather what that of horror is, seeing that one contrary
deciphers another.

Of Pleasure or Delight. CHAP. 1.
AS this great Fabric of the heavens makes his motion upon the two Poles of
the world, which are as it were the two points where it begins and ends: So
it seems that all the Passions of our souls depend upon Pleasure and Pain,
which grow from the contentment or distaste which we receive from the diverse
objects which present themselves unto us in the course of this life. If we
love, it is for that we find a sweetness in the subject that does ravish us.
And if we hate, it is in regard that we imagine the object which presents it
self unto our imagination, is full of grief, contrary to our apprehension.
The pleasure we take in the Idea of a good thing, which we enjoy not, and yet
promise to ourselves the possession in pursuing it constantly, begets hope: as
contrariwise, when we think it is not in our power to obtain it, the grief
we have afflicts us, and leads us to despair. Desires in like manner are
framed in us by the imagination we have of a benefit which may give us content;
and the distaste we have of things which we fly, is, for that we imagine they
may cause our discontent and vexation. So as in all the other Passions we
still find Ple^sure and grief intermixed, in regard whereof, we may rightly
term them the two springs and fountains, from whence derive and flow all the
other Passions. Yet they have their particular reasons and considerations,
which give them their rank, and put them in the number of other Passions duly
and exactly considered. Wherefore Pleasure or Delight is a Passion and motion,
which is framed in our souls with a certain sweetness which filles our senses
with contentment and joy, when as they receive the impression, by the enjoying
of a good which is pleasing unto them: Or else, Pleasure is a Passion which
proceeds from the sweetness which our senses receive from the objects which
delight them. Or to use Aristotle's definition; Pleasure is a motion of the
soul, which putts it suddenly and sensibly in an estate fit for the nature of
man. Whereupon we must first observe, that as things merely natural tend to
their perfections, by those means which nature has prescribed; so all
creatures strive to attain unto those which are proper unto them, by the
means which the same nature has made subject to their power. But there is
this difference betwixt inse^sible creatures and those which have sense, that
the inse^sible having attained to the height of their perfection, feel no joy.
So as it seems, the Sun is unhappy in that respect, that being endued with
such a shining brightness, and such perfect beauty, yet it has no feeling nor
knowledge of his glory; whereas creatures have a feeling of their good when
they have gotten it. So as this feeling filles their senses with joy, and
causes pleasure, which makes their nature content: let us now see what
conditions are necessary to frame this delight, and to beget in us the pleasure
of things which touch our senses.

First of all, the good must be united to our senses, be it really and in
effect, or in thought and imagination. For we must remember in all this Treaty
of Human Passions, that it imports not for to stir them up, that the object
which incites the motions be really in the nature of things, or simply in the
imagination: for that there are some men which suffer themselves to be more
transported with the images which Fancy frames in their brains, then by the
true objects of things which subsist really. As we read in Histories, that a
certain Athenian called Thrasillus had a certain foolish conceit, that all
the ships* with their loading, which came into the Port of Pyrea were his. But
when as his friends had caused his brain to be purged, and had brought him to
his right senses; he complained of them, and blamed them for that they had
deprived him of an infinite content.

Moreover it is requisite in Pleasure, that the object of good which makes an
impression in our senses, should be agreeable to our nature.

The which cannot be, if it be not in some sort agreeable unto their capacity.
Wherefore there must be such an agreement and proportion betwixt the senses
and object, as there may be betwixt them a certain resemblance and affinity,
so as that which caused the Pleasure must neither be too strong nor too weak,
to make his impression. Wherefore a moderate light is more pleasing to our eyes
then that which is more glistring. And in like manner a sweet sound co^tents
the ear more then that which is loud.

And we take more delight in a speech which we understand, then when we
understand not the words; for that this intelligence we have of the words,
frames a kind of conformity betwixt them and us, whereby the speech does
insinuate sweetly into our ears, and makes a more pleasing impression in our
soul.

Thirdly, it is requisite to breed delight in our senses, that we have
knowledge of the good which breeds the impression, and that we find it is fit
for us, and that we enjoy it either in effect, or by imagination: For that we
cannot receive any joy of a thing unknown, or which we find not that it is
good for us, or are ignorant that it is in our power. So a hidden friendship
does nothing touch us, and yet if we had any perfect knowledge, we should be
ravished with joy, and burn with desire to embrace it. Finally, it is
requisite to beget Pleasure in our souls, that our Appetite (from whence
desires do arise) should receive an alteration or change by a sweet impression,
which the object (being the cause) makes in our senses. For this sweetness is
of the Essence of Pleasure, which cannot subsist without her: wherefore she
consists rather in the end of the motion then in all the rest of her progress;
therefore Aristotle terms it, not only a motion, but also a rest of the
soul. In the mean time there are two kinds of appetites in man, that is to
say, the intellectual, which is the reasonable will, and the sensitive, which
is divided into the Irascible and Concupiscible, as we have said: the
intellectual rejoices at good things which are conformable to reason, whereof
the understanding is judge.

And the Sensitive takes delight in things which concern the senses. We also
observe this difference, that those things which delight the senses, cause a
sensible alteration in the body. As in joy we feel our heart open and dilate
it self; especially if this joy proceed from an unexpected thing which
concerns us much, it may be so moved and agitated, as death may follow. As it
happened in those women of Carthage, who having news that their sons had
been slain in battle, when as they saw them living before their eyes: this
joy happening contrary to their hopes, they dyed suddenly. But the pleasures
of reason cause no other thing then a simple motion of the will, which
rejoices the mind without any alteration of the body, unless it extend unto
the senses. Wherefore some affirm that this kind of joy is found in the
Essence of God, and in the nature of Angels. And they are accustomed to
propound a question upon this subject, which be the greatest pleasures, and
delight most, whether those of reason, or those of the senses. But the answer
is easy, for that undoubtedly, the intellectual and those of the mind (if we
consider them in themselves) are more delightful then those of the senses. And
this made Aristotle to say, that the sweetest and most pleasing content, we
can have in this life, is that which proceeds from the exercises and actions
of wisdom, which is spent in the contemplation of the first causes. The
reason why the pleasures of the mind have an advantage over those of the body,
is, for that to cause pleasure or delight in us, there must concur three
things; that is to say, the object united to the power; the power to the which
it is united; and the actual union of the one with the other, which
presupposes knowledge of this good. As for example, to beget the pleasures of
our taste, there must be delicate meats, a taste well disposed, and moreover
the union of these two things must be made by the natural organs, with his
knowledge, that must receive the impression of this pleasure. For if the most
exquisite meats were put into the mouth of a man that slept, he should
receive no pleasure, for that he had no feeling nor knowledge. And first of
all, the goods of the mind (in the enjoying whereof consist the intellectual
pleasures) are more noble and more lovely then all the goods of the senses and
body: whereof we have a notable proof in that we see men (yea, most abandoned
to vice) deprive themselves of the sweetest pleasures of the body, to purchase
glory, which is a good of the mind. So they said of Caesar, who in his great
inclination to love and women, renounced all his pleasures to get the honor of
a Triumph.

Moreover, the power of the will, in which is made the impression of these
kind of Pleasures, being intellectual: and much more excellent then the
senses which are corporeal, the actions which she produces and which are
followed by these Pleasures, are also more noble then those which derive from
the senses. And by consequence, the union which is made of spiritual objects
with the will, is far more strict; more worthy, and more durable, then that
which happens betwixt the senses and the objects, which they pursue. It is more
strict, for that the senses regard only the superficies of things, and do not
busy themselves but to consider the accidents which inuiron them: as colors,
smelling, noise, sweetness, and the like; whereas the understanding pierces
into the Essence and substance of the objects. It is more worthy, for that it
is made without any alteration or corporeal change: whereas the object
pleasing to the senses, cannot be united with them, but it will cause some
kind of change which is full of imperfection.

It is more durable, for that the objects of the se^ses are of perishable goods
which soon fail, whereas the objects of the mind are of eternal felicity
which continues for ever. Yet it is true, that the objects of the senses make a
more violent impression in our souls, and that the pleasure which we receive,
touches us much more then that which the spirits gathers from the objects
which are pleasing unto it. The which happens first, for that the goods of the
body are borne with us, increase with us, and are preserved with vs^ So as
handling them daily and hourly, we have a more exact knowledge then of the
goods of the understanding, which are removed from us.

We have said, that knowledge is necessary for the enjoying of pleasures:
wherefore, where this knowledge has least power, there the pleasures are least
sensible. This also happens, for that we use pleasures as remedies and cures
against the crosses, troubles, and cares of this life, which are sweetened, and
as it were charmed by their presence. But most men being either indisposed, or
not capable to raise themselves up to spiritual consolations, seek and tie
themselves to pleasing objects, which present themselves easily to their
senses. The which is fortified, for that the sweetness of objects which
delight our senses, are suddenly tasted, and do not much trouble us to seek
them. It is an infallible Maxim in Philosophy, that the objects by their
presence, make a more powerful impression in our souls, then when they are
absent. And those things which give us least pain, are most sweet in their
acquisition: so as for all these considerations, the Pleasures of the body
seem unto us greater then those of the mind. We may say in a word, that those
of the senses are more se^sible, but these more perfect, and more excellent. In
the mean time, all the wise men of the world exhort us to set a careful guard
over the Pleasures of the senses, which they call the poison of the mind. For
the which we must the more carefully provide; for that these Passions are
accompanied with a certain sweetness which flatters us at her first
approach, and surprizeth our judgment, and charms it in such sort, as it
helps to deceive it self. So as in this subject we must imitate those wise
old men of Troy, who counseled Priam to send back Hellen to the Grecians, and
not suffer himself to be any longer abused with the charms of her great
beauty: for that keeping her within their City, was to entertain the siege of
a fatal and dangerous war, and to nourish a fire which would consume it to
ashes.

The event did show, that it was wisely foreseen, and pronounced as an
Oracle* for in the same manner we should chase from us the objects of
Pleasures, lest they be the cause of our ruin. To which purpose an Ancient
said, That nature had engrafted no such pernicious Desires, as those of the
Pleasures of the body: for that these desires growing unbridled, do so inflame
the courages where they get possession, as they leave nothing undone to content
their Passion. Whence spring treacheries and treasons, which make men to sell
their friends and country: from thence proceeds ruins and defolation of
Estates, and the conspiracies against Commonweals. As it appeared in that of
Catilyne, who practiced the ruin of Rome: from thence the murders, violences,
burnings, and all the miseries of this life, take their spring and beginning.
The reason is, for that pleasures quench the Judgment, and smother all the
seeds of virtue and wisdom in man; the which they effect more powerfully,
when they are most violent: as it appears in those which are transported with
Love, who are not masters of themselves, but suffer themselves to be wholly
guided by their Passions: wherefore a wiseman of the world was wont to say,
that he had rather fall into frenzy, then suffer himself to be surprised with
Pleasures; for that, said he, Physicians may cure madness, by purging the
brain with Helleborum, whereas Pleasures deprive man of his judgment, without
hope of remedy for his infirmity.

But for that there are Pleasures not only of the mind, but of the body and
senses, which are merely innocent, as the Pleasure we receive by Pictures,
Perfumes, honest exercises, and other things which bring a chaste content; it
shall be convenient to know what the causes and objects be, to the end we
may of our selves judge, which are lawful, and which are interdicted, and to
be abhorred. First then, things necessary for preservation of our nature, as
drinking, and eating, are pleasing unto man, and the which he uses with a
delight, which moderation and temperance make innocent. Secondly, men take a
singular delight in things to the which they have been long framed and
accustomed, for that custom is as it were another nature, considering that the
things whereunto we have been accustomed, and whereof there is framed a long
habit, by continual exercise, have a great affinity with those of nature.
Thirdly, the things which are conformable to our nature and disposition, are
pleasing; for that they force us not in any sort, but insinuate sweetly into
our senses: Whereas on the other side, whatsoever brings any constraint vexes
us, as studies, serious affairs, disputations, and such like, are importune
and troublesome; for that they constrain and force our inclinations, unless
that custom has taken away the bitterness. Whereas their contrary please us,
as rest, sleep, play* cessation from labor, sights, and such like, in which
we find not any constraint. Fourthly, whatsoever flatters our desires, gives
us joy and Pleasure, for that these kinds of Cupidities, are properly the
desires of things which we imagine are pleasing, and ravish our senses: For
whatsoever flatters our senses, and delights our imagination, causes Pleasure
and content. So every kind of good, be it that which is present, or past, or
to come, does give a content by the presence or by the imagination; for that it
delights our senses, and is pleasing to our fancy, which is a delicate power,
and easily touched with the sweeetnesse of her object, how small soever.
Wherefore they that remember the good things which they have tasted* and those
which they hope for in future, having these things imprinted in their fancy,
feel a joy. Whereby it appears plainly, that all Pleasure and Delight
consists either in the feeling of things present, or in the remembrance of
things past, or in the hope of those which are to come. For we taste and feel
the present, we remember those that are past, and we hope for the future. And
doubtless the things which are graven in our memory please us much, not only
those which were sweet in the action, but even those which we have tasted with
some bitterness, especially when as the pains and toiles we have endured are
ended to our profit and honor: which made an Ancientto say, that it was a
sweet thing to remember travails past. So soldiers glory of their dangers
past, and relate with singular content, the wounds they have received in
combatts.

They which have escaped dangers at Sea, or made great and desperate voyages by
land, have the same content to relate the hazards and fortunes which they have
run and surmounted. The reason of this joy, and the cause of this content,
is, for that it is a sweet thing to be freed from a mischief, especially when
it has given us great afflictions and apprehensions.

But as for that which regards things which depend of hope, all those things
whose presence and enjoying we imagine will be pleasing or profitable, and
which will cause us no kind of discontent, excite Pleasure in our senses, be it
when we remember them, or when we hope for them. So as whatsoever we imagine
as a good which may befall us, is pleasing unto our thoughts: By reason
whereof, (as we will show hereafter) we feel a content in choler, for that
no man is angry, but with hope to be revenged, the which he reputs for a
great good. Wherefore Homer made Achilles to say, that choler dispersed it
self in a great courage, more sweetly then honey.

For as much then as what we remember or hope for, as a thing pleasing and
sweet unto our thoughts, excites joy in our hearts, therefore most of the
desires of men are accompanied with some Pleasure and delight: For when as they
remember how they have played, or when as they imagine after what manner they
hope to play, they feel a sensible content and a new joy, which represents
unto them the image of the true enjoying. As it happens to those which have
drunk with delight during a burning Fever, for they have a certain kind of
joy when as they remember to have so drunk; or when as they promise unto
themselves to drink again after the same manner.

So they that are tormented with Love, be it that they speak of the party
beloved, be it that they write or make verses of that subject, they feel a
wonderful content, for that in all those things, they conceive that whom they
love is before their eyes, as in their thoughts.

Wherefore they hold it for a certain sign of Love, when as any one afflicts
himself for the absence of another, and when he takes Pleasure in the tears
and complaints of their separation. And it is certain, that even in cares and
vexation, there is also a content in the tears and sighs we power forth for
the absence of that we love.

There is doubtless a grief for that we see not the party we Love; but there
is also a sweetness, for that her image presents it self unto our thoughts,
and sets before us all the motions, gestures, actions, speeches, smiles, grace,
sport, and whatsoever we have observed in her when she was truly present.

Revenge also, as we have formerly touched, is a sweet thing, the which does
well appear by her contrary; for if we see that we cannot revenge the injury
which has been done us, and which has inflamed our Choler, we feel a
wonderful discontent: whereas we are transported with joy when as we hope
and see some appearance of revenge.

Moreover, it does much content, and give a singular pleasure, not only to the
ambitious, but indifferently to al sorts of persons, to vanquish and surmount
those, against whom they have any contention or dispute: for in this
concurrence it seems they dispute of the excellency and superiority, and that
it is as it were, adjudged to him that obtaines the victory: and all men
living, be they great, mean, or base, desire, (though some more ardently, and
others with less Passion) to excel and surmount others. By this reason we
find there is pleasure in sports, in which there is any contention, as at
Chesse, Tennis, Cards, and Dice; and likewise in more serious exercises where
there is any dexterity to obtain the victory; as in fighting at barriers,
running at the Ring, and Tilt, or such like. Whereof some are pleasing as soon
as they apply themselves unto them, and others grow pleasing by custom: as
for example, they that give themselves to the exercise of hunting, although it
be somewhat violent; yet they receive a singular content, for that they must
fight against savage beasts, and aspire to get the victory. And according to
that which we have said, that victory breeds delight, it is easy to judge why
the exercises of schools, disputations among learned men, and the pleading of
Lawyers at the bar, give a content to them that employ themselves: the reason
is, for that in these exercises, there is also an image of victory which
presents it self unto our eyes.

Glory in like manner is in the rank of those things, which causes delight
and Pleasure; for that it consists in a certain opinion, to be more eminent,
and more excellent then other men, by reason of the esteem the world makes of
us: for every man imagines himself to be such as others esteem him;
especially, if they be men which he holds to be full of truth. Wherein we give
more credit to neighbors then to those which are remote, who can have no
exact knowledge of our merit. And we refer more to out fellow Citizens, to
our household servants, and to our familiar friends, then unto strangers: yea,
we yield more to them that live, then to posterity: we esteem more the
judgment of wise men, then of them that want wit; and we prefer the
testimony of many, before the applause of some few particulars: for that it
seems they whom we prefer, for the above mentioned reasons, are better
informed of the truth, and more to be credited in their dispositions.
Wherefore we are better satisfied and contented, to be in reputation with
them, then with the rest of the world: for no man cares to be honored by such
as are contemptible, and not regarded.

Wherefore if we hide our selves from Infants or beasts, it is not for any fear
of shame we have of them, seeing we know they are without judgment, and cannot
dishonor us. It is also a sweet thing to have a friend, seeing that the very
action of Love, what objects soever she propounds unto her self, is
wonderfully pleasing. For no man loves wine who takes not delight to drink it.
No man delights in Arms which takes no pleasure in the exercise; no man loves
Philosophy which is not pleased to discourse thereof. In like manner no man
loves another, but he takes pleasure in his friendship.

And moreover, it is a sweet thing to see himself beloved, for it is as it
were a presage, that he is endued with qualities which makes a man lovely, and
to be esteemed by such as have any feeling of reason. Also every man thinks he
is beloved for the love of himself: The which puffes him up, and makes him
more glorious, and by consequence, fuller of content. For the same reason it is
a sweet thing to excite admiration of us in the hearts of men, for that the
honor they yield us, maks us to have a good conceit of our selves, which fills
us with joy and Pleasure: In regard whereof, flatterers charm our minds, for
that these kind of people offer themselves under a show of friendship, and
admirers of our virtues. Moreover, it is a sweet thing to do an action often
that pleases us, for that custom makes things easy unto us, and consequently
pleasing.

Change is also delightful unto us; for that it is as it were, an imitation of
nature, which is pleased in variety, and in the diversity of things: for that
which persists always in one sort, frames an importune custom in its subject,
which continuing too long, comes to corrupt. Where^ore it was wisely said that
alterations and changes make all things more sweet and pleasant to our senses.
So as they also which come again by interualls and respits, are more pleasing
unto us: as the return of the Spring after the sharpness of winter, and the
arrival of our friend after along voyage: for that these things are not only
done with a change which causes delight, but also for that they happen rarely,
and not at all times, nor in all seasons. Moreover, it is a great content to
behold things which give us a subject of admiration: for the wonder which they
stir up in our souls, inflames us, and makes us desire to know them, and the
cause of our admiration. But we cannot learn any thing of that we desire to
know, but with extreme pleasure; seeing it is as it were, to mount up to the
highest degree of our nature, and to eleuate it to her perfection: wherefore
this admiration causes joy.

Again, they be things full of sweetness and Pleasure, to impart and to
receive benefits; for that in receiving you obtain that which men desire; and
by giving, you show your self to have that which others want, and that you
exceed them therein; the which we see with delight as a mark of our
excellency. And as to do good is a sweet thing, it follows, that it is
pleasing to ease the misery of another, to draw him out of captivity, and to
change the face of his fortune, by making him happy, who was formerly miserable.

And for that any thing that breeds admiration in our souls, and gives us any
subject to learn, is followed with pleasure: it therefore happens, that
whatsoever consists in imitation, brings contentment, as painting, caruing, and
Poesy, which are all professions whose exercises are pleasing, although the
things which they imitate be not always delightful. As for example, the
painter leaves not to please himself in his Art, although he draws the
portraict of a Moore: Nor the Caruer to content himself in his work, although
he cut a Chimera, or that he fashion a monster: nor a Poet forbeares not to
take delight in his verses, although they be made upon a Mushrome, a Sparrow, a
flea, or some such ridiculous subject: for that which stirs up pleasure in
the spirit of man, is not the object, which has propounded it self, but the
knowledge and judgment he makes to have so well expressed this object, as his
industry approaches near the truth, and is a lively Image: For that this
perfect resemblance betwixt the Image and the Original, teaches him some
thing which he knew not before; and withal, it makes him see his industry,
and his labor, whereby he enters into admiration of his work, and pleases
himself to behold the perfection of his Art.

For the same reason, the events of things not hoped for, nor expected, and the
care to be freed from those wherein there are great dangers, are accompanied
with joy, for that they happen not without amazement.

In the mean time (for that we have said, that what is comfortable to the
inclinations of nature, is pleasing) we see, that the things which are tied by
any bond of Nature, and that have any affinity one with another, as those which
are of one kind, or which have any other natural conformity, are delighted in
the company one of another: as Eagles love Eagles, Lions take pleasure to be
among Lions; and men love to see themselves among men: and for that every thing
loves that which resembles it. All men love themselves, although some with more
vehemence then others; and by consequence they commend their own works, they
esteem their discourses, they love commonly flatterers, who praise them, they
are passionate for glory, for their friends, and for their children who are (as
we may say) their own works.

And by the same reason they are pleased to finish that which they have
begun; which is to give perfection to the labor of their hands.

Wisdom which consists in the knowledge of many excellent and admirable
things, procures joy to him that is adorned, for that it raises him above the
ordinary of men, and gives him a kind of power over others, which man desires
naturally; and for that men are naturally ambitious of honor, they take delight
to show their authority in commanding others, and in reprehending them, they
make demonstration that they cannot allow of their actions.

Moreoue, rman has a singular delight to practice those things wherein he
thinks to excel; for he is never tired to show his industry, and does
willingly spend days and nights to become more perfect and to exceed himself.
The which we have seen in Apelles, Zeuxis, Protogenes, and other excellent
Painters of antiquity. Finally, for that the sports and recreations of the
mind are pleasing, and that we take delight to laugh, and to spend the time
Iouially, it follows that all the things which may ferue to that end, as
iesters, their actions and words, give us content, and procure delight to
behold them.

These in some are the objects of Pleasure, which we feel in this life; we
must now see what kind of Pleasures are allowed, and which are justly
forbidden. For the explaining whereof, we must understand that there have been
Philosophers, who not knowing how to set a difference betwixt the understanding
and the senses, and imagining there were no other Pleasures but those of the
body, have condemned them generally as detestable and pernicious. But they had
no reason for their assertion, seeing there is not any man that can live
without some kind of sensible and corporal Pleasure; seeing the author of
nature has united this kind of Pleasure and sweetness to the actions of this
life, to the end we might with more courage endure the toils and pains, and
that they might be as salt which seasoneth meat, and which makes it more
pleasing to our taste. We must then know that Pleasure being a rest of the
soul which she has gotten by some kind of operation, there are some which
being conformable to the rules of reason, and to the eternal law which God
has established among his creatures, cannot be held bad, but are merely
innocent; as those which God has tied to the procreation of children, when as
they are tasted in a lawful marriage, such as he has ordained for the
preservation of mankind. Yet we must confess, that the discordes of men do
commonly pervert the use, not keeping themselves within the bounds of reason
nor of the law of God; the which is visible in the excess they commit in
drinking, and eating, in women, perfumes, play, dancing, and other Pleasures of
the body, which are seen at this day to be no other then subjects of offense:
whereby we may see how infamous the opinion of the Epicures was, (from the
which notwithstanding many great Personages did believe that Epicurus himself
much dissented, affirming that he made no account but of the Pleasures of the
mind,) who with a visible reproach to human nature, have placed the
sovereign good of man in the Pleasure of the senses, which notwithstanding are
common with brute beasts. In like manner we may gather what wrong they did
unto virtue, who by a notable effeminacy, represented the image of Pleasure
sitting in a throne like a great Queen, which had under her the virtues, as
slaves to attend her commandments.

As if a man in the course of this life, should have no other object in all his
actions, yea in the most virtuous, then the satisfying of his Pleasures, and
the contentment of his senses. Our resolution then is, that we must not imagine
that all the Pleasures of the senses are to be rejected as pernicious, neither
all to be embraced as beams of our sovereign good.

But as Pleasure is a rest and contentment to the soul, which enjoys some
good whereof she tastes the sweetness; if it be an absolute good without
exception, the Pleasure is innocent and allowable to man. But if it be a good
pleasing only to the senses, and contrary to the rules of reason, and the law
of God, as the Pleasures of the flesh out of a chaste marriage; the effect is
pernicious, and the enjoying damnable.

But for that we have formerly said, that Pleasures regard either the
remembrance of that is past, or the enjoying and feeling of a present good, or
the hope of a future, it shall be fit to show which makes the most powerful
impression in our senses, and delights us most. We must then know that Pleasure
taking her beginning in our souls, by the presence of a good which incounters
our senses, or which unites it self unto us by some other means, this
presence or imaginary good is framed by the simple knowledge, and the only Idea
which we have of this good, so as the objects whereof we have knowledge, make
an impression of their forms in our souls* or else this presence consists in
a real union of the good with our senses, whether that we do actually enjoy
it, or that we have a certain hope to get it.

Wherefore as the real union of the object with the power is greater and more
strict then that which is but imaginary; and as the actual union is stronger
then that which is but in power, we must necessarily conclude, that the
sweetest Pleasure is that which proceeds from the feeling and actual enjoying
of the good which is really present with our senses.

But the joy which springs from hope is greater, and the Pleasure more sweet,
for that in this kind of joy, there is an union b^twixt our soul, and the good
which pleases us; Not only according to the imagination, which represents unto
us the perfections, but also with this condition, that the possession is in our
power, for that otherwise we could not hope for it. We put in the last rank
the Pleasure we feel of good things which are past as the least of all, for
that those good things not being united to our senses, but by the imagination
and memory, which is the weakest union that can be betwixt our senses and the
objects which delight them; the joy which we receive must also be less
sensible.

Of the effects of Pleasure. CHAP. 2.
THe effects which arise from the Pleasure we conceive of the objects which are
delightful to our sense, may be better understood by experience, then
expounded by words. First of all, there is not any man which does not feel in
the midst of the joy which he receives, his heart to dilate it self and as it
were open with gladness, from whence it sends the signs and tokens to the
countenance, by the laughter which ^t ^irres up in the mouth, where it causes
a visible change. They that are tender hearted, are apt to receive the
impressions of joy and heaviness, like unto soft wax, wherein they do easily
imprint the forms which are laid upon them. They that have them firm and hot
by reason of the heat, conceive joy easily, and by reason of their constancy
preserve it longer.

Whereas contrariwise they that have it cold and hard, are capable of
heaviness and melancholy, which makes an impression easily, by reason of the
coldness, with the which she has an affinity, and maintains it self long by
reason of the hardness, as we see happen unto melancholy men. For sadness is
an earthly Passion cold and dry, whereas joy is moist and hot. And therefore it
is easily framed in the hearts of children, of young men, and of those which
are of a good complexion: from this joy which makes the heart to spread and
dilate it self like unto a flower, grows laughter, which is no Passion, but
an exterior effect of an interior Passion.

For the sweetness of Pleasure, makes the heart to move and open to receive
the form, even as when we go to meet a friend, and open our arms when he
presents himself unto us. And this his motion and interior joy ascends up unto
the countenance, but it appears chiefly in the opening of the mouth, whereas
laughter is framed, and has his seat, and from thence disperseth it self to
the eyes and the rest of the face, although that some hold it has his seat
within man, and about his heart. But to take away all kind of difficulty, we
must understand that sometimes laughter comes merely from a corporal motion,
as that which proceeds from the tickling of the arm holes, so as there have
bin seen sword players die laughing, for that they have been wounded in that
place.

Sometimes it rises from indignation and despite, which we have conceived of
any thing we behold unwillingly; as we read of Hann^bal, who seeing the
Carthaginians lament their estates, for that the Romans were masters of
their fortunes, began to laugh^ whereat one being amaz^d, said unto him, that
it was an act of great inhumanity to laugh at the tears of his fellow
Citizens; to whom he answered, that this laughter was no sign of his joy, but
a token of his despite, for that he scorned the fruitless tears of those,
who lamented rather their particular loss, then the misery of their common
weal. But when it is an effect of our passion, and a sign of pleasure which
our heart receives from pleasing objects, which present themselves unto our
senses: it comes from a quick and sudden motion of the soul, which desiring
to express her joy, excites a great abundance of hot blood, and multiplies the
vital spirits, which agitate and stir up the muscles which are about the
heart, and those raise up the muscles which are of either side of the mouth,
which upon this occasion opens with a visible change of the whole form of the
face. But it rises from the pleasure and joy which our soul conceiueth, by
reason of the pleasing objects which present themselves unto our sense.

It is certain that as new things and not expected, provoke most joy in our
hearts, so they stir us up sooner to laughter. For proof whereof, having once
accustomed our selves to see spectacles and sights, how pleasing soever they
be, they do not move us to laugh, as they did when we first beheld them. And
in like manner profound cogitations and meditations, hinder laughter: wherefore
wise men do not laugh so easily as others, as well for that they have always
their spirits busied and employed about some serious meditations, which will
not suffer them to regard such triuiall things as commonly make the Vulgar to
laugh: As also for that the great knowledge they have of things, hinders them
from esteeming many of those things new or strange, which the common sort
admire. And withal, their complexion does contribute thereunto: for that most
commonly it inclines to melancholy, which makes them pensive, and more
difficult to move to joy.

The reason why many things please at the first approach, and afterward lose
this grace by custom and continuance, proceeds from nothing else, but that at
the first sight our thought is ^ied unto it with a certain vehemence, which
yielding by little and little, makes the pleasure decay. The which is not only
seen in the objects of the sight, whereof our eyes growing weary by little,
begin to slack in their action, and to become more negligent in beholding
them; but also in the objects of all the other senses, wherewith our soul is
loathed in the end after too long a continuance. The reason is, for that as in
the action of the eyes, the vital spirits consume by the vehemence of the
attention: so in all other operations of the senses, the disposition of the
Organs alter, and are changed by the motion, and by the impression which the
objects that unite themselves unto our senses, make: so as it is impossible
that the creature should long enjoy one kind of pleasure, or suffer the same
grief.

And moreover, as we have said before, that diversity, as an Image of the
changes of Nature, is pleasing; has also a place in this subject: for that men
are weary always to enjoy the same pleasures, and see the same objects.
Wherefore the continuance causes distaste, how sweet soever the possession
be. And therefore Lucian brings in a man, who being made a god, was weary of
his divinity, and desired to dye, that he might be no more: and his reason
was, that the life of men did not seem tedious unto him, but only for that
he still beheld the same things, one Sun, one, and the same Moon; the same
Stars, the same meats, and the same Pleasures, which change not their face:
wherefore, said he, tasting nothing but the same thing in this Divinity where I
am, I am weary, and thereupon would needs dye to change. Moreover, there are
men who are wonderful sensible of joy, which be they to whom all things seem
new, as children, and the ignorant multitude, whom any sights provoke to laugh:
whereas wise men are nothing moved. The complexion does also help much to
joy, as they which abound in blood, and have it not choleric and adust, but
pure and sweet, are Iouiall by nature, and love to laugh. Whereas mellancholy
men are hardly moved to joy.

The delight or pleasure which we conceive of the objects, which are agreeable
unto us, does usually stir up in us an ardent desire, and as it were, a
thirst of a new, or a more full enjoying. The which proceeds either from the
condition of the thing which is not capable to satisfy our desire at one
instant.

As we see in drinking and eating, to which we must return diverse times to
entertain life: Or from the imperfection of enjoying, as they which have but
tasted the first sweetness of friendship, desire to have a fuller content: Like
unto those which love Poesy, who having heard a piece of a goodly verse, such
as Vergil wrote, wish to hear the rest to make their pleasure perfect; Or else
it grows from the nature it self of Pleasure, which is so sweet as it
inflames the soul to desire the continuance: The which is seldom seen in the
pleasures of the senses and of the body, but which is felt with infinite
delight by those which drink of that torrent of Pleasure, which the Scripture
describes unto us in heaven; for they drink eternally, and are never satisfied.

We must also remember, that there is great difference betwixt the Pleasures of
the senses, and of the mind; for the delights of the senses charging and as it
were importuning our natural dispositions, becomes troublesome and tedious; as
it falls out when we suffer our selves to be surprised with the excess of
eating and drinking. Whereas those of the mind never exceed the carriage nor
capacity of the natural disposition of the soul, but rather add perfection
to her nature: wherefore when they are fully enjoyed they delight most. And if
there be at any time a distaste, it is for that the actio^ of the mind is
accompanied with the action of the inferior powers, the which being corporeal,
they are tired with the continuance of so long an employment. Wherefore they
call back the spirit that it may give some rest unto the body. And doubtless
it is the only reason why those happy souls are never weary to behold the
divine Essence, for that the contemplation of this pleasing object does not
ouercharge nor weaken the spirits, but does ease and fortify them. And
moreover, she does not work by the means of the senses, and corporeal
Organs, which are subject to grow slack in their actions.

I might add, that this happy contemplation of the divine Essence, is always
accompanied with new subjects of admiration, in regard whereof, it can never be
troublesome: and moreover, although the object be soueraignely simple, yet it
comprehends all the good things which may fall into the thought or desire of
man, so as it can never cause any distaste: But this belongs unto another
discourse.

The pleasure of the senses produces a pernicious and dangerous effect in us;
it binds our reason and takes away the use, the which happens by three
occasions. The first, for that employing the soul wholly in the feeling and
enjoying of the sweetness which does accompany it, she retires it from the
consideration of all spiritual goodness, and makes it less capable of
reason, in regard of the heat of the passion which does agitate it. Secondly,
for that most part of the pleasures of the body, at the least when they tend to
excess and disorder, are contrary to the motions of reason. And it is an
undoubted truth, That one contrary does always expel and destroy another;
wherefore pleasure yeeldes no place to the motions of Reason. The which made
Aristotle to say, that although that pleasure corrupts not the Theory and
simple knowledge we have of things; as for example, she does not hinder us
from knowing, that a Triangle has three corners, and that the whole is bigger
then its parts distinctly comprised; yet she depraues the judgment, and
hinders the esteem we should make by the laws of wisdom, of that which is
good: For that although we know well that temperance is a virtue, yet we fly
it, for that it is contrary to the pleasures of our senses, which suffers us
not to esteem it as we ought. The third is for that the pleasures of the
senses cause a greater and a more violent alteration and change in our bodies,
then that of the other Passions.

The reason is, for that we embrace with more vehemence, and tie our selves
more strictly to the objects which please us, when they are present, then when
they are absent. These changes and sensible alterations in the body, cause
trouble to the soul: As it appears in those which are surprised with wine, in
whose actions there is no show of reason; the excess of wine having altered
their brain, and made them incapable of the functions of the mind. But honest
and moderate Pleasure, adds perfection to her actions, as beauty and a good
grace gives the last ornament to youth; as well for that she is the end and
scope which we propound unto our selves when we mean to work: as also for
that she makes her actions agreeable by the content she ingrafts in our
senses: So as to entertain this Pleasure she causes us to employ our selves
with more heat and attention to accomplish them. Wherefore an Ancient said,
that nature had joined Pleasure to actions necessary for the entertainment of
the life of creatures, or for the preservation of their kinds, as eating,
drinking, and generation, to the end it might be as salt which seasoneth
meat: That is to say, to the end it might make those actions delightful, and
that the creatures might not be drawn unto them with distaste. And touching
that which concerns the allurements and inticements of honest Pleasures, we
must still remember the wise counsel of Aristotle, who persuades us not to
observe them at their first approach, but at their parting; for that although
the entry be sweet and pleasant, the end is always bitter and tragical.
They say that among the Pagans there was a Temple of Diana, whose image did
show a sad and severe countenance to those that entered to worship it, but at
their departure it seemed more pleasant and smiling: But it is contrary in
Pleasures, for at their first approach they present nothing but roses and
sweet contents; and in the end they leave us nothing but thorns and importune
griefs; especially for that they divert us from the sovereign Good, and from
the love of spiritual delights, without the which our souls can find no
solid nor sovereign content.

Of Grief and Heaviness. CHAP. 1.
AS among all creatures there is not any one exposed unto so many outrages of
Fortune as man, whom we may rightly term an image of misery and weakness* So
it is most certain, that there is not any Passion wherewith he is more
afflicted in this life, then with Grief and Sorrow, whose objects present
themselves continually to his sense and mind. Wherefore although that by the
light which we find in contrary things when they are opposed, and compared one
with another, we may judge of the condition of Grief and Sorrow, by that which
we have spoken of Pleasure and Delight; yet for a more ample knowledge of a
thing which is so common unto us, it shall be fit to treat more exactly upon
this subject. Grief then is a violent Passion of the Soul, entertained by
some sensible discontent: Or else, Grief is a torment of the mind and body: Or
again, Grief is a Passion of the mind afflicted by some kind of evil which
presents it self: Or to describe it more particularly; Grief is a Passion of
the Soul, which rises from a discontent she receives from objects contrary
to her inclinations, which present themselves unto the senses, and afflict them.

But we must observe that there are two kinds of Grief: The one which resides
in the sensual Appetite; and the other has his seat in the rational. This
last which afflicts the mind, is properly called heaviness, and differs from
the other, for that a sensible Grief is always accompanied with a visible
alteration and change of the body which is moved; whereas the Grief of the
mind has not always an agitation of the body, but most commonly contains it
self within the bounds of the power where it is framed; in regard whereof it
is sometimes attributed to God and the Angels. These two kinds of Grief
differ also one from another, for that the cause of the sensible Grief resides
in the body, which suffers some violent impression that alters it. But the
cause of the intellectual Grief resides in the rational part and in the
mind, which represents unto it self the evil which she receives from the
objects which present themselves unto her thought. They differ again, for that
the apprehension and knowledge which the exterior senses have of things, they
do only regard the present objects which make an actual impression in them;
but the understanding not only conceiues things present, but even those that
are past, and which may happen, or fall under the imagination of man. Hence it
comes that corporeal Grief which follows the apprehension, which present
things make in the senses, grows only from the presence of objects contrary
to their inclinations.

Whereas the Grief of the mind following the knowledge of the understanding,
may grow from objects that are present, past, or to come, and from those which
man does presuppose may succeed unto him. So as the noblest powers of our
soul, and those which are the richest ornaments of our nature, as the
understanding, imagination, and memory, help to increase our pains, and to
augment our afflictions: As if the presence of heaven which gives us some
prerogative over beasts, should make us more miserable. For the most savage
beasts fly dangers, when as they present themselves unto their eyes: But
being escaped they remain quiet and assured; whereas we not only torment our
selves* for the evil which does oppress us; but even for which is not yet
happened.

But you must understand that to speak properly, Grief which is one of the
Passions of the soul, is that which is framed in the sensitive appetite, with
a visible alteration of the body, which is agitated and moved exteriorly by the
evil or pain which it suffers: So as the cause does reside in the body which
receives some kind of outrage. But the motion of Grief is always framed in
the soul, for that the body is not capable but by the presence of the soul.
We must also remember, that as to excite Pleasure in our senses, the pleasing
object must not only be united, but also known and perceived by the senses, as
we have formerly observed; so to cause Grief, the afflicting object must touch
our senses, so as by the imp^^ssion it makes, they must p^rc^iue: at it (...)
painful. For it is certain that as there is no good but that which is
sensibly present, can cause Pleasure to the senses, so there is not any but a
present evil can procure a sensible Grief. But under the object of Grief we
comprehend not only the evil which afflicts us, but also the good which we
have lost. For even as the weight of bodies causes that not only they have an
inclination to rest in the center* but also is the cause that they are never
far remote without suffering a visible violence in their nature: So men are
naturally carried not only to Love, but with a sensible Grief of their loss.
So the covetous man torments himself for the loss of his wealth; The
voluptuous is grieved to see an end of the objects of his content; The mother
afflicts her self for her only son* and we see many who after good cheer,
great feasts, and dancings, having spent the time in all kind of Pleasures,
suddenly grow heavy and pensive; and yet can give no reason of this sudden
change, which proceeds only from the disquietnesse of our minds, which grieves
at contentments past, and afflicts it self, the which makes him heavy; and
this heaviness conuerts into melancholy, which augments his anguish, and
torments him without any other form of evil, that presents it self unto his
senses. As for the causes of grief and Heaviness, being consisidered in
regard of their subjects where they encounter, we observe three. For first of
all, our Cupidities and Desires, do many times cause great vexation and
discontents, as when any one is surprised with the Love of a pleasing object,
if they hinder the enjoying, or but only delay the possession, they are so many
thorns of Grief which pierce his soul. For as the hope to obtain the
possession causes Pleasure and Delight; so the despair to attain unto that
we passionatly desire, gives cruel afflictions and insupportable torments.

Moreover, the Love we bear to the preservation of our being, does oftentimes
cause sorrow and (...), for that we apprehend the destruction; even as we see
all creatures afflict themselves for that which offends them, and are very
careful to shelter their bodies from all outrage. Wherefore we may say, that
Grief is no other thing, but an apprehension and feeling of the destruction of
our good, which makes us impatient. Thirdly, the soul helps to afflict
herself, whether that melancholy works this effect, or that the continual
afflictions oppress her in such sort, as she does nothing but sigh under the
burden of sorrow, and like unto a bad Pilot which abandons his ship to the
waves and storm, she suffers her self to be so overcome with Grief, as she
augments her own pain and increases her misery. For we often see men who in
the midst of their afflictions and discontents do nothing but sigh and power
forth tears, and will not yield themselves capable of any kind of consolation.
But although we show our selves more sensible of the Grief of the senses,
then that of the mind, yet it is most certain, that the interior Griefs which
afflict the soul, are much greater then the exterior pains which torture the
body. For that the apprehension of the mind and imagination, is much more
powerful, and more noble then that of the senses, and especially then that of
feeling which has the greatest share in corporeal pains. For proof whereof,
we see great courages to avoid inferior Grief, expose themselves voluntarily
to the exterior pains of torments and punishments, which are in some sort
pleasing unto them, for that the interior joy does mollify their pain:
Whereof we have glorious examples in the constancy of our Martyrs, who to
avoid the blame and aspersion which had been laid upon them, to have offended
God in burning incense to Idols, have exposed themselves to the fire, to
tortures, to wheels, and to the rage of wild beasts, for that they would not
be subject to that ignominious reproach.

Finally, heaviness has troublesome effects, for that first of all, if it be
excessive, it quenches the spirit, and takes from it all means to attend the
search of truth. The reason is, for that all the powers of our soul, being
tied unto their essence, as the branches unto the tree, it does of necessity
follow, that when she is wholly busied in the functions of one of her powers,
she abandons the rest, and cannot assist them in their actions.

Wherefore when as any thing draws the soul wholly unto it, and imployes her
whole action, she cannot attend any thing else: by consequence whereof, an
exceeding heaviness seazing upon her, it draws her away; so as she cannot
think of any thing else, feeling her self oppressed with Grief as with a heavy
burden, which bears her down and hinders the liberty of her functions. It is
therefore generally true, that there is no action of the soul whereunto
heaviness is not a hindrance and let. The which we find verified in our selves,
for we never do any thing so well being possessed by cares as when we are in
joy; whereof the reason is visible; for that the will is the cause which
excites us to act, the which has the good for object, and makes the more
powerful effect, when it appears pleasing and is accompanied with delight. It
is true, that when there remains any hope to surmount the causes of our
displeasure, then heaviness may serve to fortify our action and to inflame our
courage; for that the more we feel any Grief, the more we strive to be
freed from it. But if there be no hope remaining, we become as it were
senseless, and abandon our selves in prey to Grief.

We flee the company of men, we hate the light, we find the comforts and
consolations of our friends importune, and we have no content but to feed our
selves with bitterness. Besides the torments which heaviness gives unto our
spirits, she does also produce fearful effects upon our bodies; for that it
is a malign, cold and dry Passion, which wastes the radical humor, and by
little and little quenching the natural heat of the body, thrusts her poison
even unto the heart, whose vigor she causes to wither, and consumes the
forces by her bad influence; whereof we see the signs after death, when as
they come to open those that have been smothered with melancholy. For instead
of a heart, they find nothing but a dry skin like to the leaves in Autumn.
So as all things exactly considered, we may say, that there is not any thing
that does so much advance our days as this cruel Passion, which thus consumes
our forces, causes our heart to languish, and makes our life short, but
extremely miserable.

There are many remedies against this Passion, but most commonly the Grief is
so obstinate, as all applications are unprofitable. To cure it, we must first
take away, or at the least diminish the opinion of the evil which afflicts us:
the which is easy to do, seeing it depends of our opinion.

For as dignities, honors, crowns, and triumphs, give us no content, but what
we take our selves when as they arrive; for that we have seen many weep even
in the midst of all this pomp: so the pains of this life, ignominies,
banishment, the loss of goods and kinsfolks, with all other miseries, afflict
us not extraordinarily, unless we our selves make them more bitter and
violent by our own weakness; for that we have seen many laugh in the midst
of all these miseries: we must then represent these things otherwise then the
Vulgar esteem them; for that the true cure of the evil must not be expected
from time, but by our reason, which must prevent it. Otherwise we shall
receive this disgrace, that it will cause us to do that we would not, although
it were in our power. For there is no Grief so bitter but time does moderate,
seeing that, as we have said, the greatest pleasures decrease by too long
enjoying, which causes our soul to grow slack; so it is most certain that
excessive sorrow by little and little decays, by the continuance and custom
which the soul takes of the Grief. The which may also happen, for that time
does change the condition of things and gives them another face, and so does
mollify or wholly take away the sorrow.

But not to yield to the evil when it comes to seize upon us, we must foresee
the accidents of this life, not as if they should happen infallibly, for that
were to make us miserable before the time; but as incident to all men, and that
being of this number, if any cross or misery shall fall upon us, we may be
the less amazed. For the crosses of Fortune which we have foreseen, strike
us more gently, and make a weaker impression in our soul. Wherefore a wiseman
of the world, who had prepared himself for all the accidents of this life,
receiving the heavy news of the death of his son, was no otherwise moved,
but only said, I knew I had begotten a mortal creature. Doubtless it is the
effect of an exact and singular wisdom, to have this feeling of human
accidents, not to be amazed at that which happens, nor to see any thing befall
him, which he has not foreseen. So as a wiseman must always remember, that
dangers, losses, banishment, infirmities, yea the death of his children, wife,
and that which he holds most dear, are things which may happen daily, and
which threaten all men; and therefore if he be exempt, it is the benefit and
gift of God; and if they befall him, that they are the miseries of his nature.
For having this consideration of the common miseries of men, he finds himself
bound ^o suffer constantly and with patience, the necessities and crosses of
this life: Least he should seem to fight against God, who has laid this yoke
upon him, to punish his offenses, or to keep him in awe.

But to mollify our sorrows, we must remember that the miseries of this life
give us a glorious subject to exercise our virtue, and to show our constancy
before the eyes of heaven and earth, which are witnesses of our combatts. For
as Pilots cannot show their art and industry but in storms, nor soldiers give
proofs of their valor but in the midst of dangers: So a virtuous man has
no means to make his virtues shine, but amiddest the adversities which befall
him in this life; as for example, we should have known nothing of the great
resolution of Sceuola, if he had not fallen into danger before the King of the
Tuscanes, who was ravished with admiration, seeing with what constancy he burnt
his own hand, and suffered without amazement the violence of the fire, into the
which he thrust it, for that he had fa^ld of his enterprise. Neither should
we know the notable tempera^ce of Fabrititus, nor the moderation he showed in
refusing the gold and presents of Pyrrhus King of Albania, if poverty had not
been familiar unto him. So Regulus being pierced with nails, and torn in
pieces with punishments, serving as a spectacle of the Carthiginians in
humanity, purchased an immortal name for his constancy. So Socrates seeing
himself condemned to drink poison, and beholding the cup into the which the
hangman powered that mortal draught without any palenesse or amazeme^t, deserved
to be admired by his enemies. After their example, then a wiseman will
conceive, that the afflictions of this life offer him a goodly occasion to show
his constancy, and to make his virtues shine; and therefore they shall not be
able to afflict him immoderatly, nor to torture his mind extraordinarily: But
that which should most fortify him in this thought, is, that God which does
cast him into the midst of these combatts, will crown his constancy, and not
suffer him to remain without reward. Moreover, we may also strive to divert it
by some pleasing employment, which may cause us to turn our eyes from the
fearful image of the evil which afflicts us, representing unto our selves
objects which are more sweet and delightful, then those which torture us so
cruelly.

Finally, to draw together as it were into one body, all the means we have to
charm our cares and griefs; heaviness is dispersed, either for that we see our
selves freed from the evil which did persecute us, or that we recover the
possession of the good which had been wrested from us, and we had lost: or
else for that the misery wherewith we have been crossed, is as it were
recompensed by some other felicities which befall us; as the sweetness of
these last contents, takes away all the bitterness of our forepassed
afflictions, as would befall him that should be drawn out of prison and from
bonds, to be set in a royal throne, and to have a scepter put into his hand,
and a crown upon his head.

Grief is also dispersed by diuertisments, by affairs, by the entertainment
of wisemen, by the discourse of such as are learned and fear God, and by the
force of our own judgment, conceiving with our selves that we should not
suffer any misery to triumph over our constancy; that to suffer our selves to
be vanquished by Grief, were to show the weakness of our courrage; and that
to be touched with afflictions, is a thing common to all men, but the glory of
this constant oppositio^* belongs only to an eminent virtue. And lastly, that
he who sends us these afflictions, is a Father, and no executioner: That it is
that great God, without whose decree there falls not a hair from our heads,
and whose will no man may contradict, unless he will show himself
desperately mad. After all this we must remember, that Grief is never cured,
but rather inflamed by Grief. And therefore as in other infirmities of the
soul, a greater evil makes the less to be forgotten, so we may disperse a
present heaviness, either by showing that it is not the present misery which
we must lament, but others that are more cruel, which threaten us: As if he
who is afflicted for the loss of his goods be in danger to lose his life, by
public justice: Or else in fortifying our resolutions with a better hope, as
in representing unto himself the glory of paradise, after the miseries of this
life, and the crowns of heaven after the combatts of the earth. All these
things make great impressions in religious souls, capable of the feeling of
piety.

Besides all this, there are remedies which are taken from the objects of the
senses, which recreate the mind and body in the midst of Grief. For first,
whatsoever delights and gives joy unto the senses, causes ease to the
heaviness of the soul; for that joy is to the soul that which rest is to the
body. So as they which rest repair their forces, mollifying the pain which
has tired the^; so they which begin to taste any sweet pleasures, feel their
Grief to decay by little and little, and their heaviness to vanish away and
go to smoke. Wherefore it is fit to draw them that are afflicted, into the
fields, to enjoy a free air and the sight of heaven.

It is good to show them harvest, rivers, meadows, and hills; for that these
diverse objects divert the afflicted soul, and make it forget a part of its
Grief, so as all hideous shapes are defaced by the presence of these sweeter
objects. Some have thought that music consorts and instruments, are fit to
charm our melancholies, whereunto they refer that which the Scripture says,
that David by the sound of his harp did pacify the evil spirit which
tormented Saul, but experience has taught us, that all these things do many
times rather entertain melancholy then disperse it. Wherefore in this subject
we must observe the nature of the infirmity, and the quality of the music,
which must be cheerful to drive away heaviness.

The use of wine has also a particular virtue to expel cares: And we have
seen in our time a great Prince desperately afflicted for the death of his
only son, could find no other remedy for his Grief, then to use the
strongest wine that could be gotten. The reason is, for that wine being moist
and hot, it does at one instant both water sweetly, and heat that bilious
humor, which is as it were the center and root whereunto melancholy does fix
it self. Sleep also and the use of Bathes, are very behoouefull; for that
both the one and the other reduce nature to her first habit, and restore her
good constitution which Grief had corrupted; the which disperseth heaviness,
and causes joy to enter into the afflicted soul.

Tears are also proper to disperse heaviness: yea we find many times in our
bitterest griefs, that tears diminish our pain, and mollify our miseries
how sharp soever.

The which happens for two reasons. The first, for that the things which are
pernicious unto us and remain enclosed within us, hurt us more then when they
are without: But when we power forth tears, we cast out that which afflicts
us, and emptying the humor which oppresses us, and smothers us within, by this
means we free our selves from a heavy burden which lay upon our hearts, by
reason whereof our soul helping her self to cast out the enemy of our life
diuerts and frees her self from the importune thought of Grief, and imployes
her imagination in this diuertisement, the which for this occasion is pleasing
unto her, and does ease her in her afflictions.

The second reason is, for that it is a contentment to man, to do an act
befitting the estate wherein he finds himself. So as if amiddest the mourning
of our friends, we chance to laugh unadvisedly, when we enter into
consideration with ourselves, this lightness does displease us, for that
laughter agrees not well with mourning; and there is nothing does accord and
concur better with the condition of miserable men the^ tears, wherefore they
are pleasing unto them, and by consequence sweeten their torments.

And not only the tears which afflicted persons pour forth are sweet unto
the^, but even those of their friends do comfort them: whereof we may yield
two reasons, the one, for that naturally they who groan under any burden,
feel his hand sweet, which labors to discharge them, or which help to
support them. So friends from whom pity and compassion wrest tears in the
midst of their friends misery, endeavoring as it were to ease him of the
burden which does press him down, sweeten his pain, and make him endure his
affliction with more constancy and resolution. The other, for that he that sees
his friends participate with his Grief, knows thereby that their affections
are sound, and that they love him sincerely; which is the sweetest thing that
may happen in this life: wherefore this thought makes his affliction more
supportable; whereby he comforts himself in his discontent.

But all these remedies are not so powerful against Grief, as the
contemplation of the first truth, which dispersing her beams in our souls,
fills them with so pleasing a splendor, as they remain ravished with joy and
content. For it is certain that this kind of contemplation is so sweet and
delightful of it self, as it expells and disperseth all his cares and Grief
that applies himself unto it. The which she works the more powerfully, if
the soul be enflamed with the love of true wisdom, which consists in the
contemplation of the first cause, which is God. So as the soul rejoices in
the midst of the afflictions of this life, thinking still of the sweet
Idea's of the glory of heaven.

In regard whereof some Martyrs have given a thousand testimonies of joy in
the midst of their torments: And some marching barefooted upon burning coals,
have protested constantly and truly, that they thought they trod upon Roses.
But we have spoken sufficiently of Grief in general, let us now come unto the
buddes which she produces, and to the species in particular, which are
contained under the general, as misery, indignation, envy, and emulation,
without the explayning whereof this treaty would be imperfect.

Of Mercy and Indignation. CHAP. 2.
ALthough there be some Philosophers who observing the impression and wound
which the pity we have of another man's miseries makes in our hearts, have
absolutely condemned all the motions of this Passion, as unworthy the greatness
of our courrages: Yet we must confess, that amidst so many strange accidents
which happen in the course of this life, amiddest the great pou^rties and
miseries of men, the cruel infirmities, banishments, tortures, punishments,
shipwracks, burnings, slaughters, and all other calamities as well private as
public which makes them miserable; they must have abandoned all feeling of
humanity if they should not be touched with Grief when as these miseries offer
themselves unto their eyes. For notwithstanding the saying of these
Philosophers, that great spirits in the which virtue has taken deep root,
see all things without perturbation, and wipe away the tears of those that
weep without any motion: that is to say, that men perfectly virtuous give
alms to the poor, stretch forth their hands unto him that is in danger of
shipwreck, untie the bonds of those that are in servitude, give liberty to a
son for the tears of his mother, interre the bloody carcass of him who has
been transpierced with wounds, and yet his heart is not touched with any feeling
of all these miseries; yea and in these accidents they retain still the same
countenance with the which they behold plays and shows upon a theater. These
are words which have more show and pomp then solid truth. Let us then leave
this inhumaine Philosophy which makes men rather stupid then constant, and to
become insensible of the miseries of this life; and let us consider more
exactly of the true nature of this Passion, which gives us a commendable
feeling.

Mercy is a Grief or feeling which we have of another man's miseries, whom we
hold worthy of a better fortune. This feeling and Grief is framed in our
souls, for that we consider, that what has befallen him may happen to all the
world: And particularly for that we imagine that the like misfortune may
overtake us, or some one of our friends: for it is most certain that such as
feel their hearts touched with pity, must be in that estate as they think
that either themselves or their friends may fall into the like accident, and
run into the same misfortune that he has done, whose misery does move them
to this commiseration. Wherefore first of all, they that are at the height of
human miseries, and cannot fear a more wretched condition then that
whereunto they are reduced, are never touched with any kind of compassion, for
that no kind of Grief presents it self unto their eyes but they think they
have tried it. And also for that they imagine that all the afflictions which
may happen, are as it were mixed with those they suffer. Secondly, they that at
the height of worldly felicity, have no feeling of pity, but are rather
transported with insolency and contempt, then to have any compassion of the
miserable. For imagining themselves to enjoy all kind of joys and
contentments, they presume that no disaster can befall them which may overthrow
their fortunes, for that this confidence is as a part of their felicity.

This second consideration made Aristotle to say, that Mercy had no place in
the divine Essence; for that it is soueraignely happy, and that nothing is able
to trouble or diminish her felicity. But here he considers Mercy as a sensible
Passion which does move and mollify the heart, and does imprint a feeling of
another man's misery in his soul which desires to relieve him. And of this sort
without doubt there can be no Mercy found in God, who is as free from Human
Passions, as the heavens and plannets are exempt from the qualities and
impressions of the Elements: but taking Mercy according to her effect, which is
to relieve the miserable, were to ruin mankind which subsists by his bounty,
to deny that it is in him: For this sovereign felicity which he enjoys from
all eternity, without any apprehension that he may ever lose it, does not
hinder him to relieve us in our afflictions, and to draw us out of our misery,
by the sole inclination of his bounty, who has nothing common with the
hardness of Tyrants, nor with the stupidity of the wretched. But let us
return to our discourse.

They that are capable of Mercy, are such as first of all imagine themselves to
be subject to the accidents of this life, and who have already tried and
escaped them, or which apprehend to feel the rigor. And for this reason they
which have lived long are commonly inclined to pity, both for that experience
has taught them that neither Diadem nor Crown, nor riches, honors, health,
nor present prosperities, can shelter man from the storms and tempests which
assail his life; as also for that age filles them with judgment and makes
them wise, not to trust to fortune, which seems to have no other constancy,
but always inconstant in the favors which she bestows upon us. In like
manner men subject to infirmities, weak persons and destitute of means, who
see themselves exposed to all kinds of outrages; yea and learned men who have
the knowledge of the accidents and miseries of this life, are easily moved to
pity, for that they can duly consider of things, and judge uprightly of the
affairs of the world. Wherefore an excellent and wise Roman Captain, having
defeated a mighty King of Macedon in battle, when as they brought this
miserable Prince prisoner unto him, he rose from his seat, and with tears in
his eyes went to meet him, as a great personage fallen by some misfortune, or
by the wrath of the gods, into that lamentable accident:

And having cast himself at his feet, he could not endure it, but raisd him
up with all humanity. Afterward retiring himself, and thinking deeply of the
miseries of this life, he made a speech unto his children and to the young men
that were about him, to purge their souls from all insolency and vanity, by so
prodigious an example of human frailty. But we must return to our discourse.

They that have wife, children, and a great number of friends, are also
inclined to pity, for that as we have said, they still apprehend the common
miseries, and think that the like misfortunes hang over their families. But
they that are transported with a violent Passion of Courage, Choler, or
Hardiness, are nothing moved; for that the heat of their blood* and the
excess of their Passion, will not suffer them to think seriously of these
things, and to care for future events. An extraordinary fear does also hinder
the feeling of pity, for that they which are seized therewith, being tied to
their private miseries, have no time to think of another man's. So he that has
lost his children, or seen his house burnt, thinks not of him that is led to
the gallows, or to be broken on a wheel.

But we put in the rank of those which are touched with pity, those souls
which have not yet lost all feeling of mankind, but believe that there are yet
good men living in the world. For they that imagine there are no virtuous
persons upon earth, persuade themselves also that all men deserve the miseries
they suffer, and by that reason believe that they are unworthy of compassion:
Whereof we have a monstrous example in that Athenian, who had no Pleasure in
this world but to see the ^^ine of mankind. Finally men suffer themselves to be
moved ^o pity, when as they remember that they have groned under the burden
of afflictions which they see other men endure: Or when as they apprehend the
^ike calamities may befall them or their friends.

But let us see what things are worthy of pity and compassion. They are
generally all those which cause Grief to the mind, or torment to the body:
Those which take away life; make families desolate, and cause some gre at
changes and alterations in the fortunes of men. As for example, punishment,
violent deaths, disgraces, poverty in age, incureable diseases, great
languishings, and insupportable want, or extreme poverty, treachery, or loss
of friends, burnings, and shipwreck, are all miserable things and excite to
pity. We may also put in this rank the monstrous deformities of
counterfaite bodies, the accidents of limbs lamed, or benumbed, and the ruins
which happen to men by the treachery of those from whom they should expect all
support. We may also comprehend the miseries which befall us often, or which
happen after other accidents. And in like manner the benefits which come out of
season: As if a Prince should send presents of gold and silver to one that were
dead of hunger.

Finally, it is a miserable thing never to have felt any good or contentment in
this life, or if any has happened, not to have had means to enjoy it.

But for that these objects of misery do not always make an equal impression
in our senses, we must now know who they be whom we do chiefly pity, when
we see them engaged in any misery. First of all, we are greatly moved to
compassion and mercy to those persons whom we have known familiarly, and with
whom we have had some kind of friendship, at the least if they be not strictly
tied unto us by natural affinity and blood: For as for those which touch us so
near, we have a feeling more violent then that of pity. In regard whereof we
read of Amasis King of Egypt, who seeing his own son drawn to execution, he
neeuer shed one tear, as if he had had no feeling; whereas perceiving one of
his friends oppressed with poverty and begging his bread, he wept bitterly,
thinking that tears were not sufficient to witness his first Grief, but they
were due unto the second. In like manner those strange accidents which happen
to those of our blood and which touch us so near, are full of horror and
amazement, and by their excess suppress our tears, yea and deprive us of our
speech, as if the spirit were wholly retired to consider of the violence of our
Grief; whereas the miseries of our other friends mollify our courrages, and
by the wound they make in our hearts, send tears unto the eyes, which we power
forth, and are as it were the blood of that part wounded and oppressed with
affliction.

Moreover, men have pity of those whom they see near unto some great
misfortune: As when they are ready to be buried in the waves of the sea by some
accident of shipwreck; or of those who are to have a member cut off, or to
receive some notable violence, yea or some indignity. Particularly men are
touched with pity, when as they that are exposed to outrages, or endure great
calamities, are their equals in age, in humors, in quallities, in exercise, or
in breeding. For all these things make deep impressions in the thought, that
they are subject to the like miseries; wherefore they are moved to take
compassion of their miseries, being an ordinary thing to pity those which
suffer any affliction, which we ourselves apprehend. And to the end we may be
sensible in the feeling of a misfortune which befalls another, we must have it
as it were present before our eyes: for that we are not much moved with those
miseries whose form is remote from us. As for example, we are not much moved
to tears by the relation of the miseries which the slaves of Byserte and
Algier endure.

And in like sort our hearts are not much mollified for any tragical accident
which happened a thousand years since, neither do we care much for that which
shall succeed after the reuolutions of many ages. Wherefore in old time the
Romans to move the Magistrates to mercy, striued to make a more sensible
impression of their miseries, by causing their wives, children, and families to
come desolately unto the place of justice: And as for themselves they appeared
in judgment with garments befitting their fortunes, all filthy and torn; they
opened their breasts and other parts of their bodies, to show the wounds they
had received in the service of the common wealth: Yea they caused tables to be
drawn where their misfortunes were painted* the which they presented unto
their Judges, to the end that having before their eyes so mourneful a
spectacle, they might take compassion of their misery; being most certain that
the voice, attire, carriage, countenance, gesture, and presence, of the
miserable, make powerful impressions in our hearts, and incite men more to
pity: The which happens for that these things make us as it were present by
the sight of another man's misery. And therefore a bloody roabe, (as that of
Caesar murdered in the Senate) being shown to express the misfortune of a
Prince, did not only wrest forth tears, but even inflame the people to
revenge so pitiful an accident. For the same reason we feel our selves much
touched with grief and pity, when as we hear the complaints, sighs,
tears, and lamentation, of these which are oppressed by some notable calamity:
As when we behold the Agonies of those that are exposed to a cruel and
shameful death: And we are the more moved to pity and commiseration, when
they are worthy and virtuous men, whose virtue and glory past, makes their ends
the more lamentable and tragical,

For this consideration moves us the more, both for that the evil is near us,
and that our eyes are spectators, as also for that the Image of their virtue,
and the glory of their precedent lives, increases the indignity of their
punishment.

Of Indignation. CHAP. 3.
AS Mercy or pity is a sign of a good soul, so this other Passion which we
call Indignation, and which is no other thing but a grieuing and repining we
have at the good Fortune which befalles the wicked, who are altogether
unworthy, is very commendable in us. For as pity is framed of the Grief which
we feel for the miseries of good men, or who^ we judge worthy of better
fortunes; so Indignation proceeds from the discontent we receive to see the
wicked flourish and enjoy the worldly blessings which they have not deserved;
so as either of these Passions is commendable, for that as we should afflict
our selves to see virtuous men ouertak^n by mi^fortunes, from the which their
virtue should exempt them: so we should be greiued to see men execrable for
their crimes, advanced to the height of honors and wordly dignities, which good
men should enjoy. For whatsoever befalls a man contrary to his merit, is full
of outrage and injustice; wherefore Aristotle did not forbear to say, that
Indignation is a thing which is found even in the divinity, to the which the
prosperities of the wicked cannot be pleasing.

But to enter into the matter, you must understand, that as Indignation is a
grief which we feel, and a despite which we conceive at the great
prosperity of those whom we hold unworthy for their crimes, yet this Passion
is not framed in our souls for all kind of prosperities which may befall them:
For that no man has any reason to be troubled to see the wicked change their
life unto a better, to embrace piety, to become just, valiant, moderate, wise,
and adorned with other virtues. Yea, the most innocent souls rejoice
whenever they see a man who was formerly vicious and disordered, become
virtuous and temperate. There being no man living that is unworthy of virtue,
seeing that virtue by her presence does extinguish vice, and makes man worthy
of the blessings of this life; whereas they that are destitute of this
ornament, deserve them not. So as if he who was formerly wicked, becomes
virtuous, by this change he makes himself worthy of all good fortune, and
therefore if any happen unto him we should not be grieved; as in like manner
we should not take pity of those who remain obstinate in their crimes, and
glory in their vices.

The goods then which we grieve and disdain to see the wicked enjoy, are the
goods of the body and those which we call of Fortune, that is to say, nobility,
beauty, honors, scepters, Crowns, Empires, and such like. As for example,
there is no good man but does grieve and tremble to see the Tyrants of the
East, the cruel and infidel race of the Ottomans hold the goodliest scepter,
enjoy the richest cities, and command over the most powerful provinces of the
world.

And in like manner there are no virtuous souls that can without grief and
Indignation see other wicked men to flourish and abound in all sorts of honor
and riches. But especially our despite is inflamed, when as they are men who
have crept up to the height of glory in an instant, and when they are very
prodigies of Fortune, being advanced before they were in a manner known to be
in the world, or at the least were in any sort respected. For as for those
which hold their Nobility from precedent ages, who are rich by succession and
inheritance, and who hold all the advantages they have from nature, although
they be altogether unworthy, yet we endure them with less impatiency then we
do new men, who are risen to a monstrous prosperity in one day. The reason is,
for that they which enjoy their glory and riches from their ancestors, seem to
have nothing but what belongs unto them by the right of nature and blood;
whereas men advanced to new honors, without merit, seem to be rich with the
spoils of virtue, and to enjoy the goods which in no sort belong unto them.

And for the same reason, although that sometimes the goods of the body, as
beauty, health, and disposition, meeting in men which deserve them not, may
raise in our souls some clouds of Indignation and despite to see these
presents of nature so unworthily profaned; yet we do not conceive so galling
a discontent, as when we see them enjoy the goods which we call of Fortune, as
charges, dignities, offices, the government of state, and the mannaging of
great affairs; all which things seem to be due to virtue. For this
consideration it is an insupportable thing, to see a man of the common sort,
wholly destitute of virtue, and full of all vice, attain to the first dignities
of a Realm, and in the twinkling of an eye to become as powerful as the
greatest Princes. And there is no doubt but all good men tremble when they see
these prodigious aduancements of persons taken from the scumme of the people,
without any consideration of merit.

Yea these sudden changes are as it were odious, and contrary to nature which
requires time in her actions. And for the same reason we see, that the people
submit themselves willingly under the obedience of a Prince who holds the
scepter of his Ancestors, and is come to the Crown by the right of succession;
but when they seek to give them a new master, which is not issued from the
extraction of their Kings, they cannot endure him, but easily shake off the
yoke whereunto they have not been accustomed. And in like manner, no man is
grieved to respect them that are descended from ancient Nobility, but they can
hardly yield honor to those whose nobility is but newly discovered. The reason
is, for that men believe, that the ancient Nobility being in possession of this
glory, no man should repine to yield him that which time has gotten him, which
is a right in a manner equal to that which nature gives; for that the things
which we enjoy by a long continuance of years, seem to be gotten and held as
it were inpropriety, not by the indulgence of men, but by the bounty of nature.
And withal that which has continued so long, has a greater affinity with the
truth, whose lasting is eternal, then that which is but newly sprung up within
few days.

But there is one thing that filles our souls with Indignation, when as we
see any one enjoy those goods, which have no coherence with his quallity: As
when (to the great reproach of piety) we see a Knight, a Captain, a Soldier,
or any other making profession of arms, to hold bishopprickes, to enjoy
Abbeys, and to possess other dignities of the Church; we hold this much more
unworthy, then if they gave the charge of Campe-maisters, and of Colonels of
foot or horse to religious men or Bishops. Or if they made a singing man or
Clarke of the Kings Chapel, General of his armies. Finally, we hold it a
thing very unworthy, to see a young man inferior in all kind of qualities to a
reverent old man, contest with him of merit and glory; especially when it
falls out betwixt men of the same profession, betwixt whom this inequality is
remarkable. And admit they be not men of the same profession, yet we hold it
an unworthy thing that one who is inferior in all points to another, should
contest against him. As if a Musician would equal himself to a President or
Counselor of the Court, remembering not that the charges of Justice are far
more honorable then the profession of Music; this would make all men to
tremble which know what difference there is betwixt gold and lead. They which
easily conceive indignation, are first of all men endowed with some eminent
quality, who see themselves rejected from dignities and offices, or which see
men altogether unworthy, advanced to the same honors whereunto they have
attained by their virtue: For doubtless it is no just thing to place so
unequal persons in the same rank. Moreover virtuous souls and adorned with
bounty, have a great disdain to see good men deprived of the just reward of
their virtue, and the wicked raised to honors which they could not hope for.
The cause is, for that those souls have their judgment pure, and can esteem
things according to their weight and value: And therefore they abhor vice,
and have virtue in singular recommendation. Again, they that love honors and
charges, are subject to indignation, especially when as they aspire to those
places which are held by unworthy persons. In like manner, they that have a
good opinion of themselves, and ^ho believe they deserve ^ore then all the
world besides, are subject to the motions of indignation, when as any one
enters into comparison with them. Whereas contrariwise* servile souls, men
borne in barbarism, and gross spirits, are not transported with any thing,
having nothing in them that may quicken this passion. Yet there are some which
do rather refer the motions of ambitious and presumptuous men to mere envy,
then to a just indignation: For that indignation being a commendable passion,
and which proceeds from the feeling of virtue, it cannot subsist with the
vanity and arrogance which accompany those men, but it must be another passion
which kindles in their souls this kind of despite.

Of Envy and Emulation. CHAP. 4.
AS Crocodiles have their breeding, and live in the goodliest and richest river
in the world; and as other venomous beasts are commonly found among the most
exquisite and sweetest flowers, whose grace and beauty they pollute and
corrupt; so Envy which is a venomous and malign Passion, does commonly assail
the most virtuous men, and such as have attained to the greatest honor and
glory in the world. Wherefore one of the most famous Captains of antiquity,
being yet in the flower of his age, was wont to say, that he knew he had done
nothing that was generous or commendable, for that he did not find any man that
did Envy him: which shows that there can be nothing imagined in this world
more unjust or more wicked then this infamous Passion, which seeks her own
torment, and finds her punishment in the glory and contentments of another.

It is also the reason why men are ashamed to confess openly that they are
troubled with this Passion: And being convicted, they labor to palliate their
error, yea, they had rather accuse themselves of all other imperfections then
to justify this; And therefore they give it other names, excusing themselves
that it is not Envy, but hatred, fear, or choler, which transports them: the
which is a silent confession they make, that of all the infirmities of the
soul, they should most dissemble it, least they expose themselves to a visible
shame and disgrace. But before we blame it, we must first know it with her
nature and properties.

Envy then is a grief, which is framed in our souls by reason of the
prosperities which we see happen to our equals or such as be like unto us; not
that we expect to reap any fruit by our Passion, but for that we cannot
endure the glory of another man without Grief. It rises first betwixt equals
or such as are alike; that is to say, betwixt those of the same blood, of the
same age, of the same profession, of the same wealth, and betwixt those that
aspire to the same honors. So as we see, kinsmen Envy their kinsmen, and are
grieved at the increase of their fortunes.

Young men also cannot suffer with grief that they of their age should be
advanced before them. In like manner Philosophers are jealous of the glory of
Philosophers; and Painters Envy the reputation of Painters; great Commanders in
the war cannot behold but with impatiency the tryumphes of their companions;
rich men in like manner cross the rising of such as are their equals; and
finally, they that affect the same offices do what they can to keep back
their companions. The reason is, for that Envy being always accompanied with a
certain competition and contention, which rises betwixt those that do
passionately desire the same thing, it is necessary it should rather be among
equals* then where there is no equallity nor comparison: for that men being
naturally desirous to excel in all things, and to exceed their companions,
this desire does always breed a contention betwixt such as pretend the same
thing, and from this contention Envy is engendered; and therefore the
Philosophers did rightly teach, that this Passion was always found among
equals. And therefore they which do much exceed others in glory, being above
their Envy, feel not themselves to be crossed.

And we observe that as the Sun at noone day makes no shadow, so eminent
virtues are exempt from the iealousies of Envy, and yet they cannot avoid the
assaults of Hatred. As for example, Cyrus and Alexander the Great in their
ages, and in our time Henry the Great being raised to the height of worldly
glory, by the greatness of their courages have so surmounted Envy, as in the
end they found themselves without concurrence: But they could not so vanquish
the Hatred of the wicked, but they were exposed to their rage: Especially this
last, the love and delight of Princes; who^ an execrable parricide depriues of
his life, when as the whole world honored his Valor. Moreover, that which
made these invincible resolutions to triumph over Envy, was for that no man
could contend any more with them of glory, whereof having attained the full;
despair to surmount them or to equal them, did shadow them from the
jealousy of all the world.

And for the same reason, they which have attained to that height of glory,
seeing their virtue raised and advanced to so high a degree, as all they that
would be their concurrents cannot attain unto it, they envy no man, but
rather disdain and contemn all the world, as incapable to mount unto that
height whereunto they have raised themselves. As for example; there is no
private Knight that does envy the power and luster of a Kings Diadem, neither
does the King envy his fortune. In like manner, there is no Capuchin, or simple
religious man, that does bear envy to the Popes Authority or Crown; or whose
condition also the Pope does malice: but if by some notable disaster a potent
King or a great Bishop should decline, and be reduced to a more base fortune
and condition, in which they that were before their inferiors, might hope to
become their companions and equals; then there were no obstacles, but Envy
might rise betwixt them, seeing that there might be a concurrence.

Envy then discouers it self betwixt equals, and those that are alike: the
which must be understood of those which are alike, according to their degrees
and power, but are unlike in their fortunes and prosperities; considering that
in this last point, he which bears envy is always inferior in some kind to
him whom he enuies, at the least, in those things which cause this torment.

In the mean time there is not any thing that does so much beget Envy, as
those things which concern honor. Whereby the ambitious are perpetually
affected, for that they are always in contention with some one for
pre-eminence and glory. Yea, what glory soever men enjoy, yet for that they
imagine the honor they have not, is due unto them, and that it is as it were
ravished away by such to whom the world has given it, they do commonly bear
Envy to all those that have any luster or share of it. They also which have a
conceit of their wisdoms, or which think themselves to be virtuous, are
wonderfully subject to envy. I say, those that imagine and suppose these
things; for that they which are truly virtuous, and truly wise, content
themselves with their proper virtue, and with their own wisdom, and knowing
themselves to be truly worthy of honor, affect no other glory, neither do
they feed themselves with wind and smoke: whereas such as have but the name
of wise and virtuous, hunt passionately after this vanity, and desire to be
honored and praised of all the world; showing a wonderful despite against
those that contemn them: and for this reason they are enflamed with Envy
against such as are advanced to great honors. Cowardly minds are in like
manner subject to Envy, for that being faint-hearted, when as they see things
of small price shine in others, they esteem them great and worthy to be
enuyed: like unto little children, who seeing a piece of glass or a pin in the
hands of those of their age, afflict themselves, and strive to take it away.

They also which have attained to some good with wonderful pain, are envious
to see another attain unto the like without any difficulty, and especially if
the facility which he has found be prejudicial or dishonorable unto them. As
they which have spent many years to learn painting and Philosophy, envy such
as are grown perfect in a short time, especially when they are to make
profession in the same City.

Finally, they against whom we conceive any Envy, must not be far distant
from us, either in place, time, age* dignity, honor, or such like: So as the
inhabitants of Paris and France, do not envy those of the great Cayre or
China. In like manner, we bear no envy to those who had favorable fortunes
two or three thousand years since. Neither do we see that Kings envy the
fortune of Alexander or of Caesar, although they may enter into some emulation
of their valor. In like sort, we envy not the dead, or those which are not
yet come into the world. And there is no appearance that a young man, though
issued from a noble Family, should envy grave old men, which enter into a
Council of State. In like manner, an Attorney of the Court cannot envy a
Chancellor of France, being so far short of his dignity. Neither do
shepherds envy the Crowns and Scepters of Kings: nor Merchants malice
Generals of Armies, with whose charges their qualities have so little
proportion. But our Envy is kindled against those, whose glory does as it were
dazell our eyes with their continual presence, which makes us to think of the
baseness of our condition, the which we see dejected under theirs. But
especially when as they possess a good which we have enjoyed, and which is no
more in our power to recover. By reason whereof, it often happens, that old men
envy the younger sort, for that being in Companies, they see that their age
takes from them the use, or forbids them the enjoying of those sports and
exercises, wherein young men take delight. And this Envy which they bear them,
appears in the rigors which they show them, in their reprehensions which they
make them, and in the hindrances they give them, when as they may cross them.

Moreover, the things that may be profitable or commodious unto us, stir up
more Envy then those which are only proper to him that enuies them. Wherefore
we do more envy our equals for their beauty, riches, knowledge, and honors,
then for their health or long life, which are particular unto themselves. And
the reason is, for that Envy rising from this desire to be esteemed in the
world, and from the Passion we have to see our selves more respected then other
men; the qualities which recommend them, make the deeper impression of Envy in
our souls, the more capable they are to purchase reputation to him that
enioyes them. And there is no question but the things which may bring pleasure,
profit, or honor, not only to him that enioyes the^ but also to all men that
shall possess them, are ever esteemed more honorable, and more glorious then
those, whose pleasure, profit, or glory, extend but to one in particular:
wherefore they do also stir up more Envy.

There is another Passion which is also a bud or branch of Headiness, as well
as Envy, and that is Emulation, which has some affinity with it, but yet they
are very different Passions. For although that Emulation be A grief which we
have conceived for the prosperity of our equals, yet it rises not from any
bad affection we bear them, but only from a desire we have to see our
selves attain unto the like felicities. Wherefore Emulation does not merit the
blame which Envy does, but many times it is commendable in us. As for example,
when as we see some virtue shine in one of our equals, we strive in imitation
of him to attain unto it. This Emulation is worthy of praise. So Caesar is
commended, to have propounded Alexander for a pattern, as Alexander did
Achilles: And Themistocles did show that he was borne to great matters, when
as he said that the triumphs of Miltiades would not suffer him to sleep: for
that it was a testimony that he was troubled with an honest Emulation of his
virtue. Emulation then is found among equals, or at the least among those
which are almost alike, for that this Passion stirring up a desire in us,
inciting us to seek the perfection which shines in those, whose glory has
made this impression in our souls; we must of necessity imagine that it is in
our power to attain unto them, for that we never desire those things which are
impossible.

Wherefore we have no Emulation of those, who have so great an advantage over
us, as it is not in our power to come near them. Reciprocally we have no Envy
in regard of those that be so far inferior unto us, as we see no commendable
quallity in them, which we enjoy not with much eminency. Among the rest, young
men are naturally inclined to Emulation, for that by reason of the heat of
their youth, they are found more hardy, and being full of good hopes, they show
themselves more active to undertake; for that all things how difficult so ever,
seem easy unto them. And for the same reason great and courageous spirits,
are very capable of Emulation, by reason of the greatness of their minds,
which makes them conceive that there is no design above their valor, and that
there is nothing so difficult but they may surmount.

Among other things which may induce us to Emulation, those which may make a
man necessary or profitable to many, hold the first rank. As for example,
learning, eloquence, riches, power, the mannaging of affairs, and such like,
are greatly subject to the force of this Passion. And therefore it is often
commendable; that is to say, when she propounds unto her self no sort of
external goods, but the only treasures of the soul and the riches of the
mind, which she sees to shine in another subject, whose glory inflames her,
and makes her aspire to the possession of the same graces. For this
consideration also we have a particular Emulation, and desire passionately to
equal, or to imitate those who are respected throughout the world, whom all
the world commends, and al men love, and especially when their virtues are
honored by excellent pens: For that all these things are so many glorious
testimonies of their merits.

These be the Personages whose virtue makes so glorious a show, as we desire
earnestly to imitate them: As contrariwise we contemn and are ashamed to
resemble those which are destitute of all these goodly qualities. Wherefore as
man should carefully free his soul from Envy, which does but trouble his rest,
and afflicts him more then the party against whom it conspireth; so in some
sort he should give way to an honest Emulation, which proceeds not from any
evil will he bears to another, but from the good he desires to himself, to
the end that in propounding to himself the examples of magnificence, valor,
Justice, modesty, prudence, wisdom, and of the other virtues which shine in
the lives of great Personages of his condition, he may become magnificent,
valiant, Just, moderate, prudent, wise, and endowed with all the other
qualities which make them glorious which are adorned therewith. But we have
spoken sufficiently of the Concupiscible Passion, we must now treat of those
which make their impressions, and stir up the Irascible.

Of Hardiness or Courage. CHAP. 1.
AS in the ancient sacrifices of the Pagans they did carefully observe the
generosity of the beasts that were to be sacrificed; so as ^he priest coming
to pass a naked sword before their eyes, if they were affrighted with the
brightness thereof, they were chased from the Altar; whereas if they stood
still without amazement, they were held worthy to be offered to the divinity. So
base and dejected minds which grow pale at any danger, were always held in
great contempt; whereas generous and resolute spirits, whom no kind of peril
could terrify or amaze, have ever been held in singular admiration. This
resolution and courage proceeds from an excellent nature wherewith they are
endowed, which makes them to look upon all the accidents of the world without
any alteration, being resolved to vanquish whatsoever presents it self to
encounter their constancy: Showing thereby, that they apprehend a disgrace more
then a misfortune, and that they had more care to preserve their honors, then
to prolong their lives.

Seeing then that true Hardiness and Courage is so commendable a thing, and
that many of the most excellent men of antiquity have preferred it before
riches, the disposition of the body, beauty, and the other ornaments, whereof
men do usually glory; we must seek out the Essence, and show what courages she
does accompany, and in what souls she is found.

Hardiness then is no other thing, but a resolution of courage, whereby
promising unto himself to be able to surmount the calamities which threaten
him, he sees them coming without amazement, and is not terrified when they are
befallen him: Or else according unto others: Hardiness is a Passion of the
soul, which does fortify it, and makes it assured against the miseries which
are most difficult to avoid, and which does encourage it to pursue those good
things which are most painful to obtain.

Whereby it follows, that Hardiness is always accompanied with a certain
hope to be able to vanquish and disperse those fearful things which present
themselves unto the imagination of man. This confidence may grow from the
opinion we have, that the evil which treatneth us is far from us; or from our
belief, that if it should present it self, we should be able to surmount it.
As when a City has a conceit that no man will attempt any thing against the
peace of her Citizens; and if they should, they were able to repel the
injury, and to endure the attempts of their enemies; this belief makes them
hardy and assured. Secondly, it may grow, for that although we find our
selves weak, and unable to resist our enemies, yet we believe that we shall
be powerfully assisted by our Allies, with whose aid we hold our selves
invincible. As for example, although the Duke of Saiwy be not able of himself
to resist the Arms of Spain; yet being fortified with the alliance of this
Crown, he does not apprehend them, neither is he afraid to incense them,
knowing that the assistance of the Christian King protects him of that side.

Thirdly, this confidence may grow, for that we believe, we have neither
received nor done injury to any man, which should make us apprehend revenge.
And again, for that we think we have no enemies, or else that they are so
feeble and weak as they cannot annoy us. It may also grow in regard that they
who have power to hurt us, are our friends, and live in good correspondency
with us, and have assisted us in our occurrents, as for our part we have
endeauored to bind the^ unto us by all occasions which have been offered. So the
Allies of great Kings fear not their power, although it be fearful to the
rest of the world.

By this means we find that there are diverse sorts of persons which are full
of Hardiness and assurance. First, they are hardy, which imagine that all
things shall succeed happily in regard of their former felicities. So Alexander
undertaking the conquest of India, apprehended nothing; by reason of the happy
victories, and tryumphes which he had gotten over the Persians. So Caesar being
overtaken with a cruel storm and in a small bark, feared nothing, but to
confirm the resolution of his Pilot whom the storm had amazed, he wished him
not to fear, seeing he carried Caesar and his fortunes. Secondly, they are
hardy who having been engaged in great dangers, have yet escaped; for they
imagine that good Fortune which has been so favorable unto them in so many
other occasions full of despair, will not abandon them in that present danger.
Finally, men are not troubled in dangers for two reasons, either for want of
experience, or for the hope they have to be speedily relieved. As for example,
they that go by sea, having never seen the horror of tempests, imagine that
the masters and such as guide the ship, are expert in their faculty, and that
they will easily preserve them from shipwreck; so as they are not amazed,
although the storms and waves seem to threaten them their death.

Thirdly, men are full of assurance when as they see such as equal them not,
or do not exceed them in power, make no demonstration of fear; conceyting that
they are assured, they have more cause to continue constant. Men not only hold
them inferior unto them whom they have exceeded, but also such as cannot enter
into comparison with them, or at the least are not more pow^rfull then those
whom they have vanquished,

Again men are full of Courage and resolution, when as they see themselves
furnished with all those things which may make the^ fearful to their enemies.
Among the which we put store of coin, disposition of body, greatness of
mind, extent of Empire, support of friends, the power of Armies, and a great
provision of all that is necessary for the maintenance of a war.

Moreover, men hold themselves assured when they have not offended any man, or
when such as they have offended are not able to revenge the injury. And
withal, men are much assured, when as they think that God is favorable and
assistant in their designs. Wherefore, in old time great Captains of war were
not wont to give battle, before they had sacrificed unto their gods, and had
seen in the intrailes of their sacrifices some happy presage of divine
assistance. For the same occasion they consulted with Oracles, attended the
answers, and were careful to observe the signs which were seen before the
battle: so that sometimes the flying of an Eagle has assured Armies that
were amazed.

But without all these signs and presages, men think that God is favorable,
when as they think they fight for a good cause: As when they have taken Arms
for religion; for the service of their Prince; for the maintenance of his
Crown; and for their Country: yea, when as they imagine, that the revenge
they pursue is just, and that they have been unworthily abused. The reason is,
for that Choler which is always enflamed by the injury received, and not by
that which we do unto others, makes men hardy, persuading themselves, that
God assists them that are wronged and unjustly persecuted. Lastly, they that
begin a war are commonly hardy, especially when they have a conceit that the
action will succeed, and that the event will answer the expectation.

As for the constitution of the body, which may contribute to the Hardiness
and resolution of man: It is certain, that such as have much blood and
spirits, and which abound in heat, are most commonly hardy and valiant. For
they have great minds and full of generosity, which makes them to contemn
dangers. And if in the midst of hazards some part of the blood retires
inwardly, yet the better part keeps her seat, and remains firm and
constant: so as they never grow pale, nor tremble like to other men. But if
before they fight the apprehe^sio^ of danger, makes any impression in their
souls, they recover themselves suddenly, and expel the fear which would
surprise them. And for the same reason, they which are full of wine, may become
more hardy: not that this defect of it self does contribute any thing to the
greatness of Courage, but for that wine enflames the blood, and by accident
makes men valiant; and withal, they that are overtaken with wine, have their
reason captiuated, and their judgment troubled: so as they cannot consider
duly of the greatness of peril, but imagine, that all dangers are inferior
to their force and resistance.

In the mean time we observe, that many which show a great Hardiness and
courage to cast themselves into danger, as soon as they find themselves
engaged, are often amazed; as we see in those that go valia^tly to a charge,
but finding resistance, they turn their backs to the enemy: where of we can
give no other reason, but that they are not valiant by judgment, but by the
bounty of nature. So as apprehending not the greatness of the danger before
they enter, but imagining that they shall vanquish whatsoever opposes it self
against them; when as they find resistance which they did not expect, they are
amazed at the strangeness of this accident, and their hearts grow cold and
relent in such sort, as sometimes they fly before their enemies. But the
contrary happens to those that are truly valiant; for when as they govern
their courages by wisdom, and measure their forces, attempting nothing above
their strength or against reason, there is no sudden accident that may befall
them, that can trouble them in any action of Arms; whereas commonly they find
less resistance then they expected before they entered the fight, so as their
resolution is always fortified and never decays. And then propounding honor
only before their eyes, the fear of the loss of life cannot amaze them, but
their virtue surmounting all accidents, it causes them (notwithstanding all
hazzards) to persist courageously in that which they have gloriously begun.
Yea, commonly they show themselves more cold in the beginning, then at the
ending; for that it is not the Passion that does animate them, but it is
judgment which does act in their courages. By reason whereof, in the beginning
of the actio^ they are more cold, and are not enflamed but with fighting. But
it has bin observed in many valiant men, which had their hearts all covered
with hair: whereof we have a famous example in that courageous Lacedemonian
Leonidas, who with five hundred men kept the straight of Thermopiles against
that huge Army of Xerxes, and who had the courage and resolution to pass
through the midst of his armed soldiers, to wrest the Diade^e from his head.
For when as after his death the King of Persia (amazed at so great a
resolution) had caused him to be opened, his heart was found all covered with
hair. Some, it may be, would put this among the prodigies, or rather among the
scorns of Nature; but the reason is easy to be given, for they that are
extraordinarily valiant, have an exceeding heat, which draws from their heart
a fume of excrements, which thickens, and is converted into hair; the which is
a mark of their courage, and a sign of valor.

CHAP. 1. Of Fear or Dread.
ALTHOUGH it seems that fear is a dead Passion and that it should not make any
great impressions in our souls, nor cause any strange alterations in the
world: yet as there be certain stars, which being in a manner continaully
hidden, have notwithstanding very malign and pernicious influences: so
although she seem not to be so active as the rest, and remains as it were
covered and hidden, yet she does cause strange accidents in the life of man;
for that she has sometimes ruined powerful Armies, brought Kingdoms and
States into dangers, and overthrown the fortunes of private persons. Wherefore
we have seen great Commanders in war, who troubled by some sinister and
unexpected accident, in a day of battle, have had recourse to vows and
prayers, and have promised to build temples to Fear and palenesse, to divert
the ruin that threatened them, if the amazement spread over the whole Army, had
not been as it were miraculously dispersed.

Wherefore seeing that Fear does produce such powerful changes in the
affairs of men, and withal, that this life is daily threatened with infinite
miseries, which give us still cause to fear; we must see wherein she
consists, how she is framed, and in what souls she does reside. Fear then is
no other thing, but A grief and distress of the soul, troubled by the
imagination of some approaching Evil, wherewith man is threatened, without any
appearance to be able to avoid it easily, although it tend to the destruction of
his being, or cause him some strange calamity in the course of his life.

It is first of all a grief and a distress; for that as pleasures fill the
senses with delight and joy, so the imagination of an infallible evil, which
cannot be avoided, fills us with grief and heaviness. But secondly the
causes of this grief, are not always solid nor true, but many times they are
vain and imaginary: for that we do frame or rather forge to our selves the
miseries, whereof the apprehension afflicts our minds, and torments our senses.

The which made an Ancient say, that there are more things which amaze us, then
that press us: and that most commonly opinion and apprehension, does us more
harm then the thing it self. Wherein doubtless the condition of man is
lamentable, for that as if he were not environed by a sufficient number of true
miseries, he forgets others which are not in nature, to increase his miseries.

For we see daily that although there appear no presages, nor any signs of a
calamity that does threaten us, yet our minds do frame false imaginations, and
vain fears, which many times are the causes of our ruin.

There are some things which torment us more then they should do, others
trouble us before the time, and some afflict us without cause or subject, for
that we either increase our griefs and pains, or we forge them our selves, or
else we run before them and anticipate them: And whereas we should strive
against these iealousies and false opinions which cause them, we suffer our
selves to be vanquished, resembling therein certain Soldiers who being amazed
at a little dust raisd by a flock of sheep, turned their backs, as if the
enemy had been at their heels.

These vain fears may sometimes grow from the ignorance of things which they
imagine to be of bad presage, although they be mere effects of nature which
they should observe without trembling, as we have many times seen an Eclipse
of the Sun or of the Moon which have their natural causes, trouble whole
Armies and terrify their Commanders. Thirdly, we must observe that to cause
Fear, the evil that does threaten us must not be present but to come; for
that when it is present, it is no more a Fear but a mere heaviness. And then
the evil which we doubt must be full of horror, and threaten us with the
loss of life, or some other great prejudice: For things of small weight, are
not capable to make any impression of Fear, at the least if there remain any
spark of generosity in our hearts.

Yea all kind of calamities how great so ever, are not able to cause Fear, if
it be not accompanied with a certain horror which amazeth the senses. As for
example, men apprehend not to become unjust, or wicked, although they be things
more to be feared then all the miseries of this life. But the nature of vice
is such, as the horror of her presence is not sensible unto us, for that she
seems not to destroy our being, nor to cause in us any great alterations that
should afflict us. Moreover, to be terrified with any evil, it must be as it
were hanging over our heads, and threaten us with a ruin at hand; for when as
we imagine that it is far from us, how fearful soever the form be, yet we
are not amazed. Even so although that death be the most horrid and fearful
thing that may fall into the thought of men, yet for that every man presumes it
is not ready to seize upon him, we do not apprehend it as we ought, but we
suffer it to come and prepare not our selves.

There rests now to see what things we have just cause to apprehend. An
Ancient makes three sorts, that is to say, poverty, diseases, and the outrages
of the mighty. The two first, that is to say, poverty, and diseases, make the
least show; but the outrages of the mighty present themselves unto our senses
with much brute, and terrify our eyes and ears. For even as an executioner
is the more fearful when he brings forth diverse instruments to torture and
torment the patient, so as many times they which would have endured their
punishment patiently, are dismayed, seeing so many deaths at one instant before
their eyes; even so among the calamities which oppress our spirits, those
cause most terror which march with the greatest show, for that they represent
unto our thoughts irons, fire, chains, prisons, gibbets, wheels, and
whatsoever is most horrible and fearful in this life. But let us hear
Aristotle, who also sets three kinds of things which give us apprehension and
fear. In the first rank he puts those which tend infallibly to the
destruction of our being. For this reason, we do justly fear thunder and
lightning; for that the life of man is full of the examples of such as have
been miserably burnt. We Fear in like manner great inundations, and deluges of
water, which are the cau^es of so many ruins upon earth. For the same reason,
being in Forests and deserts, we apprehend the encounter of savage beasts,
which are enemies to the life of man. And for the same subject we apprehend to
fall into the hands of those whom we think we have offended.

In the second rank of fearful things, he puts those which cause pinching
vexations and griefs, as the loss of our kinsfolks and friends, banishment,
imprisonment, and other punishments. In the third he places those which are
as it were the signs and presages of these kind of miseries. Not that these
signs of themselves cause us any prejudice, but for that they are as it were
the forerunners of the danger into which we fear to fall. The which makes
kings and Princes apprehend the rising and apparition of Comets, for that they
have been persuaded they are foretellings of the death of great men. These
signs which amaze us, may be reduced to four heads, which are found in the
course of this life, and in the affairs of the world. For we are accustomed to
Fear the wrath, and hatred of those which have power to be revenged; for that
their wrath and hatred is as it were an infallible sign of our ruin; seeing
that having power to undo us, there is no question, but (by a disease commune
to all men,) they will be naturally inclined to revenge.

But secondly, we apprehend our enemies more, when they are not stayed by some
honest Fear of Justice, or some other respect, but are ready to tread all
divine and human laws under foot to satisfy their revenge. For men which
have thus renounced all the feelings of virtue, wanting no power, and having a
wicked inclination, are always ready to do evil; and apprehend not to show
their valorous disposition. So we have great reason to Fear such as in the
liberty of crimes, find themselves above the laws, and cannot be punished by
any man. As for example, Tyrants which have seized upon Estates and Empires,
are much to be feared; for that having force and power to oppress whom they
please, there is no doubt but they will speedily put it in execution; for that
these savage spirits, knowing that those whom they have made subject to their
Empire, (having just cause to hate them,) have no other dessigne but to take
from them al means to hurt the^, by weakening them, and terrifying them with
the Fear of punishments. They are also to be feared, not only for that they
have power, but also for that to settle their Empire, they are inclined to
commit all outrages and violence.

It is true on the other side, that the same Tyrants should apprehend the fury
of the people, who do but seek occasions to root them out, and to abate their
power. Wherefore we see the life of these plagues of mankind, is full of
Iealousies and distrusts, which torment them day and night more cruelly, then
those which they make their miserable subjects to suffer, who groan under the
burden of their Tyranny. For although they be environed with their guards;
that they have powerful alliances; that they command great Armies; and have
strong towns and Forts at their command, yet nothing can assure their
consciences, but they are in perpetual terror; which makes their condition
like to that of savage beasts, which fly all the world, and all men abhor
them.

Thirdly, we have cause to fear resolute men, who make profession of honor,
when we have offended them: for that being sensible of injuries, it is
certain their courage will carry them to revenge.

Lastly, we should apprehend those which have just cause to fear us, at the
least, if they have power to hurt us. For being in continual apprehension,
lest we should attempt something against their lives, they had rather prevent
us, then suffer us to surprise them. From hence it follows, that there are
diverse persons whose enterprises we should fear, and have a special care of.
First, we should fear those to whom we have imparted some great and important
secret, which being revealed, may be the cause of our ruin: for the
weakness of man's mind is such, as it may be, they will either be corrupted,
or induced by promises to discover us; or the fear to be found confederates
if the matter should be revealed, they will seek to justify themselves in
accusing us, and ruin us to save themselves. Secondly, we should apprehend
such as have power to hu^t us, for that commonly the will follows the power,
and they will easily take liberty to effect that which is in their power.
Thirdly, we should dread such as we have offended, or that think we have
wronged them, being likely, that they will not leave this injury unrevenged,
but will endeavor to take revenge when occasion shall be offered. Fourthly,
we should fear those which have wronged us, and which are subject to fear
us: for that doubting lest we should apprehend the injury we have received,
and having forces at command, it is likely they would free themselves of this
fear by preventing us, as we have formerly said. Fifthly, we should distrust
those which dispute or contend with us, for honor, or for any good thing,
which we cannot enjoy jointly together. For to take away this obstacle in
their pursuites, it is to be presumed that they will attempt something against
us. Sixthly, we should dread such as are fearful to greater personages then
our selves. For that if they may strike a terror into the mighty, they will more
easily do it in them that are weak. Seventhly, we should be watchful of
those, which have already tried their forces against such as are more powerful
then our selves, and have prevailed; or that have used some surprise or
treachery, to be revenged of such as were not equal to us in power. For that
the first may easily persuade themselves to be able to master us, having
vanquished those that did exceed us. And the second, seeing their success
against the weaker, they will take courage in their crime, and promise
themselves the like success against them that are more powerful; to whom they
imagine they should be fearful, by reason of that which they had formerly
done. Eighthly, we should apprehend the friends of those whom we have
offended: not such as are prompt to choler, and which speak much, for that it
is easy to discover them, and to beware of them; but those that are close,
dissembling, and full of art, for that it is a difficult thing to know what
is in their souls, and to discover if they practice any thing against our
lives.

Among the things which make an impression of Dread, the most fearful are
those which surprise us, and which we had not forethought. The which happens
for two reasons: the one, for that befalling us thus unlooked for, they take
from us the means to think of the remedies, whereof we do commonly make use
against the disasters that do threaten us: and the other, for that speaking of
the accidents of this life, be they good or bad, the more we consider of
them, the more the opinion which we had formerly conceived, is extenuated. In
regard whereof, as there is no grief so violent, but time does mollify, so
there is no apprehension so great, which is not in some sort diminished by
preparing our selves for the miseries which threaten us. Wherefore Fear
increases when we are surprised, and have not means to think of the remedies.

Secondly, those things are most fearful, when as if we commit a fault, it
is no more in our power to repair the error, but if there be any remedy, it
depends wholly on the will of our enemies. For this reason we have often seen
generous resolutions, and great Captains, apprehend much to give battle, for
that as the events of war are doubtful, so if he chance to lose it, there is
little means to repair the error, but most commonly he must receive a law from
the Victor, in stead of giving it him.

Thirdly, among fearful things, we apprehend those which stir up
compassion in our souls, and mollify the heart with grief, if we see them
befall other men: as shipwrackes, burnings, racks, tortures, executions,
desperate diseases; the loss of goods, kinsfolks, or friends, and al other
accidents which may make men miserable. We must not forget that ^eare augments
in us, when as the causes which produce it come to increase. Wherefore as it
rises from the consideration of dangers which threaten us: so many times, they
which do exactly consider the hazards and dangers which threaten this life,
are most subject to Fear; as wise and discreet men, such as have had a long
experience of worldly affairs: whereas fools, drunkards, and young men
apprehend nothing, but hope for all.

Moreover, the excess of danger increases Fear, especially when it is near
unto us, when it presses us, and when we see no remedy nor means to avoid
it; as when an Army or a City is surprised, and neither Captain, nor soldier
endeauours to repulse the enemy. Yea, after that any one has escaped a great
danger, the very imagination to have been freed from so great a misfortune, is
able to kill him; for that the imagination has that force, to represent unto
us the thing, as if it were yet present, and as if we were in the midst of the
danger. As they report of a Jew, who having by night past a bridge, whereas no
man did pass by reason of the danger; who when he came to think of the
peril wherein he had been, was so surprised with Fear and horror as he died.

On the other side, it helps much to dissipate Fear, to imagine there is no
kind of danger in that wherewith they would terrify us. The which may
proceed from two causes, that is to say, either from an exact knowledge of the
nature of the things which we have carefully observed and known, and find
therein no subject of Fear; and this course is full of discretion: Or else from
mere ignorance, which makes us to judge of things otherwise then we ought;
imagining, that there is no danger in places or things which are full of
amazement; which is a sign of want of judgment.

Finally, there is a kind of people which fear nothing; that is to say, such
as have renounced all feeling of things, whereof we have just cause to
apprehend the loss.

As they which have lost all honor, abandoned all shame, wasted their fortunes
and their goods, and those whose lives are tedious unto them. For what can they
fear, who have nothing remaining to trouble them? For this reason we must
greatly apprehend desperate persons, and such as have abandoned the love of
this life: for as an Ancient said, He that contemnes his own life, is master
of another man's. Yet there are diverse things which may free our souls from all
Fear whatsoever prese^ts it self. For as they that are persuaded that nothing
can hurt them, have no apprehension nor Fear: yea, if the heavens should fall,
they would not be amazed at their ruins: In like manner men do not fear to
lose those things, which they think are safe from the outrages of their
enemies. As wise and virtuous men do not fear that the rage of Tyrants can
prevail over their minds to blemish their constancy.

If Tyrants threaten them with any shameful death, they are ready to say, as a
resolute spirit did once unto a Prince who threatened to hang him: This (said
he) would amaze the gallant Courtiers, but as for me, it is indifference
whether I ro^te in the Air, or in the Earth.

Thirdly, men Fear not those whom they think have not power to hurt them,
although in effect they should apprehend them. This false persuasion has often
ruined great Commanders in the war, who contemning the enemies, and making
show not to Fear them, have lost the victory, and fallen miserably into their
power. In like manner, men Fear not when as they conceive that the occasions
which should make them Fear, are taken away: As they which apprehend the
persecution of a Tyrant, lose all Fear when as they see his power overthrown:
Whereby it appears that men Fear, when there is appearance that they may
suffer some injury: Or when as he that is threatened is exposed to outrages: Or
when as they that threaten are powerful: Or that time and occasion favors him
that would do an injury.

By all this we may gather, that there are two kinds of men which are above all
feared. The first are such as are very happy, which have many friends,
abundance of wealth; great Spirits, great power; and which have not yet tried
the miseries of this life. For this great felicity, this immoderate wealth,
this exceeding power, and the other advantages of nature and Fortune, make men
hardy, insolent, outrageous, and to contemn all the world. Whereas on the
other side, poverty and weakness make men fearful, for that the callamity
which does press us, being the object of Fear, they which neither have means
nor power to defend themselves, have cause to apprehend.

The second sort of men, are they which think they have suffered the cruellist
afflictions that can be endured in this life, and whom the custom of
forepas^ed miseries have made insensible of future calamities, as they that are
led to execution, after that they have been tortured in prison.

But the chief reason why these men have abandoned all Fear, is that which
Aristotle alleges, that To have an apprehension of the things which afflict
us, there must be some hope or some show, to be freed from it by industry. And
therefore Fear makes us fly to Counsels, and to seek out remedies: For no
man consults of a business that is desperate. So as these men seeing no
relief in their affairs, as they have no more hope, so they cannot Fear. And
touching that which Aristotle says, that Fear makes us fly to Counsels;
some one may make a question, whether that Fear does contribute any thing to
make men more wise, and more disperse their Fear. Whereunto the answer is
easy, that Fear makes an impression in us of greater care to seek for
Counsel to fortify us against the calamities that do threaten us; but many
times it does hinder us from reaping the fruits which we might gather without
this apprehension.

The reason of the first is, that Fear representing the danger hanging over
our heads, and hard to be avoided, it binds us to seek the means to divert
it, and makes us to crave advice of our friends, to supply our weakness. The
reason of the second is, for that they which are troubled with Fear, or
transported with any other Passion, imagine things to be greater or less then
they are; so as they that love, value the things beloved much; and they that
Fear, represent them more horrible. Wherefore in that regard all Passions are
enemies to wise Counsels, and good resolutions.

Of the Effects of Fear. CHAP. 2.
THE Effects of Fear are diverse and strange; for to leave the impression
which it makes in the mind of man, (whereof we will speak hereafter,) she does
produce all these effects upon his body. First, she shrinkes up his heart, and
does weaken it by the lively apprehension which she does give it of the
affliction; By reason whereof all the heat that is in his face is forced to
fly unto it to succor it: and when as that suffices not, the blood of the
other parts flow also unto it: So as they that are affrighted grow pale. For
provident nature to preserve the life of man, having thus called back the
blood and spirits from all the parts to succor the heart which is the
fountain, speedily leaves the other parts wholly unfurnished and naked. In
regard whereof the blood being that which gives color, and makes man to have a
sanguine hew, it being fled, his complexion fades, and he grows pale. For the
same reason they that are amazed, are presently surprised with a continual
shaking, for that the heat which resides in the blood and spirits, being that
which supports and fortifies the members of man; being destitute thereof they
can hardly support themselves, but tremble and shake in that manner. And
whereas the hands and lips show greater signs of alteration then the rest,
the reason is, for that those parts have a more strict bond with the heart, and
have less blood then the rest; and therefore cold does more easily make an
impression upon them.

Finally, the members which have a particular connection with the heart, have
also a particular feeling of his agitation: wherein it is strange, that as
trembling is an effect of the want of heat, and that Fear chaseth the heat
unto the heart, to preserve the center of life; yet they that are terrified,
have their hearts agitated, and they beat in them, as if they were destitute
of heat.

The reason is, although that provident nature to preserve the heart sends
down the heat from above, yet Fear does not suffer it to subsist long there,
but does chase it lower; for that in them that fear, their spirits grow
thick, and become more heavy by reason of the cold which imagination does
produce, that they are not able to resist the danger which does threaten them:
So as the spirits being grown thus heavy, by reason of the cold which this
imagination leaves, tends downward, and remains not about the heart. They
that are surprised with fear, feel strange alteration; and are wonderfully
dry; for that the heat which nature has drawn about the heart, burns and
filles the bowels with an exceeding heat, which makes him to desire cold and
moist things, wherein thirst consists, to quench this troublesome alteration,
to refresh the Creature, and to free it from this insupportable heat.

And for that in this motion of fear, the heat descends, it made Homer to say
of him that was without courage, that his heart was fallen to his heels, after
which there commonly follows many accidents which slacken and unknit all the
joints and ligatures of the body; but especially they that are terrified have
their tongs tied and can hardly speak, causing them to ^umble in their
discourses: yea their voice is very shrill and weak, for that it is abandoned
by the heat which should entertain her force; whereas in choler it shows it
self more strong, for that the heat which ascends fortifies it, and makes it
more powerful. Moreover fear makes the hayres to stand up with horror, for
that in the absence of hea^e, the cold congealeth, and stoppes the conduicts by
which it passes: So as the hair as it were oppressed in the roots, by the cold
which diuerts their natural nourishment, for that they cannot suffer a strange
humor full of excrements which does rot them, they stand upright with horror;
the which sometimes works so strange an effect by her vehemence, as they make
young men grow graye in an instant: whereof we have a memorable example in the
age of our fathers, during the reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth. For
Francis Gonzague, having caused a young man of his house to be committed to
prison, for that he suspected he had conspired against him; this miserable
young man was so terrified with his affliction, as the same night he was cast
into prison, his hair grew all white. In the morning his Keeper seeing him
thus changed, went and made report thereof to Gonzague, who being amazed at
this prodigy, conceived that it was a testimony of his innocence; whereupon he
pardoned him.

This sudden change of the prisoners hair, proceeded without doubt, for that
the vehemence of his fear caused the heat retire from his brain: As in like
manner old men grow white, for want of heat, which decays with age: Finally,
they that have little hot blood about the heart are naturally fearful: So as
those Creatures which have great hearts to the proportion of their bodies, (as
Stagges and Panthers) are more subject to fear; for that having little heat,
it is weakened, dispersing it self into a large exte^t, even as a little fire
cannot so warm a large room, as it would do one that is less. So as the
blood grows cold, and is less able to warm the heart, which is the seat of
courage.

Whereas other creatures which have more heat, and the heart proportionably
less, are more hardy and courageous. For that the heat abounding in them, it
is more active, and the subject where it works, dispersing not her action by
extent, she works more powerfully: so as she enflames them to all generous
enterprises, and glorious designs.

But let us come to the effects which Fear breeds in the mind of man.
Besides all these strange accidents which she does produce in the body, she
causes other disorders in the soul, filling it with such confusion, as she
leaves him neither memory, nor judgment, nor will, to encounter any danger
that threatens his ruin. Wherefore it is not the work of an ordinary courage,
to have a constant resolution in the midst of greatest dangers, and suddenly
to find remedies against the mischiefs that threaten him. As histories give
this commendation of Hannibal, Iugurth, Caesar, Alexander, and some few of
those great spirits of former ages; whose judgments were never danted with
apprehension of any danger, but in the midst of combats they could speedily
redress all accidents, which happening suddenly, might amaze their Armies, and
deprive them of the victory.

Moreover, Fear (like a feruile and base Passion) depriues man of all courage:
and whereas the apprehension of danger is a spur to generous spirits, to
fortify them, and to make them seek powerful means to avoid the danger; it
does so deiect faint-hearted and fearful men, as they remain, as it were,
immovable, and incapable of all action.

Moreover, it makes a man ashamed and confounded, and to contemn himself; he
crosses his arms, and flatters them basely and unworthily, whom he thinks
may ease his grief. It fills him also with amazement, and as if it were able
to convert him into a rock, it reduces him to that stupiditie, as he forgets
himself, and becomes, as it were, insensible of the miseries which oppress
him, although they vex him worse then death.

But you must remember that we speak of a disordered Fear, which does wholly
trouble the imagination of man: for there is a kind of moderate fear, which
striking reason but gentlely, makes us advised (to the which the Stoickes give
the name of circumspection) to provide with judgment for that which concerns
us: for that it makes us careful and atentiue to look to our affairs, and to
give order for that which is necessary to shelter us from storms.

Of Shame. CHAP. 1.
SEEING that Shame is, as it were, a shoot or a Sience of Fear, we must show
wherein it consists, and what effects it does produce, to the end we may leave
nothing behind that may concern this subject. Shame then is, A grief and a
confusion, which grows from the apprehension of some crosses, which may make
man infamous: And under this kind we comprehend those calamities which are
present, past, or yet to come; so as they be of that nature, as they may
trouble and breed a confusion in the soul of man. And impudency on the other
side, is a contempt of the same misery, for want of feeling. By the definition
of Shame, we may gather, that men are ashamed of those things that they think
will breed them infamy, or lay some aspersion upon them, or their friends, or
upon such as belong unto them. So as first of all, all vices, and all things
that do resemble or have any show of vice, are capable to breed Shame in our
souls. As for example, it is a shameful thing to fly from the Army in a day
of battle; for that this flight is a sign of baseness and want of courage.
In like manner it is a shameful thing to refuse to restore that, which has
been left with us in guard, and which has been consigned to our fidelity;
for that this refusal is a proof o^ our injustice and disloyalty. It is also
a shameful thing to run indifferently into all dishonest places, in the which
(as Diogenes said to a young man) the farthe^ he enters, the more his infamy
increases; for that it is a testimony of intemperance and dissoluteness. And
again, it is a very shameful thing to seek to reap profit from all base
and abject things; like ^o that Roman Emperor, who said, The favor of gain
was always sweet, from whence soever it came: for it is a sign of a
prodigious covetousness. Moreover, it is a shameful thing to refuse to
relieve them that are in misery, and implore our aid, with money or any other
thing; for it is a sign of our inhumanity: yea, it is a Shame not to assist
them bountifully according to their means. But especially when they are our
kinsfolks, our Allies, our friends, or such persons, as at another time may
require the offices we have done them in their necessity. It is a Shame to
beg for favor or to borrow money of an inferior, or that is poorer then our
selves; and we cannot but blush to require money of him in lone, who has
first demanded it of us; or to require of him, who would gladly be paid that
which we owe him.

All these things cannot proceed but from a base mind, and void of
integrity. Moreover, we blush when as we praise any one above his merit, and
when as we seek to excuse in him the defects that are inexcusable, to the end
that we may obtain some favor, some present, or some assistance from him.
And in like manner we cannot but blush, when as to insinuate our selves into
the favor of any one, we abandon our selves to impudency, to extol his good
fortune, and the success of his prosperity, without measure. As also we are
ashamed of the extraordinary demonstrations we do usually make to men
afflicted, to witness unto them the feeling we have of their grief: as when
to comfort our Friend for the death of some one that was dear unto him, we
wish (although it be far from our thought) that we were able to redeem him
whose loss is so bitter unto him, with the loss of our own blood or life*
for all these are signs of insupportable flattery, which cause even our
friends to blush when they hear us.

We blush in like manner, when as we refuse to endure the toil of honorable
employments which are offered us; and that men of greater age, more unable,
more tender, and of another quality then our selves, accept them freely: for
that this refusal is a sign of our effeminacy. Moreover, we blush to receive
benefits and favors continually from the same person; and we cannot without
some Shame reproach them we have bound unto us by our favors, for that it is a
sign of great baseness.

Finally, we are ashamed when as we attribute praises unto our selves which are
not due unto us; or that we brag unseasonably, or challenge the glory of goodly
actions, which other men have ended: for that it is a note of our arrogance and
vanity. So al vices, and all the marks of vices, make an impression of shame in
all those which are infected with them.

Secondly, we are ashamed to see our selves destitute of all honest qualities,
which recommend all our equals generally, or at the least most of them. As for
example, it is a great shame not to be adorned with valor, wisdom,
knowledge, modesty, and other excellent parts; which shine commonly in those of
our profession, of our age, of our blood, or of our quality. So Caesar seeing
himself two and thirty years old, and having made no show of the greatness of
his courage, nor done any great exployt, he grew ashamed, and began to weep,
beholding the Image of Alexander who seemed to reproach him. All these defects
are full of Shame and infamy, especially when as they proceed from our
negligence, which shows that we have no cause to accuse any man but to blame
our selves.

Thirdly, men blush when as they are forced to do or suffer things which are
unworthy either of their condition, or of the nature of man. As for example if
they would force a man of quality to do services unworthy of his rank, this
fills him with Shame, and he cannot endure it, but with great grief and
distaste: yea we read in Histories of generous spirits, who in the midst of
their captivity remembering that they were borne free, had rather precipitate
themselves and choose a voluntary death, then be forced to do services unworthy
of their births. And therefore Nero should die for Shame to commit that excess
which he did with the scumme of the people upon the Altars and in the public
places of Rome: But what grave or serious thing can we attend from that
infamous monster, who has dishonored mankind with his impudencies? In like
manner it is a matter which causes extraordinary Shame in men of note and
quality, when by the injuries of Fortune, or by their own baseness they see
themselves reduced to that extremity as to suffer indignities and outrages
which blemish their first luster and glory: As those kings who having lost
battles, and seen their Estates ruined and spoiled, to crown their miseries
were led in triumph to Rome, to serve as a spectacle to that world of people,
and to be the Images and shows of humane misery, and of the inconstancy of the
world. Wherefore they branded them with infamous baseness, which did prostitute
themselves to this Shame either through covetousness, or for want of courage.
Contrariwise according to the custom of the time, when as Christian religion
had not yet dispersed the vanity of Pagan errors, nor converted reproaches into
exercises of patience, they observed great beams of generosity in a woman
borne to pleasures, and bred up in the midst of all delights: For that being
in the power of her enemy, she chose rather to kill her self by the biting of
Aspicks, then to be led in show, to serve as a fatal ornament to his triumph.

But generally it is a very shameful thing in all conditions to do or to
suffer things full of indignity and reproach: yet we must set a difference
betwixt those that suffer them by their own baseness, and such as endure them
by a violent constraint. For they that suffer them by their own baseness, are
infamous; for that they expose themselves volu^tarily to those affronts.

But we must again set a difference betwixt those that suffer them by
constraint: For either they resolve though timerousnesse and by an apprension,
which should not fall into a constant soul; and then it is a sign of their
weakness: Or else for that they cannot resist, being forced by such as are
become masters of their persons; and then it is rather an effect of their
misfortune then a sign of their baseness: As we see in those that suffer some
indignity by them that are more powerful.

But for that Shame rises from a belief which we have to be wounded in our
reputation, the which we measure according to the judgment and esteem which
men make of us; it falls out many times that we are ashamed of the disgraces we
suffer in the presence of persons which we respect much, and whose blame and
censure we apprehend.

In which rank we put those which have in their power the good chances
whereunto we aspire, and of whom depends the honor or contentment which we
affect with Passion. As for example, a soldier will be much more ashamed to
have fled from the enemy in the view of his Captain* then to have committed
this baseness in his absence; and a Lover will endure an injury done him in
the presence of his best beloved, more impatiently, then all the affronts that
can be done elsewhere. For the same reason our Shame increases, when as we
receive any reproach before virtuous persons, and such as are held to be just:
As when they are wisemen or reverent old men that accuse us; for that we
think men will easily give credit to what they say of us. We are also ashamed
if any infamous thing befall us in the presence of our equals, and of such
which are as it were emulators and riualls of what we pursue; for that
contending with them of honor, it is a wonderful grief unto us to see this
breach made in our reputation in their presence. And generally we are ashamed
of that which is done in the sight of men which observe it, or which have a
malicious disposition, and which interpret all actions sinisterly.

For we conceive, that if they do not pardon innocence, they will not spare
us. Shame in like manner shows it self in the presence of such which are
adorned with virtues contrary to the defects which appear in our actions,
especially if they be severe men, who are not accustomed to pardon or excuse
the errors which they see committed: As the Romans were ashamed to do any
unworthy act before Cato, both for that he was a severe censor of the actions
of the Citizens, as also for that he pardoned no man. It troubles us also to
see our selves reproved and scorned by ordinary Iesters, and by such as make
profession to show themselves in Theaters; for that we conceive it is a
testimony that we are publicly defamed, or at the least we fear that these
people to the eternal infamy of our name, will tear our reputation in
public assemblies. We are also ashamed to show our defects before those whom
we think we have offended, and are not our friends: For that we know they
will not fail to publish our imperfections. Finally, we blush when as any
thing unworthy of our condition befalls us in the view of such whose favor and
friendship we seek ambitiously; apprehending that this misfortune will be an
obstacle to our pursuites, and a subject to make us be rejected.

As in like manner we blush to see our selves surprised in some notable fault,
by such as had us in good esteem, especially if they be our familiar friends,
or of our own family, which discover the error, into which we had never before
fallen, or had always cunningly concealed it.

There are also diverse other subjects which make an impression of Shame; and
for example, at our first speech to any one whom we know not well, we blush,
for that being ignorant what account he makes of us, or how he is affected to
us, we are in suspense betwixt hope and fear, and know not how he will
entertain our discourse. And in like manner we are surprised with Shame, when
as we are to speak before a great multitude and a concourse of people: For
that in this great diversity of minds and humors we think it impossible, but
there is some one who has no great disposition to favor us. Moreover, when as
we are to speak before a person of eminent quality, of exquisite knowledge, or
of exact judgment, we blush and are amazed, by reason of the great respect
we have of him; which makes us fear to fail before him, and this fear fills
us with Shame, and makes us blush. We are also not only ashamed of our
defects, but even of all the signs and tokens of our vices and bad
inclinations: As we blush not only at uncleanness, but also at all the signs
of wantonness; especially we are ashamed at licentious words, which offend
chaste ears. Wherefore Alceus having opened his mouth to speak to Sapho, and
then staying himself, and pretending for his excuse, that Shame had hindered
his speech, she answered; If you had not had some bad desire, but had meant to
speak that which was honest and not licentious, Shame had not appeared in your
eyes, neither had it tied your tongue, but you would have delivered your
thoughts freely.

By all that we have said, it follows, that men are not ashamed to do or say
any thing whatsoever before such as they do not esteem, but contemn: Whereby
it follows, that they neither respect nor fear the eyes of children nor
beasts. But those before whom we are most ashamed to show our selves in our
misfortune* are our enemies, to whom we know our miseries are a sweet and
pleasing spectacle: As Caesar seeing himself a prisoner in the hands of
Pirates, said, That his enemy Crassus would be glad of the misfortune which had
befallen him.

To conclude, me^ are ashamed to see themselves defamed publicly; as to be led
to execution in the midst of a multitude of people, to be witnesses of their
ignominy. And yet the Poet Antiphon being condemned to dye with many others, by
Denis the Tyrant, when as he saw his companions going to execution, and
passing before a great multitude to hide their faces, as being ashamed; being
come out of the City, he said unto them, What my friends, dee you fear that
some one of these Gallants will see you again to morrow, and reproach you with
your misfortune? But doubtless every man has not this resolution, nor so
great a courage in the last indignities of life.

CHAP. 2. Of the Effects of Shame.
AS there are certain Plants whose roots are venomous and mortal to such as
use them, but their leaves are endued with excellent qualities, and proper for
the preservation of the health of man: So there are Passions of the soul,
which on the one side serve man as a spur to virtue, and on the other side
precipitate him to vice. And this is particularly incident to Shame, the which
does sometime induce men to decline from wickedness, and sometime she diuerts
them from commendable and virtuous actions, by the apprehension of an imaginary
dishonor.

Timoleon conceiving that all the world did hate him, for that he had consented
to the death of his brother, who was a plague to his common Wealth, wandered up
and down the fields twenty years together, and could not resolve to embrace the
defense of his Citizens generously. Others being ashamed to abandon their
Country in public calamities, have carried themselves courageously to
undertake things, for the which they knew, they should be unworthily
recompensed by the ingratitude of their Citizens.

But before we come to the effects which Shame produces in the soul, let us
see what impressions she makes in the body: for it seems she stirs up an
effect far different from the cause from whence it proceeds. Shame, say the
Philosophers, Is a kind of fear, which arises, for that man doubts some
blame and some censure of his actions. As Fear then retires the blood, and
makes it descend about the heart, how comes it that Shame should cause the
blood to ascend unto the countenance, and make the face to blush? Whereunto
they answer, that men may be threatened with two kinds of miseries, whereof the
one is not only contrary to the inclination of their senses, but also tends to
the destruction of their nature and being, as extreme dangers and perils of
death. Others are only contrary to the desires of the senses, but do not
threaten man with death or the decay of his being: As for example, the blame
and dishonor which we apprehend for something we have done. When man then
propounds unto himself the form of these first kinds of objects, that is to
say, of those calamities which tend to the dissolution of his being: Nature
being amazed by the impressio^ which she receives from the senses, strives to
succor them, and draws the blood and heat unto the heart, which is (as we
have said) the fountain of life; whereupon the countenance being destitute of
blood, man grows pale in these great terrors. But when as he apprehends only
the calamities of the second kind, that is to say, those which tend not to the
destruction of his being, but only to the decrease of his glory; Nature is
not so powerfully moved by the senses, for that the ruin of her consistence
is not directly in question; but leaves the grief in the senses, whose
amazement does not send the heat and blood into the body, but causes it to
mount into the face, which becomes all red and sanguine.

Some believe that this blushing is as it were a veil, which Nature extends
before her to cover her shame; as we see commonly, they that are ashamed carry
their hands before their faces and eyes, for that those parts are most
afflicted with shame, in regard they are the most noble. And the impression is
particularly made in the eyes, which the Ancients have called the seat of
modesty: and therefore Plato brings in Socrates covering his eyes, when as he
would make a discourse of Love, wherein he thought there was some shame for a
man, making profession of deep wisdom. The reason thereof is, for that we are
ashamed to see our defects known to men, who^ we greatly respect and reverence.

The Ancients did always hold it for a good sign and presage in young men, to
see them blush easily; wherefore they called this blushing The color, or
vermillion of Virtue. Yea, that great Roman Censor said, that he loved them
better that blushed, then such as grew pale, for that to be pale, is a sign
they feared some danger: So as they that grow pale, seem to have an
apprehension to be called in question for some crime, and punished: whereas
they that blush, show they are ashamed, and apprehend even the very suspicion
of doing ill.

But there is no kind of people in whom an honest bashfulnesse is more
commendable; yea, upon the lightest occasions, then in Virgins, and Women: for
to blush for words, for motions, and for the least licencious actions, is a
sign of an exact modesty, which is the rarest and the most rich ornament of
their sex.

But to return to young men, as it is a good sign to see them blush, for that
being naturally inclined to follow their passions (by reason of this great
heat of blood which abounds in them, and enflames them) it is a commendable
thing to see that Shame is, as it were, a bridle to retire them from vice. But
this kind of shame is not much commendable in men of ripe age, who have not
this spur to incite them to evil; and moreover, virtue should have taken
deep root in their hearts, whereby all their actions should be commendable and
full of glory, so as they have no subject to blush. But if they fall into this
defect, it is a sign that they judge themselves, and that their virtue is not
perfect nor complete proportionable to their age.

Let us now come to the effects which Shame produces in the soul: there are
some good, as we have said in the beginning, but she also produces badde.
Many times she has made them valiant, who were faint-hearted and fearful;
yea, we have seen whole Armies being amazed and terrified, have resumed
courage by the presence of Caesar's, Alexanders, Scipioes, and other great
Commanders, who have brought back their soldiers in battles; for that the
great esteem they had of such excellent Captains, made them blush to fly
before them; yea, to choose a most certain death, rather then to be held
cowards by such wotthy men.

Moreover, there have been soldiers, who having faintly maintained an
encounter, the next day to wipe away this shame, have performed wonders,
whereof the Greek and Roman histories, furnish us with many examples.
Besides, Shame does retire us often from dishonest things, as appeared in him
who confessed freely that he played not at dice, for that he was ashamed any one
should see him lose his time in so bad an exercise.

But on the other side, Shame diuerts us many times from commendable things;
yea, and from those which are profitable, and which concern the preservation
of our lives. As for example, you see at banquets, some being pressed to drink
extraordinarily, are ashamed to refuse them which inuit them; and ouer-ruled
by their unjust entreaties, fall into surfeits which ruin their health.

Others in like manner seeing themselves importuned or coniured in bad
companies, not to be so modest before their friends, suffer themselves to be
carried away, to commit great disorders, as with women, or at play, or to do
other execrable villainies, for the which they are grieved in their souls, but
they have not the courage to refuse such as press them: whereby it happens
often, that flying the smoke they run headlong into the flame, that is to
say, for that they are not able to resist an imaginary Shame, they fall into an
eternal reproach, being blamed by all virtuous men, when they hear of their
baseness.

There have been some also who fearing that there have been plots laid to kill
them, or to poison them, yet surmounted by Shame, have abandoned themselves to
the danger.

So Dyon being aduertized of the conspiracy which was practiced against him,
and his host and friend Calippus; being ashamed to refuse to go whither they
were both invited, which was the place where the murder was intended, he went
rashly to his death.

So Antipater the son of Cassander, lost himself for that he durst not
refuse to suppe with Demetrius, where he was slain. Young Hercules, the son
of Alexander the Great, was surprised by Polipherchon and Cassander, being
ashamed to refuse their requests to suppe with them, who tended only to have a
means to murder him. By all that we have said, we may gather that Shame is
sometimes profitable, and sometimes pernicious; but it is always commendable,
when it serves us as a bridle to retire us from vice.

Of Hope and Despair. CHAP. 1.
He which said that Hope was a dream which presents it self to them that
wake, has excellently described the nature and effects of this Passion. For as
dreams in the night fill us with illusions and vain forms, which abuse us,
and which make us imagine that we are rich in our extremest poverty, that we
are happy in our greatest misery, that we enjoy Scepters and Crowns, in the
midst of bonds and irons, that we command great Empires when we are restraided
in a hard and slavish captivity; in like manner, Hope, abusing our imagination,
fills our souls with vain contentments, and represents unto us that all
things are subject to our power, that the whole world should receive a law from
us; and if that there appear any obstacle to hinder our dessignes and desires,
that we are able to surmount them. Yea in the midst of our greatest
disgraces, we flatter our selves with this conceit, that humane calamities and
miseries have their bounds, and that they are weary to be always about one
man; as the winds and storms in the end break, and are pacified after the
most violent gustes. We represent unto our selves the constitution of heaven
and earth; we call to mind that the Stars which are in the West return
suddenly to the East, that the day follows the night, that a calm season
succedes a storm, and that fair weather follows thunder and rain: Finally,
we believe that we must assure our selves to see a change in the course of
this life, and that the day which we attend will make our condition better,
and convert our misfortunes into incomparable felicities: So as I doubt not but
even among those wretched slaves whom miseries consume in the Turks galleys,
there are some which dream and think of the Scepter of the Empire of Asia.

Wherefore an Ancient said, that there was nothing so common in the life of men
as Hope, which remains even to them that are deprived of all other good and
content: For that the miserable after an absolute shipwreck, entertain Hope,
as the last anchor of their ruined fortune. But to leave the illusion and
deceipts which we frame in our selves; who knows not that when they are well
ordered, they serve to mollify the pains, and to encounter all the crosses
and accidents of this life? What had become of the Romans after the battle of
Cannas, wherein they lost the flower and chief of their men of war, if a
better Hope had not revived their courages, to revenge the loss and disgrace
which they had received? Had not their common-weath without it, been a prey to
Hanniball, and the Carthaginians? Had not their Estate been overthrown, and
their rich provinces made desolate? But these great personages representing
unto themselves that many suffer shipwreck in the Port; and contrariwise
others, save themselves among rocks; fortified them selves with Hope, which
made them not only repair this loss, but also to give a law unto the victors.
How many other Estates, Empires, and Kingdoms, through Hope have maintained
themselves against the injuries of Fortune?

During the reign of Charles the sixth, in that great deluge of English, which
ouerflowed in a manner all France; in those domesticke treacheries, in that
general revolt of all the Orders of the Realm, what had become of the fortune
of France, if those great ornaments of our History, those worthy men, which
lived at that time, by an infamous baseness had abandoned the ship in the
midst of a storm, and had lost all Hope to preserve the King, and his
Crown? Was not their hope seconded by a thousand miracles which God wrought to
prevent the shipwreck of the State? And in our days, amidst the powerful
conspiracies of Spain, and the violent factions of the League, into what
misery had this goodly Crown fallen, if great Henry, the miracle of our age,
full of good Hope, which never abandons great resolutions, had not supported
it, and by his va^o^r overthrown all the obstacles, which his enemies had set
before his throne to hinder his rising? But if Hope has great power to
maintain public fortunes, it has no less to assure those of private me^.
So as we may say, that most men live by Hope, and entertain themselves with
the future, this Passion never abandoning any man until he goes to the grave.
Wherefore if we should search out the nature of any Passion exactly, it is of
this in particular, which has such power over the other affections of our
souls. We must then gather the definitions dispersed here and there in the
writings of Philosophers. Hope, said an ancient, is an expectation of good:
Hope, said another, is a cert^^^e confidence which we have, that what we
imagine shall befall us. And a third writes, that Hope is a motion and passion of
the soul, by the which, upon the impression which we have of a future good,
which presents it self to our imagination as difficult to obtain, we
endeavor to pursue it, conceiving that we are able to attain unto it, and in
the end to get the possession. From this last Definition, which does explicate
the true nature of Hope, we gather that there are four conditions required in
the object. First, it must have bounty, for that Hope tends always to that
which is good. Wherein it differs from fear, which has for object the evil
wherewith man is threatened. Secondly, this good which we hope for must be to
come, for that the presence and enjoying of this takes away the Hope. So
Alexander going into India hoped to conquer it, but having finished his
conquest, this Hope vanished, and was converted into the enjoying and
possession of that which he had hoped for. So in this life we hope for the
glory of heaven, but when we shall enjoy it* this hope shall be quenched and
extinguished. And therein Hope differs from Joy, which is a contentment of a
good which we possess.

Thirdly, there must be a pain and difficulty to attain unto the good whereof
we have conceived an Hope, for no man hopes for that which is in his power.
And therefore the Philosophers observe, that Hope is always mixed with some
fear, by reason of the obstacles which present themselves, and may hinder man's
enjoying of the good he hopes for; wherein she differs from Desire, which
extends generally to all kind of good, without any apprehension of difficulty:
And therefore Desire belongs to the Concupiscible appetite, whereas Hope is
subject to the Irascible.

Fourthly, amidst the difficulties which man does apprehend in getting the good
which he hopes for; yet notwithstanding he must imagine, that it is in his
power to prevent all the obstacles which might hinder his enjoying; for no man
did ever hope for things which he holds impossible. So Caesar would never have
hoped to finish the conquest of Gaul, if he had not first persuaded himself
that the industry of a generous Captain, might bring that enterprise to a good
end, although it were difficult and dangerous. Whereby we may gather, that
although Hope has her seat in the Irascible appetite, which has the good for
her object: yet as it is the property of powers endued with knowledge, to
excite those which are capable to desire, representing their objects unto them;
her motions depend of the imagination which man frames in himself of a good
which he believes confidently to obtain, notwithstanding that he apprehends
great crosses in the pursuit. For man, who is a credulous creature, and always
flatters himself in his hopes, does also assure himself to compass that
which he thinks is not above his forces, although he be not ignorant that
he shall find some resistance. So as this belief begets in the Irascible
part a certain confidence, which makes him undertake that which he desires,
assuring himself to surmount all obstacles which may cross him and hinder his
enjoying. And it is certain, that even brute beasts have motions of hope and
despair as well as men. For the interior passions of creatures discover
themselves, and are known by their exterior motions, wherewith they are
agitated; whereof we have daily experience, in the Sparrow-hauk, Tassel, Sacre,
Lanner, and other Hawks, who seeing their game far from them, and not in
their power to overtake it, they never bate after it, nor offer to pursue it;
whereas if they see it in a reasonable distance, they presently take their
flight to seize upon it. And in like manner the Lion going to hunt after his
prey, to satisfy his hunger, runs not after those beasts which he thinks
can easily fly from his fury, but sets upon those which he imagines cannot
escape him.

But we must understand, that to frame the Hope of aany thing in our souls,
it is not necessary that we know evidently that it shall happen, and that it
is in our power to attain unto it, but it suffices that we have some opinion
and conjecture grounded upon the appare^ce, which makes us believe that there
is means to obtain it: for that when we persuade our selves upon any reason
whatsoever, as imagining that others have attained unto it, that it has at
other times succeeded, and that the same events attend us; that time assists
us, that the place is favorable unto us, that we have friends, or that we are
able enough of our selves to compass our designs; we fill our selves with
Hope, and doubt not but all will succeed happily. So as there is no reason how
light soever, but it is sufficient to make us hope for that which we propound
unto our selves; wherein it seems, that amidst the miseries of this life, and
all public and private calamities, which otherwise would be intolerable, the
wise providence of God has provided us this remedy, to fortify our constancy
and to keep us from shrinking, and falling under the burden of adversities.
The which the Poets would represent unto us, under the fable of Pandora, in
whose box (being emptied of all good things) there remained nothing but only
Hope upon the brimme of the vessel.

And therefore a Rhodian being cast into an obscure and cruel prison, among
serpents and venomous beasts, and coniured by some of his friends, to make an
end of so many miseries by a voluntary death, he answered wisely, that man
hopes still whilst he breathes: as if he would say, that death only could
deprive man of the hopes of life, and a better fortune.

The persons which fill themselves with Hopes, are first of all those which
have had a long experience and a perfect knowledge of the affairs of the
world. As for example, such as have been in many incounters, and have gotten
great victories, promise still unto themselves a power to vanquish, yea, when
they have been beaten. And therefore that Roman Consul which escaped from
the battle of Cannas, where his companion had been slain, and the whole
Roman Army defeated, was commended for that he hoped well of the Commonweal.

And here we must remember what we have formerly said, that the object of
Hope is a difficult good, but yet possible to attain, for thereby follows,
that one thing may contribute, and serve to entertain our Hope after two
manners; that is to say, either in making the thing truly possible, and put
the effects into our power: Or at the least, in making us believe that it is
not impossible, and that we may attain unto it by means, which are not above
our forces. In the first sort, whatsoever makes us more powerful increases
our Hopes. And in this kind we put riches, Arms, Courage, Crowns, Empires,
yea, and a long experience of things: for so we see that men powerful in
wealth assure themselves to compass any thing.

As Philip of Macedon said, that he could force any place whereas money might
enter. And great Kings measuring enterprises, rather by their power and
courage, then the obstacles which present themselves, have an imagination to
accomplish them happily.

And in like manner experience, by means whereof man has gotten the knowledge
of means fit to procure things to succeed easily, makes him conceive a certain
Hope, to have good success of that which he proiects. Wherefore an Ancient
said, that no man apprehends to undertake that which he has learned well and
can do accordingly,

In the second sort, whatsoever makes us esteem things easy, or which
diminish the difficulties, may also serve to fortify our hopes. And of this
sort an exquisite knowledge, or a powerful remonstrance may contribute much.
And therefore in great battles, Generals have been accustomed to represent
unto their soldiers their valors tried in many occasions, the little courage
of their enemies; and whatsoever may assure them of the victory.

In this manner their experience may prevail much: for by the experience which
a man has of things, he persuades himself that what others hold impossible,
may notwithstanding succeed happily. It is true also that experience may
weaken Hope, according to the resolution or want of courage where it resides.
Wherefore Aristotle said, that old men have weak or bad hopes, for that the
long experience they have of things, the changes they have seen, the deceits
which they have tried, the frauds wherewith they have been circumuented, the
practices wherewith they have been abused, and the little integrity and
sincerity they have found in the actions of men; fills them with jealousy and
distrust. Adding moreover, that they live rather by memory then Hope; for that
they have a small share in future things, which is the ground of Hope, and that
they have a great Idea of what is past, which serves to entertain the memory.

But contrariwise young men are full of Hopes, for three reasons grounded upon
three conditions, required in the object of this Passion, which we have said
should be a good not yet present; difficult, but yet possible to obtain; for
young men have little knowledge of what is past, and have a great part in the
future, by reason of their age: In regard whereof memory being of things past,
and Hope of things to come, they do not much build upon their memory, but feed
themselves with hopes, which are many times vain. And moreover young men have
much heat, and abundance of spirit, which puffes up their hearts, and makes
them aspire to great matters, little esteeming any difficulties which present
themselves.

Thirdly, as they that have received no repulse in their enterprises, nor found
any obstacles in their dessignes, they persuade themselves easily that they
shall attain unto their desires, young men having no experience of the crosses,
and hinderance which are found in affairs, imagine that all will succeed
happily, and therefore they are still full of Hope.

They also which are surprised with wine conceive great hopes, both by reason
of the heat and abundance of spirits, caused by the excess of wine, as also
for that their spirits being drowned in wine, cannot apprehend the dangers, nor
foresee the obstacles which they may find in their dessignes. For the same
reason mad men, who are neither capable of counsel nor judgment, are easily
carried to Hope, for all that which they imagine; and they undertake foolishly
whatsoever comes into their fancies; for as Aristotle says, to speak of all
things and leave nothing uncensured, is a mark of folly; so to attempt all
things, and to Hope for all, is a sign of little judgment.

If against this which we have propounded, (that young men, such as are
overtaken with wine, and madmen are commonly full of great hopes) they object,
that neither the one nor the other have any kind of experience whereof they may
make use, nor any firm resolution, neither yet any great power to effect their
dessignes, all which are necessary conditions to frame hopes; they must
remember that although these men in effect have none of these qualities, but
are for the most part unprovided, yet they are rich in imagination, and think
they enjoy them.

And we have said, that the objects of Hope, make not their impression in our
souls, by the truth alone of things, but also by the vain imaginations which
we frame in our selves. Wherefore although they be without experience,
without resolution, and without great means to effect what they have
propounded, yet they do promise much unto themselves, and Hope for all.

And although that love be the fountain of all the Passions of the soul, yet
Hope may be the cause that we love any one. For Hope may propound unto it self
two things, that is to say, the good which we hope for, and the means to
obtain it. Wherefore an object of good presenting it self unto us, which we
are not able to attain unto, but by the assistance of some other; for this
reason, Hope does also regard those that assist us, and make the thing easy.

Seeing then that Hope regards the objects which we propound unto our selves,
undoubtedly love is the root and cause of Hope; for that we hope not for any
thing but that wherewith we are in love, and whereunto we have tied our
affections, desiring passionately to enjoy it. But for that hope regards him
which does open to us the means, and makes the thing possible; love is a bud
of hope, seeing that we love him, for that we hope to attain unto our desires
by his assistance. So as the first impression which the object we pursue makes
in our souls, is an effect of the love we bear it, conceiving it to be a
good fit for us. But the consideration of the means to attain unto it, which
comes from others, makes a second impression in us, and induces us to love him
that does procure it, representing him unto us as profitable unto our dessigne,
and therefore worthy to be beloved.

Touching that which concerns the effects of hope, we will not make any
particular discourse, but content our selves to say, that as the North Star is
the mariners guide who look continually upon her light to assure their
navigations: so Hope is that which inflames us to all the difficult actions we
undertake.

And as the brightness of this Star does fill them with joy that sail by sea,
but when as it shines not they are dismaide, and fear hourly to perish by the
violence of some storm, or to see their ship split upon some rock: So whilst
we have any remander of hope, our souls are content; but if it be quite
vanished, we hold out selves miserable, and begin to neglect and forget our
selves.

The first effect of Hope is, that it breeds a singular content in us, which
makes our pursuites pleasing. Wherefore all the Philosophers concur in this
Maxim, that hope fortifies our resolutions, and makes them more prompt in
their actions. The which is for two reasons. The first, for that she has for
her object a good hard to be obtained. But the apprehension of the difficulty,
which presents it self in the pursuit of the good whereunto we do aspire,
does usually make us gather our forces together, to vanquish all obstacles, and
to attain unto it, notwithstanding all the difficulties that may be
encountered: And therefore we employ more care and diligence, by means
whereof we attain more easily to the end of our dessignes.

Secondly, Hope breeds this pleasure and sweetness whereof we have spoken,
which makes us more active and more ready to pursue that which we desire; for
that we behold nothing painful wherein we take deligh^* We must then remember
here, what we have spoken elsewhere, that Hope is a sweet imagination which we
frame in our selves, of a good whereunto we aspire. And that this imagination
begetts in our souls a second contentment, for that it is accompanied with
this belief, that we may attain unto it.

Wherefore as pleasure makes all actions delightful unto men, so the content
we receive from our hopes (according unto the Philosophers) makes us to pursue
with more heat and less pain, that which we have once conceived in our
thoughts. This joy which proceeds from a certain hope we have of enjoying,
deriuing from the soul, disperseth it self into all the members of man, the
which do joyfully receive the impressions of the moving faculty, yielding upon
this occasion a more prompt obedience to execute the commandments of the
Irascible, the which of the one side is inflamed with desire to encounter and
vanquish whatsoever opposes it self against her, and on the other she is
sweetly entertained in this resolution, by the pleasure which imagination gives
her, representing that she may vanquish all these obstacles, and be victorious
in this combat, and in the end obtain the good whereunto she aspires.

But particularly, this joy falls about the heart, which sends it back again
and makes it ascend unto the eyes and countenance. Wherefore we read in their
faces that are full of good hope, the contentment which their imagination gives
them.

In regard of the joy and co^tentment which hope gives us, we do easily
devour all the toils and pains which present themselves in our pursuites,
especially when the good which we pursue is endued with some excellent
perfection, which makes us to esteem it greatly, or to love it ardently. As
for example, at the seege of Troy, the Grecians were not discouraged with the
tediousness of the time, nor with the toils and dangers of war; for that
they imagined the beauty of Hellen deserved their long labor to restore her to
her husband, and to revenge the reproach and infamy of Greece.

So Jacob being passionately in love with fair Rachell, he patiently endured
the rigors of her father, the toils of his service, and the afflictions of his
mind, for that he lived daily in hope of this in comparable beauty: And
therefore Hope has so great power in humane affairs, in which there is found
some kind of difficulty. The laborer would not expose himself so freely to
the rigor of the air, nor endure with such patience the injuries of times, in
tilling his land, if he did not promise unto himself a rich harvest for the
fruit of his labor: the soldier would not cast himself into dangers, he
would not mount up to breaches, nor thrust himself into the fury of combats,
if the expectance of glory, or hope of booty did not animate his courage.

The Merchant would not pass through rocks, fires, waves, and storms,
running from Sea to Sea, and from Port to Port, if he did not promise unto
himself great wealth, in recompense of his voyages and travails. Yea,
Alexander himself going to the war of Asia, where he should expose himself
to a thousand dangers, protested that he was wholly thrust on by Hope to enjoy
all the glory and treasures of the East, by subduing those Barbarians. So as
hope is as it were, the soul of goodliest actions, making us to surmount all
the difficulties and obstacles, which might hinder the execution by the
mollifying of our resolutions. Yea, it is certain, that Courage has always
been held an effect of good hope: for when as man hopes to surmount those
fearful things, which seem to threaten him, he goes courageously to
encounter them; whereas when he is surprised by fear, he faints, and abandons
himself unto the misfortune, his despair rising from the difficulties which
he apprehends in the good which he should hope for.

But to have full knowledge of this subject, and of the whole matter, we must
in the end of this chapter show, how despair is contrary to hope, and seek the
reason why it may sometimes make men valiant, and to win great victories.
First of all, you must remember what we have formerly said, that among the
Passions of the soul, they observe two kinds of opposition. The first is found
among those that have contrary things for objects: and that is only aamong the
passions of the Concupiscible part: as for example, betwixt Love and Hatred,
whereof the one regards the good, and the other the evil. The second is
observed betwixt those that in truth regard the same object, but with diverse
considerations, and that is found among the Irascible passions, whereof the one
seeks the good, and the other flies it, by reason of the difficulty which does
inuiron it. As for example, Courage and Fear do both regard an imminent
danger, which presents it self to the imagination; but courage looks upon it
to encounter and vanquish it, and fear regards it to avoid it and fly from
it, if it be in her power. After this manner then despair is contrary to hope,
for that the object of hope which is a good difficult to obtain, draws us of
the one side, that is to say, so far as we do imagine a power to obtain
it. But it does reject us on the other side, as when we apprehend, that we
have no means to enjoy it: for this apprehension daunts our resolution: or
that, as Aristotle teaches, the impossibility which we imagine in things,
makes us to give over their pursuit.

Wherefore in this consideration, despair is quite contrary to hope. But some
one may say, How comes it that many times in war, despair makes men valiant,
and gives them great victories, as well as Hope, for that it is not the custom
of nature to produce the like effects from contrary causes? To which we answer,
that when in the midst of despair men resolve to fight valiantly, as we read
of the English in the plains of Poictiers, where they took one of our Kings
prisoner; it happens for that they have not lost all hope: for they that see no
appearance of safety by flying, and apprehend that it cannot preserve them from
falling into their enemies hands, but will purchase them eternal shame with
their misery; losing all hope of that side, they resume new courage, and
resolve to sell their lives dearly, and to revenge their deaths gloriously.
Wherefore great Captains have always held opinion, that enemies should not
be thrust into despair being put to flight, but rather make them a bridge of
gold, and to give them means to pass rivers, lest that finding themselves
stayed, and despairing of all safety, they should take more courage, and
generously revenge their first baseness, by a cruel slaughter of their
enemies.

Of Choler. CHAP. 1.
OF all the passions of the soul, there is not any one that takes such deep
root, or extends her branches farther then Choler; whereof, neither age,
condition, people, nor nation, are fully exempt. There are whole Countries
which living under a sharp and rough climate, are not acquainted with
pleasures: There are others, who contenting* themselves with those benefits
which nature presents unto them, are not enflamed with any ambition. Some there
be, to whom misery is familiar, as they fear not any accidents of fortune. But
there is not any, over whom Choler does not exercise her power, and show the
excess of her rage: Yea, she enflames whole kingdoms and Empires; whereas the
other passions do only trouble and agitate private persons.

We have never seen a whole Nation surprised with the love of one woman. It
was never found, that a whole City has been transported with a desire to
heap up treasure: Ambition does puff up but certain spirits. But we see
Cities, Provinces, and whole States, enflamed with Choler, and transported by
this fury, with a public conspiracy of great and small, young and old, men,
and children, Magistrates, and multitude: we see Commonalties, whom this fury
has incensed, run all to Arms, to revenge a disgrace, or a wrong, which
they pretend has been done them. We have also seen great and powerful
Armies, which have been the terror of the world, ruin themselves by this fury,
which has thrust them into mutiny against their Commanders. Wherefore if there
be any passion which is pernicious unto mankind, it is this, which seems
neither to have bounds nor limits, nor any show of reason. It shall be
therefore fit to know the nature, properties, and effects thereof; to the end,
we may find out some remedy, to divert the miseries which she brings into
the world.

Let us begin by the Definition, which gives a full light of the Essence of the
thing, and makes us to know perfectly.

Choler is an ardent passion, which upon the appearance there is to be able to
revenge our selves, incites us to a feeling of a contempt and sensible injury,
which we believe has been unjustly done, either to our selves, or to those we
love. Whereby it appears first, that Choler is accompanied with a heat, which
is framed and engendered in us, for that this passion enflames the blood and
spirits, which are about the heart, by means of the gall, which in this heat
exhales it self, and ascends unto the brain, where it troubles our
imagination. This heat differs from that which proceeds from love, for that
the heat which is found in love, tending to the thing beloved to unite it
self with it, is mixed with a certain sweetness, so as the Philosophers
compare it to the moderate heat of the air or blood.

Wherefore we say, that sanguine complexions are most capable of love, and that
the bounty of the liver whereas the blood is framed, induces to love. But the
heat of Choler is boiling, full of bitterness, and accompanied with
sharpenes, which tends to the destruction of the object which it pursues, and
is properly like to the heat of a great fire, or to adust choler
extraordinarily moved, which consumes the subject whereunto it is fixed, and
therefore the Philosophers maintain, that it proceeds from the gall.

It appears also by the Definition of Choler, that she has always for object
the particular persons which have wronged us. Wherein she differs from hatred,
which extends to a multitude of men. As for example, we detest all murderers,
all thieves, all poysoners, and all slanderers: even as we abhor all
serpents, vipers and venomous beasts. And therefore it is not sufficient to
satisfy our Choler, that he that has done us wrong fall into some disaster,
which might suffice to give satisfaction to our hatred: But moreover (to give
us full contentment) he must know that we have procured him this cross, and
that we are the authors of the revenge and afflictions which he endures.

So Ulysses having put out the eye of Cyclops, dissembled his name no longer,
as he had done before, but would make himself known unto him; as if he had
not been sufficiently revenged of this monster, unless he had let him know
that he was the author of his disaster. We learn also by the same definition,
that to incense us to Choler, it is necessary, that he who is theobiect have
done us wrong; or to some one who^ we love, or that belongs unto us. As for
example, we are discontented with those that wound our reputation, which
attempt against our lives; which cross our pleasures, or undertake any thing
against our kinsfolks or friends: But we cannot be angry with him which
causes a Jew to be put unto the chain at Constantinople, or a Moore to be
whipped at Rome; for that the outrage done unto these persons does nothing
concern us. But if it do casually happen that one man is angry against
another, having received no cause of distaste from him, only by a certain
antipathy and contrariety of humors* the reason is, for that in this natural
antipathy, he that is angry against the other, conceiues in his imagination
that he is able to do him some wrong, or at the least he has such a distaste
of him as it is troublesome unto him to look on him.

So as this antipathy supplies the place of an injury, and works the same
effect that the imagination did to have received some wrong.

We gather also from the same definition, that to excite Choler we must
imagine that we are able to execute the revenge whereunto we aspire: And
therefore we dare not be angry, or at the least very lightly, against kings,
and great personages that have wronged us; for that we know their authority
protects them from our revenge.

Yea there has been a father, whose son a great King having slain in the
midst of his cups with the shot of an arrow, suppressed his grief in such sort
(seeing he could not revenge it) as forbearing to complain of this monstous
cruelty, he commended the Princes dexterity in shooting. But we may say, that
this actio^ sauored more of flattery then of constancy,

For the last observation we must remember that the causes which excite Choler
are not always true, but many times are such as we frame in our own
imaginations; for this Passion with her other defects has also that evil,
that she is witty to find out means to cloak her violence and fury. As it
appeared in that Roman, who transported with this fury, supposed three crimes
to put three innocents to death, under some color of Justice. By that which we
have formerly said, it may be gathered that Choler is always accompanied with
some kind of pleasure, which proceeds from the hope we have to revenge the
wrong which has been done us. For there is a content to promise unto our
selves to be able to attain unto that which we desire passionately; whereas
no man man wishes for those things which he thinks are above his power.
Wherefore as he that is incensed against any one, pursues a revenge whereunto
he thinks he may attain, this hope fills his soul with joy, and gives him
a singular content; wherefore Homer makes Achilles to say, that Choler
disperseth it self in the hearts of generous men, with a sweetness which
exceeds that of honey.

But this great content does not only arise from the hope we have to be able
to revenge our selves; but it also proceeds from the working of our
imagination, which thinking continually of the same object of revenge, breeds
in us a pleasure like unto that which they feel that have delightful dreams,
and which take pleasure in their vain apparitions. Yet we must remember that
Choler is also full of grief and bitterness, for that it propounds the injury
received, the which she cannot easily digest, presupposing that it is
accompanied with some notable contempt which tends to the impayring of his
honor and reputation. So as the sweetness which is found grows from the
opinion of revenge; and the bitterness proceeds from the conceit of the
injury which we cannot endure. Finally, as our Choler is inflamed by the
contempt and bad opinion which they seem to have of us; as there are diverse
kinds of contempt, so it may grow from diverse subjects. For many times
although the contempt be not accompanied with any injury, making only a show
that they do not hold us in such esteem as we think we are worthy of, this
simple contempt provoke us to Choler, holding our selves wronged, for that
we are not honored as we think we have deserved.

As if we should yield to a King all the honors of the world, and yet forbear
to give him the title of a King, this were sufficient to inflame his Choler: At
it appeared in Alexander, to whom Darius having written a letter full of great
and large offers, but had forgot to give him the title of King; this generous
spirit bare it so impatiently, as in the end of that which he sent for an
answer, he added for the last conclusion of all their conferences by writing,
Finally, when thou writest unto me, remember that it is not only to a King, but
even to thy King that thou writest. The which he added for that he had
defeated Darius in battle. In truth he that yields not to any one the honor
that is due unto him, makes show to contemn him, and that he deserves not the
honor which he does enjoy: For that if he regarded him as he ought, he would
not seek to diminish those honors which all the world besides yield unto him.
And therefore we may provoke any one to Choler by our silence, for that it may
be a sign of our contempt. But the wrong we receive from those which deprave
us openly, and dishonor us either in deed or word without any cause, is more
hard to digest. For that he which does this outrage without any subject, makes
a visible demonstration that he does not esteem us: it being most evident that
when as we hold any good regard of a man, we are careful not to offend him
without cause; yea we endeavor to insinuate our selves into his friendship.

There is another kind of contempt which prouokes Choler more then that whereof
we have spoken; as when any one takes a pleasure to wrong us and to cross our
dessignes, reaping no profit by the crosses which he gives us, but the
contentment to have crossed us, and to have hindered the course of our intentions.
For it is an apparent sign of a wonderful contempt, seeing that he wrongs us
in a thing whereof he reapes no profit but the discontent he gives us, and
withal he shows to have an opinion that we are not able to hurt him;
otherwise he would apprehend to wrong us upon so weak a subject: and that he
attends no kind of goodness from us; for if he did hope to reap any profit
by our friendship, he would seek it and cherish it by all good offices, and
not take that liberty to discontent us. So as having so many testimonies of
contempt, and of the little esteem he makes of us, we think we have just
cause to be moved, and to revenge our selves of him. But when as this contempt
proceeds to outrages, and that any one without cause seeks to blemish our
reputation by scandalous reports made in companies: Then our Choler has no
bounds, but is inflamed beyond measure, and makes us burn with desire to
revenge so great an affront.

In like manner he, who without provocation does us wrong both by word and
deed, and who dissembles not his bad disposition, but does publish it in all
places, makes show that he does wonderfully contemn us. For as he is not
ignorant, that so sensible an injury deserves revenge, seeing that he makes no
difficulty to do it, but in despite defames us in all companies where he
comes; he shows plainly how basely he esteems us, and that he thinks we
are either too faint-hearted to undertake, or to weak to execute the revenge,
which so sensible an affront deserves.

In the mean time we suppose that he which has wronged us in this manner,
does it for his pleasure, having not given him any apparent subject of
discontent: for if it were to repel a former injury which he had received
from us, it were no more a contempt or an outrage, but a revenge which he would
take of us.

But you must not wonder at that which we have said, that there are some
people, which take a delight to commit outrages: and the reason is, for that
naturally men cannot endure that any one should exceed them in those things
wherein they take delight: yea, they desire to excel those whom they think
are competitors with them in that which they undertake. Wherefore if they
encounter any one that is able to oppose himself against the^, they contend
with him, and upon the first occasion do him some affront, to the end they may
show how much they exceed him in power. And therefore young men, and such as
are rich and powerful, do most commonly fall into this excess. For young
men, and such as have their blood hot and boiling, are wonderfully ready to
commit insolences: and as if they wanted better employments, they busy
themselves to do harm; yea, unto those which have not offended them. Whereof
we have great and notable examples in the life of Alcibiades, who scandalized
the whole City of Athens, by the insolency of his actions.

Rich men in like manner, and such as are powerful, are full of this vain
ambition to seem great, by the outrages they do to their inferiors, imagining
that this insolency is a mark of their greatness. For they presuppose that
they are far advanced above those, whom they dare so visibly wrong. And
therefore they take a certain kind of content, to do them some affront, which
is also the ordinary end that they propound unto themselves, which take a
delight to wrong others.

Finally, we must remember, that men are commonly moved to Choler, when as they
see themselves contemned in any of those manners which we have related. And if
we shall seek the cause in the Center, we shall find that the reason is, for
that men desire passionately to see themselves honored, and they believe, that
such as are inferior unto them, be it in nobility, power, virtue, or any other
eminent quality, are bound to yield them all sorts of duty and respect.

Rich men also will be reverenced and respected by the poorer sort, who are
inferior unto them in the goods of fortune. And he that is endowed with
singular eloquence, desires that such as have not attained to the like
perfection, should acknowledge the advantage he has over them.

In like manner men of authority and command, will have such as are subject to
their government, honor them with their service. And if their inferiors
fail to yield them the honor which they think is due unto them, they cannot
endure this injury, but fall into rage; which makes them to seek all occasions
to punish this contempt.

And therefore it was truly said, That the indignation of a King is great and
fearful; for that when as a great king is incensed against any one that is
not of his quality, although he temper and moderate his choler for a time, yet
he smothers it in his breast, and is never satisfied until he has made him
feel the effects of his power, that durst presume to offend him.

Wherefore an Ancient said, that Choler encountering with a great power, was
like a thunderbolt, which breaks in pieces whatsoever stands in its way. But
not only Kings, but every private person is impatient to see himself
contemned by those which are his inferiors. And to speak truth, there is
nothing but the wisdom of God, and the Law of Jesus Christ, that can pull out
of our souls, this feeling of a contempt, or of an injury received unworthily.

For a conclusion of this chapter, we will observe, that Philosophers make
three kinds of Choler: and that as among serpents, there are Aspickes, Vipers,
and Dragons, whose poison increases daily; so they hold opinion, that of these
diverse kinds of Choler, some are accompanied with more violence, and show
more fire then the rest. For there is a kind of Choler, whose motions are
sudden and prompt and which inflame upon the first occasions, and the first
objects which present themselves.

Aristotle calls those that are subject to this passion, sudden, active,
choleric, and adust; for that this suddenness to be moved, rises from the
abundance of adust choler, or from the gall. But as it is kindled suddenly, so
it is quenched with little pain, like unto the waves of the Sea, which rise and
break at the same instant There is another kind of Choler, which takes root,
and is fashioned in the soul, by a long continuance of time, during the which,
man does represent unto himself the form of that party which has wronged
him, and preserues the memory of the injury he has received.

Aristotle terms these men sharp, bitter, and secret: Such was the choler of
Achilles, which the death o^ so many brave Princes slain at the siege of Troy,
during his despite, could hardly mollify. There is a third kind (although it
differs not much from the second) the which does wholly transport men, torments
them perpetually, and never gives them any rest, until they have satisfied
their revenge. Aristotle calls those that are agitated-with this frenzy,
violent, outrageous, and insupportable. The first is found in the best
dispositions, but the two other are signs of bad inclinations. To conclude,
there is not any one of them, but we should avoid and fly from, as a poison
which kills charity, which should shine in all the motions and actions of
Christians. And if we are at any time surprised, let us be angry, but sin
not; let Nature work her first effect, but let us stay her violence, and above
all, let not the Sun go down upon our wrath.

Of those against whom we are angry. CHAP. 2.
He which said that man was a creature which is passionate for glory, seems
to have discovered all the roots of Choler: for if we observe the objects which
excite it, and against whom we are angry, we shall find it generally true,
that it never discloseth it self in our hearts, nor is framed in our souls,
but upon a conceit we have, that they seek to diminish our glory, and to
blemish our reputation, with some notable contempt, or by some great outrage
which we cannot bear: so as this passion is kindled first, by a contempt and
an injury which we imagine we have received, the which makes an impression in
our souls: the grief and discontent to have been wronged, makes us to seek
means for revenge, being thrust on by the nature of grief, which always
seeks ease, and which in this occasion cannot find it but only in revenge,
the desire whereof makes his heart to swell, and stirs up his courage. For it
is certain, that revenge quenches the heat of Choler, and we are pacified,
when as we see the wrong which we have received, sufficiently punished: For
that we conceive by this means that our reputation is repaired, and the
contempt revenged. But before this revenge, the grief of the injury sticks
fast unto our souls and imflames, us to seek reparation.

An Empress of Constantinople having let slip certain words of contempt
against Narses that generous Captain, who had reduced Italy under the
obedience of the Empire: and said in disdain that they must send for that
Eunuch and make him spinne amongst her women; this valiant man being incensed
at this outrage, protested in the midst of his grief, that he would weaue
such a web for the Emperor and his Empress, as all their power and industry
should not be able to undo: And thereupon he drew the Lombards into Italy, and
dismembered those goodly provinces from the Empire: whereby it appears how
dangerous it is to incense a great spirit. Secondly, when we are much
transported with Passion, and do vehemently affect any one thing, wherein we
are crossed and have some obstacle given us, be it directly or indirectly, by
ouert means, or secret practizes, our Choler is inflamed against those that
are the authors of this let: And therefore sick men are angry with such as to
repair their health, refuse them water or fruits, or some other thing which
they earnestly desire: And they that are in love, frown on them that flatter
not their Passion, and which seek to divert them from the pursuit of that
they love. But above all, men are bitterly incensed, when as they contemn
their present condition, and the estate whereunto some calamity or their own
indiscretion has brought them.

Hence grow the complaints and vexations of the miserable, of poor people, of
the diseased, of those which apprehend some notable afafliction, and of those
which see themselves exposed to the violence of the mighty, yea there have
been men which have died of sorrow and grief, for that they were reprocht
with an imperfection of nature which they brought with them into the world.
Moreover we are discontented against those who we think are the authors or
abettors of any disastrous accident which we expected not, holding them for
our friends.

For as any great felicity which befalls us beyond our expectation, fills us
with extraordinary joy; so great misfortunes which happen, not foreseen, and
contrary to our expectance, afflicts us strangely, and excites us wonderfully
to Choler. And sometimes the circumstance of places where we are, the humors,
wherein we are, the time wherein they take us, with a thousand such like serve
to provoke us to wrath. As for example when we are sad and full of sorrow,
Choler does easily become mistress of our senses oppressed with grief: And in
like manner, if they give us any words of contempt in company or before such
persons as we love, we bear the^ impatiently, and let slip the reins to
Choler. These are the chief roots of anger which breeds in our souls, and
these are the powerful objects that may excite it.

But moreover there are other moving causes which have power to provoke it,
although they be always grounded upon the contempt which is done us: For men
are also discontented against those that cause them to suffer some indignity,
or that scoff at them, or at such persons whose reputations are as dear unto
them as their own. So the Citizens of Millan being beseeged by the Emperor
Frederike, having spoken something against the honor of the Empress, the
Emperor bare it so impatiently, as having them in his power, he caused them to
suffer all the indignities that might be inflicted upon the vanquished; yea
he ruined their City and sowed it with salt, to take from them all hope of
rising or to see it built again. The reason of this extraordinary Choler is,
for that these opprobrious scoffs are signs of a notable contempt. Men are
also moved against those which do them some sensible outrage, the which brings
no profit to the author, but dishonors him that receives it. Wherefore Choler
made a powerful impression in the soul of the Emperor Justinian the second,
by reason of the outrage which they of Constantinople (deposing him from the
Empire) caused him to suffer, in cutting off his nose; who being restored to
his estate, whenever there distilled any humor from his wound, he sent for
some one of them whom he thought to have had a part in the conspiracy, and put
him presently to death, or sent him into exile.

The reason is, for that these kinds of outrages blemish the things wherein
they take any kind of content, as they that are passionatly affected to arms,
cannon endure to hear the profession taxed without Choler: Neither had it been
the means to win any great favor with Caesar, Alexander, and Great Henry,
to have made discourses unto them in disgrace of Martial exercise.

And in like manner they that love Philosophy, cannot see it contemned without
perturbation. Yet we must observe, that such as think they have attained to
the perfection of any thing, are not so apt to be moved for words that are
spoken to the disgrace of their profession, as they that have but weak
beginnings, and are but new apprentices; and which think they have no great
opinion of them, or which know their own defects: For these men are easily
incensed for any thing that is spoken against the profession they embrace:
Whereas the others being assured by the knowledge they have of their own
merits, make show to neglect the blame is given the^ without judgment. But
there is no contempt more insupporable then that we receive from our friends,
and from such as we think are bound to contribute to our glory: for when as
we see that instead of advancing our honor they seek to blemish it, we can
no longer master our despite.

Wherefore we have seen great personages, who finding themselves unworthily
entreated by their commonweal, or by their Citizens, for whose preseruations
they had exposed themselves to a thousand deaths, have borne this injury so
impatiently, as they have given way to despite; and having no other means to
revenge this ingratitude, for the last monument of their wrath, have denied
their ashes unto their Country, desiring to be buried in other places.
Wherefore the Ancients held opinion, that the Choler of brethren was cruel and
hard to pacify: For that the love of brethren being tied by the most powerful
bonds of nature, being once broken, Choler turns into fury, which continues
even after death.

Again, men are moved against those which having made profession to honor
them, grow cold again, and yield them not that respect which they had formerly
done: For that they imagine this coldness proceeds from some kind of contempt,
as if they had discovered some imperfection in them, the which they had not
formerly observed: for they discourse in themselves; if these men had not
changed their opinions, and if they had not conceived some new contempt, which
withdrawes the^ from us, they would live as they had formerly done; the which
they neglecting, they attribute it to an opinion which those men have
conceived, that instead of honoring them, they should be honored by them.

Men are also incensed against such as they hold ungrateful, and who they think
have no feeling of the benefits they have received from them: For they imagine
that this ingratitude is a mere contempt both of them and of their favors, as
if they had been due unto them, or that they were much their inferiors. They
are also discontented against those which take a contrary part to that which
they embrace, which contradict their counsels; oppose their resolutions, and
which are of another opinion in all occasions which are offered: for they
conceive that this contradiction proceeds from the little esteem the opponent
makes of their sufficiency and industry, and also from a concyit they have to
be more capable and sufficient, which is a visible contempt.

But men are wonderfully incensed to see themselves disdained by the baser
sort, which are in no estimation, holding this contempt to be much more
insupportable, then that of eminent persons, and which are in reputation. The
reason is, for that as we have said, Choler rises from the indignity of the
contempt; but we cannot endure a contempt accompanied with a greater indignity,
or a more sensible outrage then that which comes from base persons, and which
are our inferiors, who should yield all honor and respect to those that
exceed him in dignity and merit. Wherefore men of honor cannot endure but with
much impatiency, to see themselves contemned by the scum of the people.

Men are also discontented against their friends, if they refuse to commend
them, or to oblige them by their courtesies and favors, but especially if they
do the contrary: that is to say, if they brave them, and reject them, seeming
to be ignorant of their necessities, or if they accommodate not themselves to
their desires and passions. And in truth it is a great sign of contempt, when
as any one feignes not to know that which his friend desires and affects with
passion: for that we strive to know the affairs and inclinations of those, of
whom we have any care and love dearly.

Men are also incensed against those which rejoice at their calamities, or have
not the true feeling they ought. For to scorn, or take delight in them, is a
mark of Hatred; and not to care for them, is a sign of contempt. Men are also
discontented with such as neglect them, and hold it an indifferent thing to
displease them, or to do an act that may offend them. Wherefore we do
commonly hate such as bring ill news, conceiving that if they had borne us the
respect they ought, they would not have been the messe^gers of that which they
knew would afflict us, lest they should give us occasion of discontent, but would
have left the commission to some other.

In like manner they are moved against those which take delight in scandalous
speeches made to the prejudice of their reputation, or which laugh with the
rest, or take pleasure to be spectators of their miseries: for that the first
argues a contempt, and the second shows an hatred. So as we see true friends
undertake words of reproach delivered in the absence of their friends, and are
moved with grief, when as they happen to be spectators of their misfortunes.
As it chanced to that poor man, who held himself happy to be upon the coast
of Egypt, not far from Alexandria, where as Pompeys slaves performed his last
funeral rites, to the end he might witness his grief, and pity for the
misery of so great a Personage. But men are particularly moved against those
which contemn them before four kinds of people: that is to say, before those
with whom they contend for honor and glory. As Alexander could not endure the
contempt of those which preferred Darius before him: Nor Caesar such as
equalled Pompey unto him. Or before such as they admire, or by whom they desire
to be admired: As Alexander could not without grief endure they should blemish
the glory of his conquests before the Athenians: for that having their virtue
in singular recommendation, he desired in like manner to be admired by them,
and attended from them the most glorious ornaments of his triumphs. Or before
such as they love and honor, as children grow into choler against those that
contemn them before their parents; and he that is passionate in love with a
woman, cannot endure an affront which is done him in her presence. Or else
before those by whom he will be reverenced: As fathers grow bitter against such
as discover their imperfections to their children, by whom they cannot endure
to be contemned.

Moreover, men are discontented with those that contemn or offend such as are
dear unto them, whom they are bound to assist, unless they will be partakers
of their disgrace: the which has been the cause of great wars to revenge an
injury done to the wives, daughters sisters, and mothers of Kings: Princes hold
themselves interessed to revenge the reproach done unto those persons, that
Nature has tied unto them by so powerful bonds.

Moreover, they are angry with such as do not thank them, nor acknowledge the
favors they have received from them: for when as they see themselves deprived
of this just acknowledgement, which they had propounded unto themselves, for
the fruit of their good turns; or at the least, which they expect from the
good disposition of those they held obliged unto them, they attribute it unto a
mere contempt. And their choler is kindled against those which have deprived
them of an honor whereof they held not themselves unworthy.

They are angry also with such as dissemble things, and make a jest of that
which they have done seriously: for this dissimulation and diuersion of their
intensions, is a sign of scorn.

Finally, men are discontented with those which do good to all the world, yet
do none to them in particular: for they are conceited, that such as have no
care to bind them unto them, showing an inclination to oblige all the world,
witness thereby, that they esteem them not as they do other men, but have a
most base conceit of their merit.

This consideration has bred disco^tents in the courts of great Princes; for
every one holding himself as worthy as his companion to attain unto the
offices of State, when as any one is advanced without mention made of them,
they conceive that his good fortune is a blemish to their glory, and makes them
to be esteemed inferior to his merit. To conclude, forgetfulness prouokes
choler, for that forgetfulness is a sign of the little care they have of men.
And this little care is a mark of contempt, for that the things whereof they
make account, are most carefully recommended to memory.

CHAP. 3. Of the Effects and remedies of Choler.
AMONG all the Passions that trouble and transport the soul of man, there is
not any accompanied with so great violence, which shows such brutishness, or
that produce such fatal and tragical effects, as Choler; which seems
properly to be the spring from whence flows all the miseries and ruins which
happen in the world. For whereas other passions, as Love and Joy, Desire and
Hope, have certain beams of sweetness, which makes them pleasing; Choler is
full of bitterness, and has no sweeter objects the^ punishments, blood and
slaughter, which serve to glut her revenge.

These be her delights, these are her joys, these are the sweetest and most
pleasing spectacles which she can behold. But if you desire to see how she is
the fountain of all the horrors which are dispersed over the world, and make
it desolate: read in histories of the sacking of Towns, of Provinces ruined
and made deserts, observing the euersion and overthrow of Empires; Diademes
trodden under foot; Princes basely betrayed, and smothered by poison; Kings
murdered; great Commanders in War cast into chains; and serving as an
example of humane misery. Consider that whole multitudes have been put to the
sword, or made Gallyslaues; whole Nations rooted out; the Temples (whereas
Divinity dwells) profaned; the Altars beaten down; and whatsoever was most holy
and most reverend among men, unworthily violated, and they shall find that all
these tragical spectacles are the effects of that cruel and inhumane fury.
But setting apart the horror of the effects which she produces generally, let
us observe the miseries whereof she is the cause in private persons that suffer
themselves to be transported with this Passion.

First then if the saying of Physicians be true, that of all the infirmities
wherewith we are afflicted, there are none worse nor more dangerous then those
which disfigure the face of man, and which make it deformed and unlike unto
himself; we must conclude by the same reason, that of all the Passions of man,
there is not any one more pernicious, nor more dreadful then Choler, which
alters the graceful countenance and the whole constitution of man. For as
furious and mad men show the excess of their rage, by the violent changes
which appear in their bodies; even so a man transported with Choler gives
great signs of the frenzy that does afflict him: his eyes full of fire and
flame which this Passion does kindle, seem fiery and sparckling; his face is
wonderfully inflamed as by a certain refluxe of blood which ascends from the
heart: his hair stands upright and staring with horror, his mouth cannot
deliver his words: his tongue falters, his feet and hands are in perpetual
motion. He vomits out nothing but threats, he speaks of nothing but blood and
vengeance: Finally, his constitution is so altered, and his looks so terrible,
as he seems hideous and fearful even to his dearest friends. What must the
soul then be within, whose outward image is so horrible? Wherefor an Ancient
said, that Choler was a short fury: And another maintained, that all violent
Choler turned into madness: The which we may confirm by that which is written
of Hercules, who growing furious knew not his own wife and children, upon whom
he exercised his rage, tearing them inhumanely in pieces; even so they over
whom Choler has gotten absolute power, forget all affinity and friendship, and
without any respect make their own kinsfolks and friends feel the effects of
their fury. For it is a Passion which grows bitter against all the world,
which springs as well from love as from hatred, and is excited as well in sport
as in the most serious actions.

So as it imports not from what cause it proceeds, but with what spirit it
incounters: As it imports not how great the fire is, but where it falls; for
the most violent cannot fire marble, whereas the smallest sparkles will burn
straw.

Hereby we gather, that this Passion domineers principally in hot and fiery
constitutions; for that heat is active and wilful, and gives an inclination
to these kinds of violence, making us to grow bitter easily, yea upon the least
subject that may be. Finally, to return to our first purpose, Choler does not
only disfigure the body, but many times it ruins it wholly: For some being
extraordinarily moved, have broken their veins, and vomited out their soul
with the blood; yea they which have slain themselves, owe their misfortune to
Choler which has forced them to this last fury: having then left such cruel
signs of rage upon the body, she assailes the mind, she does outrage to the
soul, and smothers reason in man, and like unto a thick cloud, will not
suffer it to enlighten him, and by this means fills him with disorder and
confusion. So as he begins to shut his ear to all good advice, he will no
more hear speak of that which may help to mollify his courage, which is
full of bitterness and violence; so as taking pleasure in his own affliction,
he abhorres all remedies, and flies the hand of the Physician which might cure
him: yea in this transport he is offended at any thing, and imitates the
savage beasts, whom the most cheerful colors thrust into fury: An innocent
smile, a shaking of the head which signifies nothing, a glance of the eye
without dessigne, is capable to draw him to the field.

But how often have we seen this inhumaine fury dissolve even the most sacred
friendship upon very frivolous subjects? has she not provoked dearest friends
to duells, and made them serve as spectacles of infamy both to heaven and
earth, for quarrels embraced without any ground? It is then very apparent,
that this Passion is not only infamous, but also most wretched, seeing that
under an weak pretext of revenge she does precipitate men into most horrible
villainies, and makes them tread all divine and human laws under feet, to
satiate her in^olency and rage. Wherein doubtless she is more to be blamed then
all the other Passions wherewith the soul of man is afflicted: For that the
other Passions have this property, that even at the very instant when as they
are as it were in the height of their transport, give way somewhat to reason,
and yield in some sort unto her commandments, when as she presents her self
to pacify them* Whereas Choler does like unto Mariners which are amazed or
corrupted, and will give no ear to the voice of their Pilot: Or as mutinous
soldiers, which will not hear the advice of their Leaders: Yea she despi^es
truth if she opposes against her rage; and although she come to know the
innocence of the party whom she persecutes, yet she holds obstinacy more
honorable then repentance: So as nothing shall be able to make her desist from
her unjust and violent pursuites.

And continuing this Injustice against himself, she sometimes constraines the
most covetous profusely to cast away their most precious treasure, and to make
a heap of their wealth, and then to set fire on it; and many times also she
forces ambitious men to refuse and reject the honors which they had
passionatly affected before their despite: who does not then see that this
Passion, (more then any other) quenches the light of reason?

The cause is, for that of all the Passions, whether they have the good for
their object, or regard the evil, those cause the greatest perturbations in
our souls which are the most violent; there is not any that does exceed or
equal Choler in violence, which does inflame the whole blood, and all the
spirits which flow about the heart, which is the most powerful organ of
Passions: by reason whereof there follows a wonderful disorder not only in
the sensible and corporeal powers, but even in the reason. For although she
use no corporeal organs in her proper functions, yet to produce them forth
she has need of the powers of the senses, whose actions are crossed and
disquieted by the trouble which rises in the heart and the whole body; by
reason whereof Choler does darken, yea hinder the whole light which she strives
to cast forth: whereof we have two apparent signs, for that the members,
wherein the image of the heart does most shine, as the tongue, the eyes, and the
countenance, feel the most violent force of this fury.

It is true that Aristotle says, that Choler does in some sort give ear to
reason: But that must be understood touching the report which she makes of the
injury received, wherein she takes a singular content; but she gives no ^are
unto her, but reiects her aduertizements in the measure and moderation which
she ought to hold in the revenge. So as in truth there must be some kind of
reason to provoke Choler; for that men which are stupid and dull are not
capable of these motions; but when this Passion is fully inflamed, then she
does wholly darken reason.

And as the same Philosopher says, that they which are full of wine and
drink, are not moved with any thing for that their reason being drowned in
wine, they are not capable to balance an injury, or to observe a contempt: But
such as are not fully drunk, are moved to Choler, for that there remains some
weak beams of judgment to discern that which has an appearance of injury or
outrage; but this Passion rises in them without subject and without any great
occasion, for that their reason is captiuated by the wine which has gotten the
maistry.

Even so in the beginning of Choler, reason may give some light to the
Irascible power; but when she has gotten the absolute command, and is become
Mistress of the senses, Reason is darkened, and is of no use in a soul thus
transported.

But we must not conceive that this mischief is absolutely incurable, but we
must rather imagine, that as Helleborum has power to cure mad men, so there
are remedies against Choler. The most powerful are those which are taken from
the Law of God, who teaches us nothing but patience, charity, mildness,
humanity and sufferance. But we will rest satisfied to set down the
instructions of Philosophy, which may serve to this effect: First of all,
Philosophers advise us to entreat this passion as they do monsters and
serpents, whom they strive to smother as soon as they are disclosed: for they
will that man should have a care to the beginning of Choler, which many times
arises from so light an occasion, and so poor a subject, as it is unworthy a
great spirit should be transported therewith And as it is easy to quench a
fire of straw in the beginning, but if we suffer it to take hold of more solid
matter, it passes all our labor and industry, and makes a pitiful ruin:
even so, he that will observe Choler from the beginning, seeing it begin to
fume and kindle for some light quarrel and small offense; it is easy for him
to suppress it, and to stay her course. But if she be once settled and
begins to swell, and that he himself blows the bellows; that is to say, if
he stirs it up and enflames it, it will be hard for him afterward to
quench it, whereas he might easily have done it before by silence,

Wherefore as Pilots foreseeing a tempest, do usually retire themselves into a
road or under the Lee of some rock, before the storm come; so he that feels
the first motions of Choler, should have recourse to reason, and oppose it to
the passion, to control her violence. For the first means to vanquish Choler
as an unjust tyrant, is not to yield any obedience to her, nor to believe her
in any thing she says or does, to inflame us to revenge, we find in other
Passions, that the liberty we give them, brings some ease. As when young men
which are enflamed with Love, go in mask, make dances, combats, or feasts,
in favor of the party they love; all this gives some ease unto their passion:
and when as they suffer those that are afflicted to weep in the midst of their
afflictions, the tears they power forth, carry with them a part of their
grief, But Choler has nothing of all this, she grows bitter, and is incensed
by the liberty we give her, and is enflamed the more in that we give way to
her fury. And as they that are subject unto the falling sickness, having any
sign or beginning of their fit, retire themselves suddenly, and take all the
remedies which may divert so troublesome an accident, or at least, hide the
shame; so they which see themselves transported with Choler, should retain
themselves, and strive to moderate their passion, and divert the infirmity
which seeks to seize upon them. Whereunto they should the more willingly
resolve, for that all other passions do but draw men to evil, but this does
precipitate them; those do shake them, but this does overthrow them; Those
when they have the upper hand, suffer themselves to be curbed, but this being
mistress will obey no law; like unto the thunderbolt, which being once fallen
from the cloud wherein it was enclosed, can no more be stayed. Other Passions
stray from reason, but Choler treades it under feet, and leads it as it were,
in triumph. Wherefore by all these considerations, men should be careful not
to fall into the hands of so furious a mistress.

The second remedy that may be given, is to represent the defects of this
passion, and the miseries wherewith she is accompanied; the which are such, as
it seems they carry the Palm of vice, and to be more detestable then all
other crimes, wherewith the soul may be polluted. Avarice, in truth, is a
shameful greediness of getting, but yet it sometimes gathers together that,
which falls into the hands of a good man that succeedes a miser: whereas Choler
scatters all. For what expenses, what profusio^ does she not to attain unto
the revenge which she does meditate? How often does she make a man ruin his
own fortune? the husband to separate himself from his wife; the son
abandons his father; the people arm against the Magistrate; and he which
aspired to honor, checks himself, and gives over his pursuit.

Choler is also worse then voluptuousness, for that lusts make men to plunge
themselves in particular plesures; whereas Choler makes them of so bad a
disposition, as he is delighted in another man's miseries. It is much more
wicked then Envy: for that if Envy desires to see any one miserable, it is
Choler which procures the misery.

But we must not continue our great desires in the reuenges of Choler, for
generous spirits are as it were, impenetrable to offenses; whereas they that
cannot resist, show their weakness; whereby we see that women, children,
sick folks, and old men are most subject to these motions and impressions.

The highest and goodliest part of the world, and nearest to the firmament and
stars, is never covered with clouds; and in whose bosom there is never any
hail, rain, winds, nor other tempests congealed: there is never any thunder
nor lightning, although the thunderbolts fall from thence upon the earth. In
like manner, a spirit truly elevated, a generous soul, is always quiet,
moderate, and grave, never suffering it self to be transported with the
furious motions of Choler; she represents unto her self the defects of this
passion, she sees that they which abandon themselves unto it, disrobe
themselves of all shame, and lose all reason: for who is he that in the midst
of his despite and wrath, seems not to have renounced all moderation, and
modesty? Can he refrain his tongue, or contain the other parts of his body
in their duty? But how many great personages have we seen expose themselves to
be a scorn of the world by the excess of their Choler? Witness that famous
Prince, who wrote letters to a Mountain, and who caused a River to be
whipped, which had been an obstacle to his passage.

Wherefore as in seeing the shameful motions of them that are drunk, we
conceive a certain horror of the excess of wine: so great spirits seeing the
deformity of Choler, endeavor what they can not to be infected with a vice,
which is as it were a reproach to humane Nature. But to prevent it, we must
first fly all affairs that are above our reach, lest that finding our selves
oppressed, as with an insupportable burden, grief kindle our waywardness and
Choler. We must also fly the company of quarrelsome persons, lest by a
certain contagion they poison us with their Passions.

Drunkards provoke to drink, voluptuous men mollify the most courageous, and
avarice poisons those that haunt the covetous. In like manner, choleric men
infuse into us their troublesome humors, or at the least in frequenting them,
we expose our selves to the dangers of quarrels with them; whereas conuersing
with quiet men (besides the good example) we are freed from that danger.

Philosophers produce other remedies to cure Choler, aduising them that have
any inclination to this passion, to leave al great and weighty occupations of
the mind, yea, the most serious studies: and they exhort them to imitate those
that are weak sighted, who ease themselves in fixing their eyes upon the most
cheerful colors; above all things they conjure them to avoid the occasions
and subjects which are given the^, to remember that it is not expedient for man
to see all nor to hear all, and that we must let many things pass which are
spoken against us; for that many times having neglected them, it is a kind of
justification. That which prouokes us to Choler (say they) is the opinion we
have to have been outraged; but we must not so suddenly give credit to this
opinion, nor presently receive the reports which are made unto us, how clear
and evident soever the proofs of the injury may seem unto us; for there are
many things which having a show of truth, are notwithstanding false; so as we
must reserve one ear to hear the reasons of him that is accused, or else shut
them both to the reporters, who many times take a delight to sow discord, and
to breed quarrels for their own pleasures.

And doubtless we may many times repent to have run rashly to revenge, whereas
we have cause to be glad to have deferred it. For the same reason we must
fly suspicions and iealousies, which many times incense us, as well as the
iustest subjects of Choler; for that taking in ill part a look, a smile, or
some other light action, we conceive a despite, and run to field against
those that are innocent, and which had no desire to wrong us.

Finally of things that offend us, some we have by report, others we have
either seen or heard ourselves. As for those which are reported we must not
easily give credit unto them, considering the practizes which are used at this
day to abuse the most credulous: A flatterer will seek to insinuate himself
into favor by accusing an innocent; he will suggest an outrage and make a bad
discourse to persuade that he has heard it with grief of mind; another will
seek an occasion to dissolve the most sacred bonds of friendship: Another full
of venom and poison will desire to have the sport of a quarrel, and will be
glad to be spectator of a combat which he has kindled, so as he be none of
the party. It is then a notable lightness to condemn a friend suddenly before
he be heard, and without an exact knowledge of the matter whereof he is
accused; and it is a prodigious injustice to be incensed against him before
that he know who accuses him, or what crime is imposed upon him.

As for those things whereof we our selves are witnesses, we must consider the
disposition and will of those that have committed them; if it be a young man,
let us impute it to his age and bear with his youth. Is it a father? Having
received so many other benefits from him, it is reason we should endure, and
that remembrance of things past should mollify our present bitterness; and we
must duly consider with our selves whether he has not just cause to entreat
us with that rigor, whereof we now complain.

If it be a woman, this sex does not always follow the motions of reason, and
her weakness should serve her for an excuse. If they be persons subject to a
greater power, it may be they have been forced, and being solicited by such as
they could not disobey, would you then be angry against necessity? another may
offend us after that he has been outraged by us: and what wonder is it if he
requite us with the like? If he be a Magistrate or a Judge from whom we
pretend to have received some injustice, his sufficiency must be of more
weight then our private opinion, and we should rather accuse our own crime
then suspect him of corruption. If it be a King or Prince, that punishes some
malefactor, we must believe that he does it justly: But if he oppress an
innocent, we must not complain, but give way to the miseries of humane nature,
remembering that the weaker are subject to the laws of mighty.

If it be a brute beast or a piece of timber or stone that hurts us, we must
beware that we become not more stupid then senseless things, thinking to
revenge our injuries of them. If it be a good man, we should not think that he
had any will to hurt us, being confident of his innocence. If he be a wicked
man, why are we amazed if the effects resemble the cause? Moreover if we
think that we are wrongfully oppressed, let us remember that many times we
think that unjust, which is not so in effect: This proc^eeds from too great a
love which we bear unto our selves: and in a word, it is ignorance or
insolency that thrusts us into Choler, never remembering that humane nature
(like unto a field full of weeds and thorns) brings forth spirits that are
ingrate, treacherous, envious and wicked. He that shall duly consider this,
will not easily give way to Choler.

These are parts of the remedies which Philosophers propound against this
furious Passion. There are others which were too long to relate; and to say the
truth, most of them are rather remedies of Emperickes which palliate the evil,
then solid medicines which cure our Passions. The sovereign remedy is to cast
our eyes upon the examples of patience which the servants of God and the Saints
have taught us in this world, and especially to fix them upon those which the
Son of God has left us, who being outraged by men did not curse them; being
persecuted, he did not threaten his excutioners; being crucified, he prayed
for his enemies; and who in the end by a Philosophy far different from that
of the world, has put our salvation in his cross, our triumphs in his
reproaches, and our glory in his punishments.

Of Mildness and Gentleness. CHAP. 1.
AS CHOLER enflaming man to revenge, transports him in such sort as many times
he seems to be deprived of all kind of humanity; and that it has converted
him into a savage and cruel beast, which breathes nothing but blood and
slaughter, so there is a motion contrary to this Passion which restores man to
the estate of man, and casting as it were water upon the fire of his wrath,
makes him tractable to pardon the outrages which he pretends to have been
done him unworthily. This Passion has no proper name, but may be called
Gentleness, Mildness, or clemency, according to the subjects where it
encounters; and it is no other thing but a motion which reduces the soul to a
quiet estate, and makes him forget all kinds of injuries and reuenges.

Wherefore as men are ordinarily incensed against those that contemn them, and
this contempt being an injury which proceeds from the will of him that offends
us, it is visible that our Choler is easily pacified when as we see there is
no cause of contempt in us; for that they of whom we might complain, have done
it against their inclination, and not by any affected malice: And the reason
is, for that humane actions depend of the intention of him that does them.
Wherefore imagining that they have no bad intention against us, we hold them
free from crime.

By the same reason we do easily forget the Choler which we have conceived
against those, who being mistaken show their grief, and desire to live
otherwise; for that this desire is a testimony that their will has been
surprised. As for example, a friend in our infirmity may give us a receipt
which he thinks fit to cure our disease, but having taken it, our pain
increases; yet we are not bitterly incensed against him, for that it appears
his will was to give us ease, although our pain increased. And particularly
we show our selves easy to pardon those which do unto themselves what they
have done unto us: For that we cannot conceive that they have contemned us in
those things wherein themselves are engaged; being apparent that no man
contemnes himself. We also pardon those easily which confess their faults
freely, and show repentance for their offenses; for that we imagine this
grief is a sufficient punishment for their wrong.

Whereof we have a familiar example in our servants; reprehending more sharply,
and punishing more severely, those that palliate their offenses, or that answer
us arrogantly; and we entreat them more graciously which acknowledge their
faults and demand pardon. And the reason is, for that it is a sign of
impudency to maintain an error which is apparent, and th^s impudency is a
notable contempt of him against whom they contest so boldly: for that we
contemn those with whom we show no respect or reverence.

We are easily pacified, when as they whom we pretend have offended us, humble
themselves before us, endure our reproof, and do not contradict us; for that
this submission is as it were, a sign of fear or reverence which they bear
us, whereby they silently confess, that they are our inferiors: so as we
conceive they do not contemn us: for that no man contemnes him whom he
fears. Wherefore every man lays aside all choler against those that humble
themselves: we have an example in the Lion, a generous beast, who never shows
his fury, but pardons those that lie prostrate upon the ground to save
themselves. We also show our selves mild to those which making the same
profession, honor us, and speak not slanderously of us: for that this respect
shows they have us in good esteem, and that they contemn us not.

We also pardon those willingly, from whom we have received some notable
favor, and particularly when they entreat us and conjure us with passionate
prayers, to forget the injuries they have done us, and not to take revenge of
them; for that these kind of ^ntreaties are signs of their submission.

We also pardon those willingly, which are not reputed to be insolent,
slanderers, mockers, or contemners of others, but are known to be good men,
doing outrage to no man unless it be to the wicked, among whom we desire not
to sort our selves. We check and control our choler, when as we know that
they that have offended us are powerful persons, from whom we might fear some
greater injury, if we should attempt to revenge that which they have done us*
for we seldom make demonstration of choler against those whom we fear,
being impossible that at the same instant we should fear any man, and yet
be in choler against him. Yea, we pass over their faults lightly that have
wronged us in the heat of their choler: so as if we are incensed against
them, it is with less feeling and bitterness, for that we conceive that what
they have done, was not through contempt, seeing that no man ever contemned him
whom he held worthy of his choler: for that contempt is without grief and
apprehension, but choler is full of grief and feeling of the injury received.

Places, times, employments, companies, help many times to make us mild and
quiet, and to keep us from being transported with choler, if it be not for
some outrageous injury: for in sports, at banquets, and public feasts, among
our friends, in the midst of our great prosperities, during the happy success
of our affairs, and in the midst of our good hopes, we do not easily receive
any impressions of choler, unless (as we have said) they do us some notable
outrage which exceedes all patience.

In like manner, when as we suffer much time to pass before we seek revenge
of the injury, by little and little we forget it, and time having assuaged our
heat, we lose all desire of revenge. But one of the things which helps most
to quench our choler, is, when as some other then that party against whom it is
enflamed, has been severely punished or sent to execution, before we could
satisfy our revenge against him.

Wherefore Philocrates, being demanded why he did not purge himself of the
crimes whereof he was accused, during the time the people were in choler
against him; answered, that the reason was, for that he expected some other
should be unjustly accused and condemned before him; imagining (as it is true)
that when as men have powered forth their choler and spleen upon any one, then
they grow more mild, and their rage is turned to pity. As it happened to
Ergophilus, against whom although his judges were more incensed then against
Calisthenes; yet they pronounced him innocent, and freed him from punishment;
for that the day before they had condemned Calisthenes.

Moreover, men show themselves mild and tractable to those over whom they have
gotten some favorable decree, and also to such as they see exposed to more
cruel afflictions, then they would have imposed upon them for their revenge:
For they conceive that they are punished sufficiently for their offense, and
that for their part they are fully revenged of the injury they have received.

But particularly our choler is not often enflamed when as we conceive the
injury that we suffer is done us justly, and that we have well deserved that
chastisement; for then it rather makes show of a revenge justly pursued, then
of a contempt or injury unjustly procured. Choler has injustice for her
object, be it true or apparent: for that as we have observed in the
Definition, it is a feeling of an indignity which we think we have received
wrongfully, and without merit: wherefore when as we apprehend there is no
injustice in the wrong we receive, our choler breaks not forth and runs not
hastily to revenge. And therefore when we will reprehend any one, it is fit to
represent unto him the subject wherefore we use this severity, that making him
know we have just occasion, it may stay him from choler. The which we should
practice particularly with our servants, who will take our reprehensions in
better part, and serve us with more affection when we show them that they have
erred, and let them know the offense which has moved us to this rigor. Our
choler is not easily moved against such as we hold insensible of any thing
that we shall do or say; for that Choler will have her effects known.
Wherefore no man of judgment will be angry against insensible things. But the
choler which we show against the living, is mortified in regard of the dead,
for that they have endured the last misery of life, and they have no more
feeling nor knowledge of injuries, which choler does wonderfully desire.
Wherefore Homer to pacify Aclilles, who insulted over the dead body of Hector,
let him know, that he did but beat the earth, and outrage an insensible thing.
These are briefly the persons to whom Mildness or clemency extends, and which
can command their choler.

This Mildness is commendable in all men, for that it is a bud of true
humility, or rather a true character of the children of God. But it has a
greater luster and a more eminent show when it is found in the souls of kings
and Monarchs of the earth: For what praise, what triumph, and what glory is it
to a great Prince, to have the command of so many millions of men, to be
arbitrator of their lives, to be master of their goods and fortunes, to be able
in an instant to leuy fearful Armies, and in the twinkling of an eye to
ruin Towns and Countriee, without the fear of any Laws? And yet in this
prodigious power, not to suffer his eyes to be daxeled with so great a
splendor, nor to be transported with choler, and in offenses not to use
severity; to spare blood, to contain his Passions, and to make it his whole
glory to do good to those that are subject to his authority.

Wherefore this bounty and clemency in Princes, makes them not only to be
beloved, but even to be adored by their subjects, who are ravished with a
sweet excess of joy, when as they see themselves subject to a power which
has nothing insolent, but all things tend to their preservation, and propound
unto themselves no more glorious objects then their safety.

Subjects hide not themselves from these good Princes, and fly not from them,
as if a Tiger, a Lion, or some other savage and cruel beast, did present it
self; but they run to meet them, to behold them, and admire them, as
stars of good influence, of whom depend all their happiness. The subjects
run unto their Temples for such good Princes, and pour out their vows and
prayers for their honors and safety. It is for them they watch and are in care,
and it is for them they are ready to suffer a thousand deaths, rather then any
attempt should be made against their lives, whereunto they know their safeties
are tied: For their mildness and clemency, as a powerful charm binds the
affections of their subjects unto them, and does purchase their love, which is
the most powerful bond and the safest guard whereby Monarchs may assure their
estates: For there is no Empire nor government, more firm then that which
pleases the subjects; whereas those that are odious, are soon ruined: yea,
they that could temper their authority by Clemency, have always enjoyed a
happy success in their government. And to speak in a word, clemency is as a
soueraign ornament to all the other royal virtues; yea; it is to Princes as a
way to heaven, and immortality to use so eminent and fearful a power
moderately; to love their subjects, to pardon the humble, to abstain from all
cruelty, to do no violence, not to bathe their hands in blood, to let their
time pass, to pacify their choler, and to procure peace and quietness to the
world. For these reasons their subjects apprehend not them, but apprehend only
for them: whereas the violence of Princes striks a terror into the minds of
their subjects, but it makes them neither more powerful, nor to be more
respected by them.

And these fears and terrors of the subjects are weak ties and bands of their
affection and love: for when as they imagine they have no more subject of
fear, they begin to hate. But admit that the horror of punishments and
tortures were able to settle Empires: who knows not, that as it is an
incomparable shame for Physicians to fill up graves, putting their skill in
practice: So it is a great reproach to Princes to mainetaine their greatness
by tortures. They should understand all the defects of their estate, but
wisdom binds him to excuse some: and if they be forced to use severity, they
must do it in punishing crimes which deserve no pardon; yet with a testimony
of grief and remorse. And finally, they must show their clemency to those
where there is some hope of amendment, not always seeking to inflict
punishments, but sometimes to be satisfied with the repentance of them that
have offended.

They must remember that it is a glorious thing to pardon him whose offense
has already made miserable, and that it is a severe punishment to be forced to
crave pardon for his crime. They must imagine that cruel and violent commands
are more sharp then durable; that no man can be feared of many, but he must
fear much: and that the life of Princes, is as a perpetual war, and a
perpetual death, if they be forced to distrust, and to guard themselves from
so many millions of men which hate their power, if it be insolent and
insupportable.

CHAP. 1. Of the diverse Passions of men, according to their ages and
conditions.
AS all the Countries and parts of the world, are not equally shaken with the
tempests of the air, yet there is not any corner of the earth, nor portion of
the Universe, in which there rises not some little wind, or some small
storms: Even so, although that all men are not subject to the furious motions
of the same Passions, yet there is not any age nor condition which does not
feel some effects, and is not in some sort agitated. Only there is this
difference, that the one have a feeling of one sort, and the other of another:
some are more violent, and other have them more quiet and temperate. For some
are Passions befitting young men; others are incident to men of perfect age; and
some are those of old men: Some the rich and mighty are subject unto, and
others transport the poor and miserable.

And first touching that which concerns the Passions of young men, they are
hot and fiery by reason of the blood which boyles in their veins; and what
they once desire they affect with vehemence. Yet they show this heat more
particularly in the motions of Love, whereunto their age which is in the
flower, gives them a violent inclination, which appears in the heat of their
pursuites. But they are subject to all kinds of changes, and have no constancy
in their affections; so as their Passions are properly like to the hunger and
thirst of sick persons, which pass away with the fit of their disease. Or to
speak more properly, they resemble Meteors, or wandering fires which are
kindled in the air, and suddenly extinct.

They are in like manner very ready to the motions of Choler, and are easily
transported with disdain, especially when as they seek to blemish their
honor, or to do them any kind of outrage. They are also ambitious, and love
glory passionatly, so as they prefer victory before any other thing, for that
it is the highest degree of excellency whereunto they aspire. But they are not
covetous, neither do they love money, for that they have not yet tried the
miseries of poverty: like unto him whom an Ancient reproached, that the
contempt he made of gold, was a sign that he had not yet felt the sweetness
thereof; for if he had tasted it, his hands would be more ready, and he would
be more diligent to gather it together. Neither are they maliciously disposed,
but show more plainness then cunning in their actions, for that they have not
yet learned the subtilties, nor tried the malice of the world. But they are
credulous, and do easily believe what is said unto them: for that they have
not yet tried the frauds of men, nor have bin often abused.

Moreover, they are full of great hopes, like unto the^ that are surprised with
wine; both in regard of the heat which abounds in them, as for that they have
not yet felt the injuries of Fortune: And therefore they live in hope; for that
Hope regards future things, as memory is employed about that which is past. And
as for them, they apprehend, that the time they have to live, is long; and they
make no account of that which is past. And for the same reason in the flower of
their age, they remember not what is slipped away before their time, but hope for
all that is to come, so as they are easy to be deceived: for that having this
belief and hope, it is easy to make them believe and hope for that which is
not. By consequence they are valiant and hardy, both for that they are
choleric, and also for that they are full of good hopes: for Choler takes from
them al fear, and hope makes them hardy; whereby they have a great confidence
of the success of that they undertake.

Moreover, young me^ are bashful, knowing nothing in this life, but what they
have learned from the Laws, or from their education: wherefore when as any
thing presents it self, of whose nature they are not well instructed, they
remain as it were in suspense, and know not what to resolve, and therefore they
are commonly subject to blushing. They are also magnanimous and generous, both
for that they have a good opinion of themselves, as also for that they have a
proud conceit of their courage, holding themselves fit for any great action:
and in like manner, for that they have not yet tried the calamities and
miseries, which overthrow the fortune and constancy of men, but are ignorant of
the afflictions whereunto this life is subject.

Finally, they desire rather to undertake those things which are honorable,
then that which concerns profit. For that they govern themselves rather by
their own courage, and the bounty of their nature, which has the honesty of
things for object, then by the discourse of reason, which does commonly
propound for end, that which is most profitable. Young men do also love
indifferently the company of such as are of their age and condition, not making
any curious choice of their friends; the which shows, that they have more
curiosity then care of that which may avail them in the course of their lives.

They are also violent, and observe no moderation in their motions and actions:
so as if they love, they love furiously; and if they hate, it is extreme: and
so in all other things they keep no mediocrity. The which grows from their
presumption, and for that they have a conceit to know any thing; which makes
them to speak boldly, and to defend their impertinencies wilfully. They commit
many errors, but commonly they are the defects of youth, which proceed from
the heat of blood, so as there is more insolency in their actions, then
affected crimes.

They are moreover pitiful and gentle; for that measuring others by their own
innocence, they believe that all the world is good; and that they which suffer
any extraordinary misery, have not deserved it: and for that reason they have
compassion of them.

Finally, young men are pleasant, witty, and love to laugh, and to hear a
witty jest, which they think is a sign of a good spirit, and therefore
admire him. They also love horses, dogs, huntings, combats, and other
exercises, which have some kind of violence or pleasure.

To conclude young men are commonly rich in invention, but poor in matters of
judgment: they are fit for execution, but incapable for any great dessigne.
They are borne to excite troubles, but are not able to pacify them: they
embrace much, but hold little: they aspire to the end, but look not to the
means: and when they have committed an error, they will hardly acknowledge it
and leave it; like unto those resty horses, which leap and bound* and will
neither stand still nor go forward.

As for those that grow to age, they have Passions in a manner quite contrary
to young men: for having lived long, and been often deceived, having
themselves committed many errors, and knowing also that the world is full of
subtilty and villainy; they are not assured of any thing, but look upon all
things with distrust: and if they deliver their opinion in any business, it is
with a kind of fear: so as it seems they will make it known, that in all
things there is more conjecture then certainty: wherefore their ordinary
restriction in their answers and discourses, is, It may be, peradventure it is
true. The which proceeds from the great Idea they have of the inconstancy of
things, and the deceits of men. For the same reason they are malicious, being a
mere malice to interpret, as they do, all things in the worst sense; and for
the same reason they are also distrustful and suspicious: suspicious by reason
of their distrust, and distrustful, in regard of the experience they have of
things. Finally, they never love entirely, neither is their hatred furious, but
they love commonly as if they should hate, and they hate as if they should he
moved to love.

Moreover, their courage is weak, both in respect of the coldness of their
blood and spirits, as also by reason of calamities past, and the miseries which
they have tried. And for this reason, unless they have some spice of folly,
they do seldom attempt any hardy enterprises, nor hazard their fortunes and
honors, but they are content to seek that which may protect them from
necessity: whereby they are covetous and fast, fearing to diminish that which
they think is necessary for them: whereunto they are drawn by experience
which has taught them, how hard a thing it is to gather great wealth, and how
easy it is to lose it. They are in like manner fearful, and increase their
apprehensions by imagination, and by the foresight of the future: wherewith
they are always troubled; the which proceeds from the coldness of their
blood. For this coldness which is common to old men, makes them inclined to
fear, whereas heat incites courage and resolution.

Moreover, they love life much, and especially upon the declining of their
days; for that men desire that naturally, whereof they have great need; and
when as they fear it should fly from them, then they desire it more
passionately. They commonly power forth complaints, which are signs of their
weakness, and which makes them importune: And then they rather embrace that
which is profitable, then what is honorable: wherein they show themselves
commonly extreme, even base, the which grows from the love they bear unto
themselves: For profit is the good of that private person that does enjoy it,
but honor tends to good absolutely, without consideration of the interest of
any particular.

After this they are rather impudent then bashful; for respecting not honor
so much as their own commodities, they care not for the opinion of the world,
but contemn it. Finally, they renounce in a manner all good hopes, and have
none but bad, both for that they are distrustful and fearful; as for that
experience has taught them, that most things are bad, and that they impair
daily: so as they live rather by memory then hope, for that they have not long
to live, and have lived long: for hope is of future things, and memory of what
is past.

And this is the cause that old men are great talkers, for that they take a
singular content to commend the times past: In our times (say they) we did
this, we did that: taking a wonderful content to remember what is past. As
for their choler, it is sudden and violent; but it is like a fire of straw,
that is soon quenched. Their desires are mortified or weak, and cannot be
quickened, or receive any vigor, unless the love of money possess them. And
therefore they are temperate, and love frugality, which is a kind of sparing,
for that they govern themselves rather by the discourse of reason, then by
their own genius, or their proper inclination: for (as we have said)
discourse aims at the end; and courage has a respect to honesty as a
companion to virtue. Their faults savor more of injustice then insolency or
outrage. They are inclined to mercy, yea, more then young men, but for diverse
reasons; for young men are pitiful by humanity, and old men by weakness,
whose age makes them apprehend the miseries wherewith they see other men
afflicted, as if it hung over their heads; which is a consideration (as we
have said elsewhere) moves to mercy and pity: And for this reason they do
nothing but complain, and they love not to see any one laugh, neither do they
willingly frequent any that are pleasant and Iouiall; for that their age has
cooled the blood, and made an impression of melancholy which loves severity.

As for vigorous and perfect men, such as are betwixt these two ages, they
participate of both their humors, yet they prune of^ that which proceeds both
in youth and age. Wherefore they observe a mediocrity in all things, so as they
are neither too audacious nor too timorous, but they hold a mean, neither
trusting in all the world, nor distrusting every thing, but they examine al
affairs by the rules of wisdom and truth. And in like manner they are neither,
miserable nor prodigal, but measure their expenses by the laws of their power
and by honesty. And in like manner they observe this mediocrity in the other
motions of the Irascible and Concupiscible powers. Their valor is tempered,
and their temperance is accompanied with courage, wherein they participate both
with young and old: For young men are valiant, but without moderation; and old
men are temperate, but full of apprehension and fear. And to say in a word;
all the good qualities which are found divided both in young and old, are as
it were united and tied together in a middle age, which contains it self
within the bounds of his temper, and natural inclination: And as for those
which have any excess or superfluity, either in youth or age; a man that is in
this middle age, checks them and cuts them off, reducing them to the point of
virtue and honesty.

We must now see what the Passions of men be, in regard of their fortunes: that
is to say, we must know the Passions of Noblemen, of Rich, and of the
powerful of the Earth; namely of Kings, and Princes. Noblemen have this
particular Passion, to desire honors vehemently: For as all men naturally wish
to increase the goods they enjoy; Noblemen seeing themselves rich in glory, and
full of honor, desire to augment their treasure, to the end they may not seem
to plant their triumphs upon that which their Predecessors have left them. But
as they have given them light by their glory, so they desire to transfer the
same beams of brightness to their posterity: and commonly, Noblemen hold it a
generous vanity not to continue in the same rank, with those which have been
equal to their Ancestors; yea, many times they contemn them. Wherefore they
desire to add some thing to the ornaments of their birth, and to have a
subject to recommend themselves above others. For in truth, the trophies of
Families are sometimes so ancient, and so worn with time, as it is an easy
thing to surmise any thing. Wherefore generous spirits should preserve that
which nature and their birth gives them; otherwise, if they degenerate, it is a
famous spectacle of infamy and reproach. As in truth there are some, which
degenerating from the magnanimity of their fathers, make us to see thick
clouds in the midst of their shining glory, as it was said of the son of
Great Scipio.

This misery happens to Families as to fields where corn and fruits grow;
for whilst the soil is good, it yields good fruits and rich haruests, but
growing barren, it yeeldes nothing that is pure and excellent. So good Families
continuing in their vigor, produce worthy plants for a time: But this generous
vigor decaying by little and little, they yield not such brave and valiant men
as formerly they did. In this Realm alone, how many great and worthy Families
(whose names are so many stars, and so many flowers which beautify our
ancient Histories) are extinct and lost? Or if there remain any Relics, they
rest unknown.

Finally, when as Nobility comes to degenerate, it gives us monsters of fury:
for he that is puffed up with the glory of his Ancestors, and will stray from
their virtues, imagines, that he cannot make better show of the splendor of
his birth, then by the insolences and violencies which accompany their
actions: Whereof we have seen prodigious examples in the carriages of the
descendants of Dionysius the Tyrant, and Alcibiades. And it is a misery in
humane things, that as good trees grow wild and savage, either for want of
pruning and manuring, or for that the soil is not favorable: So great
Families lose the glory of those that were their founders. And as Philosophers
affirm, that there is no worse corruption then that which grows from things
soueraignly excellent, as we find in the corruption of perfumes: so it happens
that Families full of magnanimity and courage, degenerate into dull and stupid
spirits, as we have seen in the posterities of Simon, Berides, and Socrates,
forbearing to speak of our own age.

As for the Passions of rich men, they are known to all the world, for that
every man sees that these menare proud, insolent, and outrageous. For feeling
themselves supported by their wealth, they imagine that all things are in their
power. For that riches, through the covetousness of men, set as it were, a
price of all other things which they may buy.

Rich men are also voluptuous, effeminate, and full of ostentation, and vanity,
that makes them to glory of their treasure; they are voluptuous and effeminate
by reason of the continual delights wherein they plunge themselves: they are
vain, and glory of their wealth, for that their thoughts are perpetually
employed in the imagination of their abundance, whereof they are rather slaves
and Idolaters, then true possessors and masters. And moreover they imagine,
that all the world loves what they love. Wherein they are not much deceived,
for that infinite numbers of persons have need of the assistance of riches.
Wherefore a Philosopher being demanded by a Princess, whether it were better
to be rich or wise: he answered, that it was better to be rich; for, said he,
we commonly see wise men at rich men's gates to beg their favors. Rich men
also have commonly this vanity, that they hold themselves worthy of great
imployme^ts, because they are rich, in regard whereof, they think it reasonable
they should command others: And to speak in a word, the riches of a happy man
(destitute of wisdom) discouers his inclination. But there is great
difference betwixt the Passions of those that are newly raised to great
fortunes, and such as have enjoyed them long: And we must not doubt, but that
they that have newly gotten their wealth, are more vicious and more insolent,
then such as have enjoyed it from their Ancestors; for they enter into their
riches as into a new possession, in the which they are altogether ignorant. As
for the crimes which either of them commit, they savor more of insolency and
incontinency, then of malice; for commonly they are polluted with adulteries,
and do outrage to such as resist their desires.

It rests now to speak of Princes, Kings, and the great men of the earth,
whose Passions also are well known, for that they much resemble those of rich
men; yet we must confess, that they have sometimes bin more moderat and more
mild; for great men are commonly more jealous of their honor, and more
generous then the rich: for that they are employed in greater actions, and have
a more eminent glory to preserve. Wherefore they are contented to mainetaine
their dignity, not caring for any affected gravity: for that dignity gives a
greater splendor unto men. And therefore they show themselves temperate, and
hold a mediocrity, for that dignity is sweet, and gravity is reverend.

Finally, when they once break out, they commit no small mischiefs; For that
commonly the effects are proportionable to their causes; and finding themselves
armed and powerful, they execute their Passions violently, and do
unspeakable wrongs; like unto great rivers, which breaking forth spoil the
harvest, and ruin the laborers hope. Whereunto we may add, that prosperity
does also make them more insolent; for that seeing themselves powerful in
means, and fortunate in their dessignes, they grow proud, and live without any
consideration of virtue or vice, by reason of the favors of Fortune which
blind their eyes. And yet there are some good natures, who in steed of growing
proud, or forgetting themselves in the height of their fortune, become more
temperate, more religious, and more fearing God: for that they acknowledge
their greatness as a gift and favor of his providence, to the which for this
consideration they are more affectionate, and more devout then other men,
considering the great benefits they have received.

FINIS.

