HYPNEROTOMACHIA.

THE Strife of Love in a Dream.

At London, Printed for Simon Waterson, and are to be sold at his shop, in S.
Paul's Churchyard, at Cheape-gate. 1592.

TO THE THRICE HONORABLE AND EVER LYVING VERTVES OF SIR PHILLIP SYDNEY KNIGHT;
AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND OTHERS WHATSOEVER, WHO LIVING LOVED HIM, AND
BEING DEAD GIVE HIM HIS DVE.

To the Right Honorable Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex and Ewe, Viscount
Hereford, and Bourghchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourghchier and Louaine,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Horse, and Knight of the most noble order of
the Garter: Is wished, the perfection of all happiness, and tryumphant
felicity in this life, and in the world to come.
WHen I had determined (Right honorable) to dedicate this Book, to the
euerlyuing virtues of that matchless Knight Sir Phillip Sydney; me thought
that I could not find out a more Noble personage then your self, and more
fit, to patronize, shield, and defend my duty to the dead, then your Honor,
whose greatness is such, and virtues of that power, as who so commends them,
deserves not to be accounted a flatterer, but he that does not the same, may
be thought an evil willer. How your Honor will accept hereof, I make no
doubt, because that courtesy attends upon true nobility; but my humble
request is, that your Honor may not think of me (by the title of the Book,
and some part of the discourse) as if I were amorous, and did speak according
to my own passions, for I being restrained of my liberty, and held in the
grave of oblivion, where I still as yet remain, oppressed with Melancholy,
and wearied with deeper studies, I was glad to beguile the time with these
conceits, anothomising in them, the vanity of this life, and uncertainty of
the delights thereof, in the Dream of Poliphilus; Which if it shall please your
Honor at convenient leisure to look over, pardoning what you find amiss, and
weighing my good will, I shall think my self most happy.

And thus I humbly take my leave, until that I may present your Honor, with a
matter more fitting the same.

Your Honors devoted, R. D.

A nonymi elegia ad Lectorem.
CAndide Poliphilum narrantem somnia Lector
auscultes, summo somnia missa polo,
Non operam perdes, non haec audisse pigebit,
tam varijs mirum rebus abundat opus.
Si grauis and tetricus contemnis erotica, rerum
nosce precor seriem tam been dispositam.
Abnuis? ac saltem stylus and noua lingua novusque
sermo grauis, sophia, se rogat aspicias.
Id quoque si renuis, geometrica cerne vetusta
plurima milliacis disce referta notis.
Hic sunt Pyramides, thermae, ingentesque Col^ssi,
ac Obeliscorum forma vetusta patet.
Hic diuersa basis fulget, variaeque columnae
illarumque arcus, Zophora, epistilia,
Et capita atque trabes, et cum quadrante coronae
symmetria, and quicquid tecta superba facit.
Hic regum cernes exculta palatia, cultus
Nympharum, fontes, egregiasque epulas.
Hinc bicolor chorea est latronum, expressaque tota
in Laberintheis vita hominum tenebris.
Hinc lege de triplici quae maiestate tonantis
dicat, and in portis egerit ipse tribus.
Polia qua fuerit forma, quam culta, tryumphos
inde Iouis specta quatuor aethereos.
Haec praeter varios affectus narrat amoris,
atque opera and quantum saeuiat ille Deus.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Fol. page line. faults. correction. Fol. page. line. faults. correction. 1. 2
38 I begin of the I began the. 21 1 38 subuaging, suruaighing. 4. 2 8 member.
members. 21 2 2 sardins, sardius. 6. 1 12 troake. trunk, 22 1 7 vanubraces,
vaumbraces. 6. 2 3 assured, azur'd, 22 1 12 coronie, coronice. 7. 1 33 f^ing.
flying, 22 2 18 Daphus, Daphne. 10 1 23 Laborinth, Laborinths. 22 1 28
chanifered, chamfered. 10 2 20 Palia. Polia, 22 1 30 contract, contrast, 11 1 2
foot, four, 22 2 29 Achanthis. Achanthis. 11 1 29 cariec. carrier. 23 1 12
hapies, Harpies. 11 2 3 backs, back. 23 1 15 fishen, fishie. 12 1 11 peeee,
piece, 23 2 4 did Anaglipts, did ye Anaglipts 13 1 3 adolestency, adolescency.
23 2 5 Briapis, Briaxes. 13 1 5 soliature. foliature, 24 2 22 Andraene.
Andracine. 14 1 29 stone, son, 24 2 32 bell flowred fox bell-flowre. 19 2 12
soliature, foliature, 26 2 2 menifis, (glove, memphis. 19 2 25 briganine,
brigandine. 26 2 34 which my, which with my 19 2 39 all. off. 28 2 8 vastus.
vastnes*

Poliphili hypnerotomachia, Wherein he shows, that all human and worldly
things are but a dream, and but as vanity it self. In the setting forth
whereof many things are figured worthy of remembrance.
The Author begins his Hypnerotomachia, to set down the hour and time when
in his sleep it seemed to him that he was in a quiet solitary desert, and
uninhabited plain, and from thence afterward how he entered unadvisedly before
he was aware, with great fear, into a dark obscure and unfrequented wood.
The description of the morning.
WHat hour as Phoebus Phoebus the Sun.
issuing forth, did bewtifie with brightness the forhead of Leucothea
Leucothea the morning.
, and appearing out of the Occean waves, not fully showing his turning wheels,
that had been hung up, Pyr and Eo, the horses of the Sun.
but speedily with his swift horses Pyrous and Eous, hastening his course, and
giving a tincture to the Spiders webbes, among the green leaves and tender
prickles of the Vermilion Roses, in the pursuit whereof he showed himself
most swift and glistering, now upon the never resting and still moving waves,
he crysped up his irradient heirs.

Upon whose vprising, even at that instant, the vnhorned Moon dismounted her
self, losing from her Chariot her two horses, the one white and the other
brown, and drew to the Horrison Horison a circle dividing the half spear of
the firmament from the other half which we do not see.
different from the Hemisphere Hemispere is half the compass of the visible
heaven.
from whence she came.

And when as the mountains and hills were beautiful, and the northeast winds
had left of to make barraine with the sharpness of their blasts, the tender
sprigs to disquiet the moving reeds, the fenny Bulrush, and weak Cyprus, to
torment the foulding Vines, to trouble the bending Willowe, and to break down
the brittle Fur bowghes, under the horns of the lascivious Bull, as they do
in winter.

At that very hour, as the diverse coulered flowers and green meades, at the
coming of the sun of Hypperion Hyperion the Sun.
fear not his burning heat, being bedued and sprinkled with the Christalline
tears of the sweet morning, when as the Halcyons Halcyons are certain byrds
which building near the snore upon the waves there will be no storm until the
young be hatched.
upon the level waves of the still, calm, and quiet flowing seas, do build
their nests in sight of the sandy shore, whereas the sorrowful Ero, with
scalding sighs did behold the dolorous and ungrate departure of her swimming
Leander Leander a young man of Abydos, who in swimming over Hellespont (a narow
sea) by Byzantium, which parts Europ from Asia) to Sestus, was in the sight
of h^s lover Ero of Sestus d^owned, which she seeing, threw her self down into
the sea, and died with him.
.

I lying upon my bed, an oportune and meet friend to a weary body, no creature
accompaning me in my chamber, besides the attender upon my body, and usual
night lights, who after that she had used diverse speeches, to the end she
might comfort me, having understood before of me, the original cause of my
hollow and deep sighs, she endeavored her best to moderate, if at least she
might, that, my perturbed and pitiful estate. But when she saw that I was
desirous of sleep, she took leave to depart.

Then I being left alone to the high cogitations of love, having passed over a
long and tedious night without sleep, through my barren fortune and adverse
constellation, altogether vncomforted and sorrowful, by means of my untimely
and not prosperous love, weeping, I recounted from point to point, what a thing
unequal love is: and how fitly one may love that does not love: and what
defense there may be made against the unaccustomed, yet daily assaults of
love: for a naked soul altogether unarmed, the seditious strife, especially
being intestine: a fresh still letting upon with unstable and new thoughts.

In this sort brought to so miserable an estate, and for a long while plunged
in a deep poole of bitter sorrows, at length my wandering senses being weary
to feed still upon unsavory and feigned pleasure, but directly and without
deceit, upon the rare divine object: whose reverend Idea is deeply imprinted
within me, and lives engraven in the secret of my heart, from which proceeds
this so great and vnces^ant a strife, continually renewing my cruel torments
without intermission. I begin of the conditions of those miserable lovers, who
for their mistresses pleasures desire their own deaths, and in their best
delights do think themselves most unhappy, feeding their framed passions not
otherwise then with sithfull imaginations. And then as a weary body after a
sore labor, so I, somewhat in outward show qualified, in the pain of my
sorrowful thoughts, and having incloystered and shut up the course of my
distilling tears: whose drops had watered my pale cheeks, through amorous
grief, desired some needful rest.

At length my moist eyes being closed within their bloudshotten and reddish
liddes, presently betwixt a bitter life and a sweet death, I was in them
invaded and overcome, with a heavy sleep, who with my mind and watchful
spirits, were no pertakers of so high an operation.

Me thought that I was in a large, plain, and champion place, all green and
diversely spotted with many sorted flowerrs, whereby it seemed passingly adorned.
In which by reason of the mild and gentle air, there was a still quiet
whisht: In so much that my attentive ears did hear no noise, neither did any
framed speech pierce into them, but with the gracious beams of the sun, the
sliding time passed.

In which place with a fearful admiration, looking about me, I said thus to
my self. Here appears no human creature to my sight, nor sylua^ beast,
flying bird, country house, field tent, or shepherds cote: neither upon the
gras could I perceive feeding either flock of sheep, or heard of cattle, or
rustike herdman with Oten pipe making pastoral melody, but only taking the
benefit of the place, and quietness of the plain, which assured me to be
without fear, I directed my course still forward, regarding on either side the
tender leaves and thick grass, which rested unstirred, without the beholding
of any motion.

At length my ignorant sleeps, brought me into a thick wood, whereinto being a
pretty way entered, I could not tell how to get out of it. Whereupon, a soddaine
fear invaded my heart, and diffused it self into every joint, so that my
color began to wax pale, and the rather by reason that I was alone, and
unarmed, and could not find any track or path, either to direct me forward, or
lead me back again. But a dark wood of thick bushes, sharp thorns, tall
ashes haled of the Viper, towgh Elmes beloved of the fruitful vines, hard
Ebony, strong Oaks, soft Beeche, and brown Hasils, who intertaining one
another branches, with a natural good will opposed themselves, to resist the
entrance of the gracious sun shine, with the green couerture of their
innumerable leaves. And in this sort I found my self in a fresh shadow, a
cool air, and a solytarie thicket.

Whereupon my reason persuaded me to believe, that this vastwood, was only a
receptacle for savage and hurtful beasts, as the tusked Bore, the furious and
blood thirsty Bear, the hissing serpent, and inuading Wolf, against which
I was unprovided to make resistance, but rayther as a pray sent amongst them,
miserably to have my flesh and bones rent and gnawne in pieces.

And thus forecasting the woorst that might follow, I was resolved not to abide
there, but to seek to get out, that I might the better eschew such suspected
occurrents, and taking my self to my feet, Minotaurus a monster in Creete,
born of Pasiphae which being enclosed in the laborinth fed on man's flesh, whom
Theseus slew and got out of the laborinth by a clew of thread given by Ariadne
king Minoes daughter, after wife to Theseus, who did forsake her, and left her
in a disinhabited I Will, notwithstanding that she had saved his life.
I wandered now this way, now that way, sometime to the right hand, sometime to
the left: now forward, then back again, not knowing how to go among the
thick bowghes and tearing thorns, bearing upon my face: rending my clothes,
and houlding me sometimes hanging in them, whereby my have in getting forth
was much hyndered. In this unaccustomed labor: and without any help but only
the keeping of the sun still upon one side, to direct me straight forward:
I grew extremely hoate and faynte, not knowing what to do, but only in a
wearye body, to contain a mind distraught through troublesome thoughts,
breathing out hollow and deep sighs, desiring help of the pitiful
Cretensian Ariadne, who for the destroying of her monstrous brother the
Mynotaur: gave unto the deceitful Theseus a clew of thread, to conduct him
forth of the intricate laborinth, that I also by some such means might be
delivered out of this obscure wood.

Poliphilus being thus distempered in this dangerous and obscure wood, at
length gets forth, and being come to a fair River, indeuoring to rest
himself and cool his heat, he heard a most delightful harmony, which made
him forget to drink, and follow after the voice, which brought him to a
worse perplexity.
Fear and desire of freedom thus occupying my senses, my understanding was
blinded, neither did I know whether it were better for me either to wish for
hated death, or in so dreadful a place to hope for desired life. Thus every
way discontent, I did endeavor, with all force and diligence to get forth,
wherein the more I did strive the more I found my self entangled, and so
infeebled with weariness, that on every side I feared, when some cruel beast
should come and devour me, or else unawares to tumble down into some deep pit
or hollow place.

Wherefore more trembling then in mustulent Autumn be the yealow coulored
leave, having left their moisture, being thorowlye searched with the furious
north wind, I lifted up my heart to God, desiring as Achemenides being afraid
of the horrible Cyclops rather to be slain by the hands of Aeneas his enemy,
rather then to suffer so odious a death.

And my devout prayer, sincerely united to a contrite heart, pouring out a
fountain of tears with a steadfast belief to be delivered. I found my self
in a short space gotten at liberty, like a new day crept out of a dark and
tempestuous night. My eyes before used to such obumbrated darkness, could
scarce abide to behold the light, through watery sadness. Nevertheless glad I
was to see the light: as one set at liberty, that had been chayned up in a
deep dungeon and obscure darkness. Very thirsty I was, my clothes torn,
my face and hands scratched and netteled, and withal so extremely set on
heat, as the fresh air seemed to do me more hurt then good, neither did it
any way ease my body, desirous to keep his new recovered scope and liberty.

And after that I had a little rowsed up my mind, and sommoned together my
senses in some better sort: I sought a means to quench my inordinate thyrst,
procured and increased through innumerable sighs, and extreme labor of body.
Thus casting my eyes with a diligent regard about the plain, to find some
Fountain whereat I might refresh my self: a pleasant spring or head of water,
did offer it self unto me, with a great vain boiling up, about the which did
grow diverse sweet herbs and water flowers, and from the same did flow a
clear and chrystalline current stream, which divided into diverse branches,
ran through the desert wood, with a turning and winding body, receiving into it
other little channels, vnlading themselves.

In whose courses the stones lift up by nature, and trunkes of trees denied any
longer by their roots to be vpholden, did cause a stopping hinderance to their
current and whuzing fall, which still augmented by other vndissonant torrents,
from high and fertlesse mountains in the plain, showed a beautiful brightness
and soft passing course, to the which short windedly coming, by means of my
fearful flight. I did see a little obscure light, through the tops of the high
trees, somewhat dividing themselves over the water, and with the rest of their
bodies and branches, as it were seperating the heavens from my lifted up eyes.
A horrible place to be in, vnaccompanyed of any creature.

And suddenly hearing the fall of trees, through the force of a whyrle wind,
and noise of the broken bowghes, with a redoubled and hoarse sound a far of,
and yet brought to the echo of the water through the thick wood, I grew into a
new astonishment.

And at this instant thus terrified and afflycted, and yet without any received
hurt, being upon my knees bowed down, and enclosing the hollownesse of my
hand, therewith determined to make me a necessary drinking vessel: I had no
sooner put the same into the water, offering to my mouth the long desired
moisture, thereby to refrygerate and cool the extreme heat of my burning
heart, which at that time would have been more acceptable unto me, then either
Hypanis and Ganges be to the Indians, Tigris or Euphrates to the Armenians, or
Xeylus to the Ethiopian nation, or to the Egyptians his innundation, in bybing
their burnt and roasted mould, or yet the river Po to the Ligurians.

Even then also it fell so out, that I had no sooner taken water into the palm
of my hand, offering the same to my open mouth, ready to receive it: I heard a
doricall song, wherewith I was as greatly delighted, as if I had heard the
Thracian Thamiras, which thorough my ears presented it self to my unquiet
heart, with so sweet and delectable a delivery, with a voice not
terrestrial, with so great a harmony and incredible a fayning shrilnesse, and
unusual proportion, as is possible to be imagined by no tongue sufficiently
to be commended. The sweetness whereof so greatly delighted me, as thereby I was
ravished of my remembrance, and my understanding so taken from me, as I let
fall my desired water thorough the loosned joints of my feeble hands.

And then even as a bird, which through the sweetness of the call forgets to
remember the Fowlers deceit, so I letting slip that which nature stood in need
of, hastened my self back with all speed, toward that attractiue melody,
which the more I coasted, the further it seemed still from me, sometime here,
sometimes there, and still as I shifted places, so the same also changed with
a delectable voice and heavenly consent. Thus vainly running up and down, I
knew not after what, I grew more weary, faint, and dry, and so feeble, that
my legs could but with great pain, vphould my distempered body. And my
grieved spirits unabled long to support the same, what with the fear that I
had bin in, what with extreme thirst, what with long and wilesome travel, and
what with doubting the worst that might ensue. Thus hot, faint, and dry: I
knew not what to do but even to procure rest for my weary member. I marueled
first at this strange accedent, and was amazed at this inhumane harmonye, but
most of all in that I was in a strange contry, and uninhabited, being only
fertile and beawtyfull to behold, besides that I greatly sorrowed for the
loss of the fayer river which I had so greatly labored to find out, and now
so lightly and carelessly to have lost the benifit thereof. In this sort I was
houlden in an intrycate mind of doubts, at length overcome with all kind of
greefes, my whole body trembling and languishinge under a broad and mighty
Oak full of Acornes, standing in the midst of aspatious and large green
meade, extending forth his thick and leauie arms to make a cool shadow,
under whose body breathing I rested my self upon the deawye herbs, and
lying upon my left side I drew my breath in the fresh air more shortly
betwixt my dry and wrinckled lips, then the weary running heart, pinched in
the haunche and struck in the breast, not able any longer to bear up his
weighty head, or sustain his body upon his bowing knees, but dying prostrates
himself. And lying thus in such an agony, I thought upon the strifes of weak
fortune, and the inchauntments of the malicious Cyrces, as if I had by her
charms and quadranguled plaints, been bereaved of my senses. In these such so
great and exceeding doubts: O hi me where might I there among so many diverse
and sundry sorts of herbs, Moly an herb greatly commended of Homer, and
thought to be sovereign against inchauntments of modern authors altogether
unknown.
find the Mercurial Moli with his black root, for my help and remedy.
Again me thought that it was not so with me. What then? even a hard
appointment to delay my desi^ed death. And thus remaining in these pernicious
thoughts, my strength debylitated: I looked for no other help, but to draw
and receive fresh air into that breast, which panted with a small remainder of
vytall warmness, taking into my hands half alive, as my last refuge, the
moist and bedewed leaves, preserved in the cool shadow of the green Oak:
putting the same to my pale and dry lips, with a greedy desire in licking of
them to satisfy my distempred mouth with their moisture, wishing for such a
well as Hypsipyle Hypsipile was daughter to Thaos king of Lemnos, who alone when
all women of that Island had slain their husbands and kinsmen, saved her
father: she also showed the Grecians the fountain Langia in the wood of Nemea
in Achaia where Hercules slew a lion.
showed the Grecians: Fearing least that unawares as I had ruffled in the wood
I were bitten with the serpent Dipsa Dipsa a kind of snakes that Lucan
mentions, whose biting procures extreme drynes or thirste.
my thirst was so unsupportable. Then renewing my oulde cogitations: as I lay
under this mighty Oak: I was oppressed with emynent sleep over all my
members: where again I dreamed in this sort.

Poliphilus shows, that he thought he did sleep again, and in his dream
that he was in a Vallie, environed with mountains and hills, the end whereof
was shut up in a marvelous sort, with a mighty pyramides worthy of
admiration: upon the top whereof was a high obeliske, which with great pleasure
he beheld, and diligently discribeth.
GOtten forth of this fearful and thick wood, and forgetting the
forementioned places by this sweet sleep, occasioned by my weary members
now laid along: me thought that I was in a new more delectable place, far
excelling the former, which consisted not of fertles mountains and craggie
winding rocks, containing wide caves, but being a delicate valley, in the
which did rise a small mounting of no great height, sprinkled hear and there
with young Oaks, A^hes, Palm trees broad leaued, Aesculies, Aesculus is a tree
bearing both greater fruit and brother leaves then the Oak.
Holme, Chestnut, Sugerchist, Poplars, wild Olive, and Oppies disposed some
hyer then other, according to the mounting or fall of the place, in the plain
whereof was an other kind of thicket of medicinable simples like little young
trees, as the flowering Genista Gemista bears a cod and yellowe flower, vines
are bound therewith. Elaphium is like to Angelica, but not in smell, the heart
thereon rubbeth his head when it is velvet.
environed with diverse green herbs, Tetrifolie, Sheere grass, hunnisuckle,
the musked Angelica, Crowfoot Elapium, and Rugwoort, with other profitable and
unknown herbs and flowers hear and there diversely disposed. A little
beyond in the same valley, I found a sandy or grauelly plain, yet be spotted
with green tuffes, in which place grew a fair Palm tree with his leaves like
the Culter of a plowe, and abounding with sweet and pleasant fruit, some set
high, some low, some in a mean, some in the very top, an elect and chosen
sign of victory. Neither in this place was there any habitation or creature
whatsoever. Thus walking solitarily betwixt the trees, growing distantly one
from another, I persuaded my self, that to this no earthly situation was
comparable: in which thought I soddainely espied upon my left hand, an hungry
and carniuorous Woolfe, gaping upon me with open mouth.

At the sight whereof immediately, my hair stood right up, and I would have
cried out, but could not: and presently the Woolfe ran away: whereupon
returning to my self, and casting my eyes toward the wooddie mountains,
which seemed to join themselves together, being looked unto a far off, I
saw the form of a tower of an incredible heygth, with a spyre vnperfectlie
appearing, all being of very ancient form and workmanship.

And drawing near unto this building, I beheld the gracious mountains before
a far of seeming small, by coming nearer and nearer, by little and little,
to lift up themselves more and more, at the first seeming to me that they had
joined together with the building which was an enclosure or end of the valley
betwixt mountain and mountain: which thing I thought worthy the noting, and
without further delay I addressed my self more nearer thereunto. And by how
much the more I approximated the same, by so much the more the excellency of
the work showed it self, increasing my desire to behold the same. For there
appeared no longer a substance of unknown form, but a rare Obelisk upon a
vast frame and stony foundation, the height whereof without comparison did
exceed the tops of the side-lying mountains, although I thought that they
had been the renowned Olympus Olimpus a hill in Greece between Macedonie and
Thesalie, so high, that of the Poets it is sometime taken for heaven.
, the famous Caucasus Caucasus a mighty hill in Asia which parts India from
Scythia.
, and not inferior to Cyllenus Ci lenus a hill of Arcadia, where Jupiter begat
Mercury upon Maia.
.

To this sollitarie place thus desiredlye coming, with unspeakable delight,
at pleasure I beheld the strange manner of the art, the hugeness of the
frame, and the wonderful excellency of the woorkmanship. Maruelling and
considering the compass and largeness of this broken and decayed object, made
of the pure glistering marble of Paros Paros is one of the 35. Isles called
Cyclades and Sporades, in the sea Aegeum which deuideth Europ from Asia.
. The squared stones joined together without any cement, and the pointed
quadrangulate corner stones streightlye fitted and smoothlye pullished, the
edges whereof were of an exquisite vermillion color, as is possible to be
devised: and so just set, as betwixt the joints, even the enemy to the work
(if ever there were any) could not devise to hide the point of the smallest
spanish needle used of the best workewomen. And there in this so noble a piece
of work, I found a proportioned substance to every shape and likeness that
can be thought upon and called to remembrance, partly decayed, and some still
whole remaining, with pillars small upon great, with their excellent heads of
an exact and most perfect closing, crowned battelments, embost caruings,
bearing forth like embroderie, arched beams, mighty mettaline images,
overthrown and broken in sunder, the troake of their exact and perfect
members, appearing hollow of brass. Skyffes, small boats and vessels of
Numidian stone and Porphyr, and diverse colored marble. Great lauers condites,
and other infinite fragments of notable woorkmanship, far different and
inferior from that they were, in their perfection, but now brought back as it
were to their first vnshapelines, being fallen and cast down, some here, some
there, upon the earth from the which they were taken. Among the broken and
decayed places, whereof great sundry wall weeds and herbs, especially the
vnshaking Anagyre, the Lentise of both kinds, bears foot, dogs head,
Gladen green, spotted Iuie, Centarie, and diverse such like. And in the
myldered places of broken walls grew Howslike, and the hanging Cymbalaria
briars, and pricking brambles, among the which crept Swifts and Lyzarts which I
saw crawling among the ouergrowne stones, which at the first sight in this
silent and solitary place, made me to be warily afraid of them. On every side
there say fallen down smoothe round pieces of serpent spotted Marble, purple
and red diverse colored. Fragments of strange histories, Panglyphic be wholly
carved from the head to the foot in all members. Hemigliphie apeare but half.
Panglyphic and Hemygliphic compendiously caracterized, showing the excellency
thereof, undoubtedly accusing our age, that the perfection of such an art is
forgotten.

Then coming to the myddle fronture of the great and excellent work, I saw
one sole large and marvelous porche worthy of great estimation, proportioned
according to the huge quantity of the rest of the whole work, which was placed
betwixt and continued in building from the one and the other of the mountains
hare lipped, and above arched, whose space betwixt as I do conjecture was in
measure six furlongs, and twelve paces. The top of which mountains were
perpendicularly equal either of them touching the assured skey. At the sight
whereof I imagined with my self and devised to think with what iron
instruments, with what labor of men's hands, and number of workmen, such a
piece of work could be by great strength framed, with much pain laid
together, and a long time in finishing. There then this wonderful frame
willingly as it were joined hands and united it self with the one and the
other mighty mountains, by means whereof, the foresaid valley there had an
end, that no man could go further forward or back again, but to enter in by
this broad, large, and wide open porche.

Upon this massy frame and mighty woorkmanship, which I take to be in height
from the roof or top to the foot, five parts of a furlong, was placed a high
and wonderful Pyramides, after the fashion of a square poynted Diamond, and
such incredible workmanship that could never be devised and erected, without
inestimable charge, great help, and long time. So that I thought the
excellency thereof unthought upon, to be a myrrour, the fight whereof was
able to dafell any human eyes, and quail the rest of the spiritual senses.
What shall I say more? for so far as the reach of my capacity will afoorde
me leave, in this sort I briefly describe the same.

Every side or quarter of this four squared frame, whereupon the foot of the
Pyramides did stand, A furlong is 16. pole every pole being 16 foot.
did extend themselves in length six furlongs, which in compass about every
side aequilatered of like breadth, does multiply to 24 furlongs. Then lifting
up the lines on high from the four corners, so much as every corner is
distant in length from an other, meeting in the top, so as the Perpendicular
line may fall just upon the center of the Dyagon, stretching from both corners
of the plynts or square foot, just and conveniently joined together do make a
perfect pyramidall figure. Which immence and wonderful form, with a
marvelous and exquise Symmetrie and due proportion mounting up labor somly
foot by foot, contained 1410. degrees or steps, taking away 10. degrees to
make up the head and gracilament of the Pyramides in whole place was set a huge
Cube or four square stone of form like a dye, sound and firm of a monstrous
thickness and incredible weight to be carried so high. And of the same stone
of Paras as were the steps: which cube and square stone was the Basis and foot
set under the Obilisk, which I have in hand to describe.

This mighty big stone sharp topt, sliding down the extreme part from corner
to corner, flat sided by the Diameter, was four paces, at every equal distant
corner, whereof was the foot of a harpie of moulten metal, their steals and
claws armed. Firmlye and strongly set in with led, in every corner of the
Cube, or four square head of the Pyramides, meeting together over the
Diagonike line. Of proportioned thickness in height two paces. Which thus
closing and met together, made the socket of the great Obelisk: which Socket
was beautified with leaves, fruits and flowers, of shining cast metal, and
of convenient bigness. Whereupon the weight of the Obelisk was borne. The
breadth whereof was two paces, and seven in height, artificiously sharping of
the stone of Thebais called Pyrus. Upon the smooth plains whereof, pure and
bright shining as a looking glass, were most excellently cut Aegiptian
Hycrogliphs.

Upon the point of which Obelisk, with great art and diligence, was fastened a
copper base, in the which also there was a turning devise infixed: whereupon did
stand the shape of a beautiful nymph framed of the aforesaid matter, able to
amaze the continual diligent behoulder. Of such a proportion as the common
stature might be considered and perfectly seen, notwithstanding the exceeding
height thereof in the air. Besides the greatness of the figure or image: it
was a wonder to think how such a weight should be carried and set in such a
place and so high. Covered with a habit blown abroad with the wind, and
showing part of the naked substance of the legs and thighs: with two wings
growing out from the shoulder blades, and spread abroad as if she were ready
to fly, turning her fair face and sweet regarding countenance toward her
wings. The tresses of her hair fying abroad the upper part or crown naked
and bare. In her right hand she held from her sight a copy or horn stuffed full
of many good things, stopped up, and the mouth downewarde, her left hand
fastened and hard holden to her naked breast. This Image and stature was with
every blast of wind turned, and moved about with such a noise and tinkling in
the hollownes of the metaline devise: as if the mynte of the Queen of England
had being going there. And when the foot of the phane or Image in turning
about, did rub and grind upon the copper base, fixed upon the point of the
Obeliske, it gave such a sound, as if the tower bell of Saint John's College in
the famous University of Cambridge had been rung: or that in the pompeous
Batches of the mighty Hadrian: or that in the fifth Pyramides standing upon
four. This Obeliske in my judgment was such, as neither that in the Vaticane
in Alexandria or Babylon, may be equally compared unto it, but rather esteemed
far inferior. It contained in it such a heap of woonders, as I could not
without great astonishment look upon it. As also consider the hugeness of the
work, the excessive sumptuousness, the strange invention, the rare
performance, and exquisite diligence of the woorkeman. With what art invented?
with what power human force, and incredible means, envying (if I may speak
it) the workmanship of the heavens, such and so mighty weights should be
transported and carried into the skies? with what Cranes, winding beams,
Trocles, round pullies, Capres bearing out devices, and Poliplasies, and
drawing frames, and roped tryces, therein being unskillful, I slip it over with
silence.

And here on the other side follows the figure.



Let us return then to the huge Pyramides, standing upon a strong and sound
plynth or four square foot, fourteen paces in height, and in length six
furlongs, which was the foundation and bottom of the weighty pyramides, which
I persuaded my self was not brought from any other place, but even with plain
labor and workmanship hewn out of the self same mountains, and reduced to
this figure and proportion in his own proper place.

Which great quadrant and square work, joined not fast to the collaterate and
sidelying rocks, but was betwixt spaced and separated on either sides ten
paces. Upon the right hand as I went of the aforesaid plynth or square sheame,
there was most perfectly carved the vyperous head of the fearful Medusa, in a
most furious and rigorous form to look upon, and as it were yelling out: with
terrible eyes cauernate, and hollow skowling under there ouerhanging brows with
a wrympled and forrowed forehead and gaping wide open mouth, which being
hollowed with a dyrect way from the Catill, and upon stone by a mediane line
perpendicular to the center of the far showing Pyramides, made a large
entrance and coming unto it, at which opening mouth, compassed with fowlded
hairs of vnrepartable curiousnes artificial cunning and costly woorkmanshyppe
the assending the turning stayers showed them selves, and in stead of tresses
of hair platted with laces, I saw fearful vypers and winding serpents
growing out from the scalpe of the monstrous head confusedly twysting together
and hissing, so lively portrayed and set forth, that they made me afraid to
behold them. In their eyes were placed most shining stones, in such sort, as
if I had not been persuaded and known that they were stones indeed, I durst
not have drawn near them.

And the aforesaid entry cut out of the firm stone, led to the scale and
compassing passage in the center, with winding steps tending to the highest
part of the stately Pyramides, and opening upon the out side of the catill or
cube: upon the which the shining obeliske was founded. And among the rest of
such notable parts that I beheld, me thought that this devise was worth the
noting, because the artifitious and most cunning architect with an exquisite
and perspicuous invention, had made to the stayres certain loopes or small
windows, embracing the bountiful beams of the sun correspondently on three
parts, the lower, the middle, and supreme: The lower taking light from the
higher, and the higher from the catabasse or lower with their opposite
reflections showing a marvelous fair light, they were so fitly disposed by the
calculate rule of the artificious Mathematrician, to the Oriental Meridionall
and Occidentall parts of the air, that every hour of the day the sun
shined in, and gave light to the whole scale, the same loopes or windolets in
diverse places symmetrially and definitely dispersed and set.

To the aforesaid entrance through the open mouth of Medusa, I came by a long
gallorie to a salying scale or down going staire opening at the foot and
pauement of the building upon my right hand against one of the collateral and
side-lying mountains, betwixt which there was out of the stone and open space
cut out of ten paces up, into the which I ascended boldly without
resistance, and being come to the beginning of the staire in the aforesaid
mouth by innumerable steps and degrees, not without great wearines and
disinesse of head, by often turning about, I came to so incredible a height,
that my eyes would not suffer me to look down to the ground, insomuch, that
me thought that every thing below upon the plain had lost his shape, and
seemed imperfect. In the opening and coming out of this circulate and turning
assence many pillars of fused and molten metal were aptly disposed and surely
fixed: the inter-space betwixt every one and other one foot, and in height
half a pase, railed and joined together above with a battelled coronet al
along the said pillar, and of the same metal compassing about the opening of
the staire, lest that any coming forth unawares should fall down headlong,
For the immesurable height thereof would cause a giddines in the head, and
bring a staggering to the feet: upon the plain of the obeliske there was
infixed a table of bras^e fastened and soldered in about the height of a man,
with an ancient inscription in Latin, Greek, and Arabike, by the which I
plainly understood that the same was dedicated to the Sun, and the measure
of the work wholly set down and described, the name of the Architector noted on
the obeliske in Greek letters.

(...)
Lichas Libiicus architectus me orox^t.
Lich^s a Libian architector set me up.
Let us return and come back to the consideration of the But and tessell or
square, subject and vphoulder of the Pyramides in the front and foreside
whereof I beheld engraven a Gigantomachie and combat betwixt Giauntes, the
only enemy to vital breath, surpassinglie well cut, with the quick motions
and lively agilities of their large and tall bodies, impossible to be rightlye
described, the artificial handling thereof, as it were envying the work of
nature it self, as if their eyes and feet had moved together, and coasted
from one part to an other, with an expedite passage and swift course. In such
sort seemed they upon their strong and mighty horses, some being cast down,
other stumbling and falling: many wounded and hurt, yielding up their desired
lives: some trodden down and mischieued under the feet of the fierce and
unrestrained horses. Other casting off their armor wrestling and t^gging one
with an other: some headlong with their heels upward, falling and not come to
the ground from off their horses. Other some lying upon the earth, houlding up
their sheilds and Targets, offended with the one hand, and defended with the
other. Many with their shimitaries and curtilaxes, some with long swords two
handed after the ancient Persian manner, others with diverse deadly and strange
fashioned mortal weapons: some wearing habergions and helmets, with diverse
devises upon their crests: others naked and unarmed, leaping and rushing in
among the thickest, thereby showing their haughty, invincible, and undaunted
courages, resolute for death. Some with fearful countenances crying out,
other showing obstinate and furious visages, although they were assured to dye,
strongly abiding the proof of their pain, and the cutting in sunder of their
fatal thread, others slain before them, with diverse vneothe and strange
warlike and deadly instruments. Showing their strong members, their swelling
muskels standing out, offering to the sight and eyes of the behoulder, the
duty of their bones, and the hollownesse in the places, where their strong
sinews be strayned. Their conflict and combat seemed so fearful, bloody,
deadly, cruel, and horrible: as if Mars himself had been fighting with
Porphirion and Alcion, who made a noise like the braying of Asses.

This catagliphic imagerie, did exceed a natural and common stature and
proportion of men, carved in privy white marble, the ground thereof as black
as iet, a perfect foil to beautify and set forth with pale Christaline and
silver crolley, of innumerable huge bodies, their last endeavors, their present
actions, the fashion of their armor, the diversity of their deaths, and
uncertain and doubtful victory. The discharge of my undertaken description
whereof, proves maimed and lame, by reason that my understanding is weary,
my memory confused with variety, and my sight dimmed with continual gasing,
that my senses will not aford me rightly, and as their dew, fitly to manifest
part, much less to describe at large the whole manner of their curious
Lythoglyphi.

After this I became to cast with my self, what should move and cause such a
pride and burning desire in any man, to fetch from far, and gather together so
mighty stones with so great travel: With what carriage, who were the
conueyers and porters, with what manner of wheels, and rolling devises, and
upholding supporters, so great large and innumerable a sort of stones should be
brought thither, and of what matter their cement that joined and held them
together, was made the heygth of the Obelisk and stateliness of the Pyramides,
exceeding the imagined conceit of Dimocrates proposed to Alexander the great,
about a work to be performed upon the hill Athos. For the strangenes of the
Egiptian building might give place to this. The famous laborinth were far
inferior, Lemnos is not to be rehearsed, the Theaters of old time were in
comparison but warriners lodges, neither did the famous Nausoley come any thing
near. Which certainly makes me absolutely persuaded, that he which wrote the
seven woonders of the world, never hard of this: neither in any age has their
been seen or imagined the like, no not the sepulcher of Ninus.

Lastly I woondered what foundation and arches were able to uphold so monstrous
a weight, whether the pyllars were hexagons or tetragons, and what variety of
columns, and what number might serve, and after what sort proportionately
disposed and set. For the better understanding and more perfect knowledge
whereof, I conueyghed my self in at the open and spacious porche and entrance,
within the which was an obscure and vast hollownes: which porche, together with
the proud and stately buylding (things worthy of memory) shall in some sort
be descrybed as follows.

Poliphil^s, after the description of the huge Pyramides and Obeliske,
discourses of marvelous works in this Chapter, namely of a horse of Colos.
of an O^phan^, but especially of a most rare and strange Porche.
RIghtlye and lawfullye may I have leave to write, that in the whole world
there was never such an other, so pompeous, glorious, and magnificent a piece
of work, by man's eyes seen or crebiblie reported. The wonderful excellency
and rare strangeness whereof, as I beheld what with delight, and what with
admiration, my senses were so captiuated and tied thereunto, that no other
solace or pleasure, did either occur or take place in my swift flying thought.

But that when I applied my senses to consider, and addressed my eyes with
diligent observation, curiously to ouerlooke every particular part of this
sweet composed object, and most rare and goodly imagerie and virgin like
bodies, without crack or flawe, with a long drawn breath, and somewhat
opening my mouth, I fet a deep sighe. In so much as my amorous and sounding
breathing, by reason of the thickness of the air in this solytarie and lone
place, gave an echo, and did put me in mind of my Angelike and extreme
desired Polia.

O hi me that so small or any intermission should cause that her lovely and
celestial Idea and shape was not still imprinted in my mind, and continued a
daily companion, in whose breast my life is resolved to abide, and rest as under
the protection of a most sure and approved shield and safe defense.

And by this way I was brought to a place where were diverse and sundry
excellent sorts of ancient devises and woorkemanships: first of all, I beheld
a most fair porche, past all sense to describe (for the incredible curiousnes
thereof, as ever was built or devised) and the rather for that our mother tongue
and vulgar speech, may not afford apt and peculiar words, for such a piece of
artificial work.

Before this gorgeous and glorious porche, you shall understand that in the
open air there was a four square court of thirty paces by his Diameter,
paued with pure fine marble, poynted foot square, wrought checker wise of
diverse fashions, and sundry best sitting colors: but in many places, by
means of the ruin of the ancient walk, and old pillars, broken in pieces
and ouergrowne

And in the utmost parts of the aforesaid court, A column consists of his
Capitell that is the head.

Astr^galus that is the subject of the capitell next the column. Hypotrachelie
the shaft of the column.

And Hypothesis, that is the foot whereon the Column stands, exceeding the
bigness of the column.


to the right hand, and the left, toward the mountains, there was two
straight rows of pillars, with a space betwixt for the interiect Ar^^stil^, as
the quantities of both columns required, the first course or order of setting
the pyllars, beginning on both sides equal to the Lymbus or extreme part of
the front of the porche, the space betwixt pyllars and pillars xv. paces. Of
which collumnes or great pillars, some and the greatest part or number were
whole. With their capitels or heads, wrought with a waued shell work, and
cyllerie or draperie, their corners bearing out and manulated or turned in like
a curled lock of hair, or the upper head of a base Vial above the pinnes,
which strain the stringes of the instrument to a musical concord: with their
subject Astragals, writhing and hanging here and there, making the capital
thrice so big as the bottom thereof of the column, whereupon was placed the
Epistile or straight beam, the greatest part decayed, and many columns
widowed and deprived of their Capi^els, buried in ruin both Astragals and
shafts of the columns and their bases or feet.

Fast joining to which order or set rows of pillars, there grew old plain
trees, wild Olives, Pine apple, and pricking brambles. I coniectured that it
was made for to ride horses in, to trot and gallop, the ring, to manage,
carreic, and coruet in, or else some open gallerie, covered close over head,
under propt with pillars, and of a large wideness to walk dry in, and to
take a temperate air in, not too subtle.

Above in this great Court paued as aforesaid, in the passage toward the
Porche, some ten paces, I behold a prodigious winged vaughting horse, of
moulten brass, of an exceeding bigness, his wings fanning out. His hooues
standing upon a smooth plain base or frame, five foot broad, and nine feet
in length, in height proportionable to the breadth and length: with his head at
liberty and unbridled: having his two small ears, the one standing forward,
and the other drawn back, with a long waued maime, falling from his crest on
the contrary side: upon whose backs diverse young youths assayed to ride, but
not one was able to sit steadfast, by reason of his swiftness and high
bounding, from whom some were fallen down, lying wide open to the air, some
groueling, other falling headlong, betwixt the horse and the earth, the rest
in vain houlding by the hair of his maine, some forceing to get up upon him,
and others indeuoring to recover themselves from under his feet.



Upon the upper part of the frame and base, there was infixed and fastened with
lead, a footing or thick crust, of the same metal that the horse was, and
upon the which he stood, and those that were overthrown did lie, somewhat
shorter and narrower then the base or subject frame, the whole mass or
composition cast of a piece and of the same metal, marvelously founded.
Lastly you could not perceive that any were contented with his rowghnes, as
appeared by their framed countenances, showing a discontent which they could
not utter being senseless images, not differing otherwise thorough the
excellent conning of the craftisman from living creatures, and by his
surpassing imitation of nature.

Peryl^us there might go put up his pypes, and blush with his devised Bull, and
Hiram the Jew must here give place, or what founders else soever.

The Paegma base or subject for this metaline machine to stand upon, was of one
solyde pee^e of marble (of fit and convenient breadth, height, and length, for
that purpose accordinglye proportioned) full of streaming veins, sundry
coulered, and diversely spotted, marvelous pleasant to the eye, in infinite
commixtures, confusedly disposed:

Upon the breast or foremost part, and end of the marble base, that was opposite
against the porch, there was a garland of green marble, like the leaves of
bitter Alisander, commixt with dead leaves of May denweede, of a hayrc color,
within the which there was a smoothe round, pure, white stone, wherein was
engraven these capital Roman letters.



At the hinder end in like sort was a garland of deadly Woolf-woort, with this
inscription, Equus infaelicitatis. And upon the right side there was engraven
certain figures, shapes, and representments of men and women dancing
together, byformed or faced, the foremost smiling, the hynmost weeping: and
dancing in a ring, with their arms spread abroad, and hanfasted man, with man
and woman with woman. None live in in this world in that pleasure, but they
have a^s^ their sorrows in time.
One arm of the man under that of the woman, and the other above, and thus
closing together, and houlding by the hands, they floung about one after
another, that always still in one place, a smyling countenance incountered a
foregoing sad. Their number was seven and seven, so perfectly and sweetly
counterfeited with lively motions, their vestures whisking up and flying
abroad, that the workman could not be accused of any imperfection, but that one
had not a lively voice to express their mirth, and the other brinish tears to
manifest their sorrow: the said dance was in fashion of two Semicircles, with
a seperating partition put betwixt.



Under which Hemiall figure, there was inscript this word TEMPVS. On the
contrary side I beheld many of green adolestencie of like proportion to the
former, and in such like compass or space, Gift vainly bestowed, in time
wantonlie spent, is a great loss, and breeds repentance.
the grounds of both beautified and set forth with an exquisite foliature or
work of leaves and flowers, this company was plucking and gathering of the
flowers of sundry herbs, and tender bushing stalks and branches: and with
them diverse fair Nymphs pleasantly devising, and sportinglie snatching away
their gathered flowers, and in such sort as abouesaid under the figure were
engraven certain capital letters, to show this one word AMISSIO, containing
the ninth part to the Diameter of the quadrature.



At the first sight hereof I was amassed and astonished, but with better regard
and great delight curiously reouerlooking the huge founded Machine the shape
and form of a horse made by humane industry and skill most commendable, for
that every member without defect had his perfect harmony, and every limme his
desired proportion, I straight called to remembrance the unfortunate horse of
Scian.

And thus held still to behold the same artificial mystery, an other
spectacle and object no less worthy to be looked upon than the former, offered
it self to my sight, which was a mighty Elephant, whereunto with a desirous
intent I speedely hyed me to approach and come near.

In which mean while on an other side I heard a mournful noise and humane
groaning, as proceeding from a sick body even unto death: whereat I stood
still at the first, my hairs standing right up, but presently without further
stay, I addressed my steps toward the place from whence I heard this woeful
noise and doleful lament, forcing my self up upon a heap of ruinated,
broken and downe-fallen marbles. Thus willingly going forward, I came to a vast
and wonderful large Colose, the feet thereof bare, and their soles hollow,
and the legs as if their flesh had been wasted, consumed and fallen away.
From thence with horror I came to look upon the head, where I did conjecture
and imagine, that the air and wind getting in and coming forth of his wide
open mouth, and the hollow pipes of his throat, by a divine invention did cause
this moderated noise and timed groans: it lay with the face upward all of
molten metal, like a man of middle age, and his head lifted up as with a
pillowe, with a resemblance of one that were sick, breathing out at his mouth,
sighs and groans gaping, his length was three score paces. By the hairs of
his beard you might mount up to his breast, and by the rent and torn pieces of
the same to his still lamenting mouth, which groningly remained wide open and
empty, by the which, provoked by the spur of curious desire, I went down by
diverse degrees into his throat, from thence to his stomach, and so forth by
secret ways, and by little and little to all the several parts of his inward
bowelles, Oh wonderful conceit. And every part of man's body having upon it
written his proper appellation in three ideomes Chaldee, Greek and Latin,
that you might know the intrailes, ^inews, bones, veins, muscles and the
enclosed flesh, and what disease is bred there ^ the cause thereof, the cure
and remedy, Unto which inglomerated and winding heap of bowelles, there was a
convenient coming unto and entrance in: with small loope-holes and wickets in
sundry places diversely disposed, yielding thorough them a sufficient light to
behold the several parts of the artificial anothomie, not wanting any
member that is found in a natural body.

When I came to the heart, I did see and read how Love at his first entrance
begets sorrow, and in continuance sends out sighs, and where Love does
most grievously offend: wherewithal I was moved to renew my passion, sending
out from the botome of my heart deep fet and groaning sighs inuocating and
calling out upon Polia, in such sort as that the whole Colose and Machine of
brass did resound, striking me into a horrible fear: an exquisite Art beyond
all capacity, for a man to frame his like not being an Anotomy indeed.

Oh the excellency of passed wits, and perfect golden age, when Virtue did
strive with Fortune, leaving only behind him for an heritage to this our
world, blind, ignorant, and grudging desire of worldly pelf.

Upon the other side I perceived of like bigness to the former Colose, the upper
part of a woman's head some deal bare, and the rest buried with the decayed
ruins, as I thought, of such like workmanship as the other, and being
forbidden by incompolite and disordered heaps of decayed and fallen down
stones, to view the same I returned to another former object, which was (and
not far distant from the horse straight forward) a huge Elephant of more
black stone than the Obsidium, powdered over with small spots of gold and
glimces of silver, as thick as dust glistering in the stone. The extreme
hardness whereof the better did show his clear shining brightness, so as every
proper object therein did represent it self, except in that part where the
metal did bear a contrary color. Upon his large back was set a saddle or
furniture of brass, with two gyrthes going under his large belly, betwixt the
which two being straight buckled up with buckles of the same stone, there was
inter-set a quadrangle correspondent to the breadth of the Obeliske placed upon
the saddle, and so justly set, as no perpendicular line would fall on either
side the diameter. Upon three parts or sides of the four square Obelisk, were
engraven Egiptian caracters. The beast so exactly and cunningly proportioned,
as invention could devise, and art perform. The aforesaid saddle and furniture
set forth and beautified with studdes hanging jewels, stories, and devises,
and houlding up as it were a mighty Obeliske of green colored stone of
Lacedemonia, upon the even square, two paces broad, and seven in height, to
the sharp point thereof, waxing smaller and smaller, upon which point there
was fixte a Trigon or round Ball o^ a shinyng and glystering substance.

This huge beast stood straight upon all four, of an exquisite woorkmanship
upon the plain level, and upper part of the base, hewn and cunningly
fashioned, being of Porphyr stone. With two large and long teeth, of puer
white stone, and clear appact, and fastened. And to the fore gyrth on either
side was buckled a rich and gorgeous poiterell, beautified with diners
ornaments and variety of Jewels, the subject whereof was of the same substance
of the saddle: upon the midst whereof was graven in Latin Cerebrum est in
capite. And in like manner brought about the out sides of his neck to the
foretop of his large and big head, it was there fastened together with an
artificial knot: from the which a curious ornament and very notable, of
Gouldsmithes work, hung down, over spredding his spacious face: the same
ornament being twice so long as broad, bordered about, in the table whereof I
beheld certain letters Ionic and Arabi^, in this sort.

His devouring trunk rested not upon the leuel of the base, but some deal
hanging down, turned up again toward his face. His rigged large ears like
a Fox-hounde flappingly pendent, whose vast stature was little less, then a
very natural Olyphant. And in the about compass, and long sides of the base,
were engraven certain Hicrogliphs, or Egiptian caracters. Being decently and
orderlye pullished, with a requisite rebatement, Lataster gule thore orbicle,
Astragals or Neptrules, with a turned down Syme at the foot of the base, and
turned up aloft with writhin trachils and denticles, agreeable and fit to the
due proportion of so large a substance, in length 12. paces, in breadth five,
and in height three, the superficial and outward part, whereof was hewn in
form of a hemicycle.

In the hinder part of which base and stone, whereupon this mighty beast did
stand, I found an assending place of seven steps, to mount up to the plain
superficies of the base where upon the Olyphant did stand. And in the reserved
quadrangle perpendicularly straight under the aforesaid brazen saddle, there
was cut out and made a little door and hollowed entrance, a wonderful work
in so hard a substance, with certain steps of b^asse, in manner of stayr^^,
by the which a convenient going up into the body of the Olephant was offered me.



At the sight whereof I extremely desired to see the whole devise and so going
in, I assended up to the height of the base whereupon the cauernate, hollow,
vast, large and predigious monster did stand, except that same part of the
Obelisk, which was contained within the void body of the beast, and so passing
to the base. Leaving toward both sides of the Olyphant so much space as might
serve for any man to pass, either toward the head or hinder haunches.

And within from the bending down of the chine or back of the beast, there
hunge by chains of copper an everlasting lamp and incalcerate light, thorough
the which in this hinder part I saw an ancient sepulcher of the same stone,
with the perfect shape of a man naked, of all natural parts. Having upon his
head a crown of black stone as iet: his teeth eyes and nails siluered and
standing upon a sepulcher covered like an arc, of scale work, and other
exquisite lyneaments, poynting with a goulden scepter, and houlding forward his
arm to give direction to the former part.

On his left side he held a shield in fashion like to the keele of a ship, or
the bone of a horse head, whereupon was inscript in Hebrew, Attic, and Latin
letters, this sentence that is placed on the other side with the figure.

(...)
(...)
NVDVSESSEM, BESTIA NIME TEXISSET, QVAERE, ET INVE NIES. MESINITO.


At which uncouth and strange sight I stood not a little amassed and somewhat
doubtful what to imagine, turning my eyes to the contrary part, I saw in
like sort an other, as before burning light, and passing thorough betwixt the
side of the beast, and the therein enclosed part of the Obelisk, I came toward
the forepart of the Olyphant, where in like manner I found such an other
fashioned sepulcher as the former, with a stature or image standing thereupon
as the other, saving that it was a Queen, who lifting up her right arm with
her foremost finger, poynted toward that part behind her shoulders, and with
the other she held a little table f^st in her hand, in which was written in
three languages this epygram.

(...)
(...)
QVISQVIS ES, QVANTVNCVNQVE LIBVERIT HVIVS THESA VRI SVME AD MONEO. A VFER
CAPVT, CORPUS NE TANGITO.


This novelty worthy to be manifested, and secret riddle often to be read
over, was not known to me, so as I rested doubtful what the interpretation of
this sophisme should signify, not daring to try the conclusion. But stricken
with fear in this dark vnlightsome place, notwithstanding the dim burning
lamp, I was more desirous to behold and peruse that triumphant porch and gate
as more lawful to remain there than other-where. Whereupon without more ado,
I determined to leave this place until another time, that I might more quietly
at lesure look upon the same, and to prepare my self to behold the
wonderful work of the gate: and thus descending down I issued forth of the
vnbowelled monster, an invention past imagination, and an excessive labor and
bold attempt to euacuate such a hard substance over that other stones be, the
workmanship within as curious as that without. Lastly, returned clean down,
I beheld in the Porph^^e last along the sides notably insculpt and graven
these hierogliphies.

First, the horned scalpe of an ox, with two tools of husbandry fastened to
the horns.

An altar standing upon goats feet, with a burning fire aloft, on the
foreside whereof there was also an eye, and a vulture.

After that a basin and an ewre.

A spindle full of twind, an old vessel fashioned with the mouth stopped and
tied fast.

A sole and an eye in the bale thereof and two branches trauersed one of Olive,
an other of Palm tree.

An Anchor and a Goose.

An old lamp, and a hand holding of it.

An ore of ancient form with a fruitful Olive branch fastened to the handle.

Two grapling yrons or hooks.

A Dolphin and an Arc close shut.

These hierogliphies were passing well cut on this manner.



Which ancient manner of writing, as I take it, is thus to be understood.

Ex labor De^ naturae sacrifica liberaliter paulatim reduces animum Deo
subiectum. Firmam custodiam vitae tuae, miseri^ ordit^r guberna^do tenebit,
incolumemque seruabit.

Letting pass this most excellent rare, strange, and secret devise and work:
Let us return again to the prodigious horse, whose head was lean and little,
of a small proportion and yet fitting the body, which seemed continually
staring, fieerce and impatient, the flesh in his muscles trembling and quaking,
in such sort as that he seemed rather alive than a fained imitation, with this
Greek word in his face (...). There were also other great pieces and
fragments of diverse and sundry lineaments among the broken and decayed ruins,
which I looked not on, still running and sliding, time giving me only leave to
consider and peruse these four rare wonders, the porch or gate, the horse, the
Colose, and the Flephant.

Oh reverend arthists of times past, what despite has gotten the upper hand of
your cunning that the same is buried with you, and none left for us to inherit
in this age,

At length being come to this ancient porch, a work worthy the looking upon
maruellously composed by exquisite rules, and by art notably beautified, with
diverse and sundry sorts of cuttings, which did inflame a desire in me to
understand and find out the lineaments and practice of the architect. I
began after this manner, making a square from the two collumnes on either side
in a perfect sort, in the which I took the due proportion of the whole porch.

A tetragon figure A. B. C. D. divided by three lines straight, and three
overthwart equally distant one from an other will make sixeteene quadrats, then
add to the figure half as much more in like proportion, dividing the adiunct
you shall find four and twenty squares. This figure shall serve of credycels
to make the inlepturgie and brief demonstration that follows,

Draw then in the first figure A. B. C. D. two diagons, make also in the same
two lines, and straight down, and the other overthwart, which make four
quadrats mutually intersect,

Then in the void over the Isopleures make four mediane pricks, drawing
lines from one to another, and they will make the Rhombas.

When I had drawn this figure after this manner I straightway mused with my
self, what reason should move many of our woorkemen in these days either to
think well of themselves, or take the art of building in hand, not knowing
what it is? Making such gross faults in churches and great men's houses,
defaming art, and so ignorant, that they seem as though they could not
consider what nature her self does teach us in behoulding of her works.

And what part soever is not agreeable with his principle, is foul and
naught. For take away order and rule, and what thing can any man make, either
beautiful to the eye, or of commendable proportion and durable: then it must
needs follow, that the cause of such inconvenient errors does proceed from
ignorance, and has his beginning from illiterature. And this notwithstanding,
that although the perfection of this art does not vary, and fall from his
rectitude, yet the discreet and cunning architect to grace the object, to the
behoulders: may lawfullye either with adiection or deminution, beautify his
work, keeping whole the sollid part, with his universal composition.

I call that solid which is the body of the frame, which is the principal
intent, invention, fore setting down, and symmetrie, or dew proportion of the
building without any additions, rightlye examined, and perfectly composed,
which will manifest the skill of the workman, and the same afterward to
adorn and beautify, which adjuncts is an easy matter. Wherein is also to be
considered, the dew ordering and placing of every thing, and not to set a
crown upon the feet, but upon the head, and so oualing and denticulating and
other cuttings of sundry sorts in their several and best fitting places, the
chief invention and disposing whereof, rests in the rare and cunning
architect, but the labor and woorking thereof to the vulgar and common sort of
m^nnalists and servants to the architect, who if he will do well, he must in no
wise be subject to avarice.

And besides his skill he must be honest, no pratlerfull of words, but
courteous, gentle, bening, tractable, patient, merry and pleasant, full of new
devises, a curious searcher into all arts, and well advised in his proceeding,
least with rashness he commit a fault or absurdity in his work, and hereof
thus much shall suffice.

After that Poliphylus had at large made a demonstration of the dew proportion
of the Gate, he proceeds to describe the ornaments thereof, and their
excellency.
I Having been somewhat prolix and tedious in my former purpose, it may be
that it has bred some offense, to such as daily endeavor to occupy their
senses in the pleasant discourses of love. But it will also prove no whit
displeasant, if with a little patience, they restrain to glutte themselves
with the walowish sweetness of deceyueable delights, and try the taste of a
contrary vyand.

And for as much as the affections of men are naturally variable and different
one from an other: upon this occasion I may be excused. For although that
bread sometime denied and kept back from the hungry body, may cause a hard
conceit, yet when it is eftsoons offered unto him, the malice is forgotten,
and the gift very gratefully received.

Now having in some sort spoken of the right use of architecturie, and the
direct way and means by order and rule, to find out, the set down devise,
and solyde body or ground of the work, with facility that being found
out, the architector may use sundry deuisions in diverse perfections, not
unlike unto a cunning Musition, who having devised his plain ground in right
measure, with full strokes, afterward will proportion the same into deuisions,
by cromatycall and delyghtfull minims crotchets, and quauers, curiously
reporting upon his plain song. Even so after invention, the principal and
special rule, for an Architector is a quadrature, the same divided into smales
the harmony and sweet consent of the building, sets forth it self, and
the convenient adiunctes, agreeable to their principal.

In all which this porche was most excellent, both for the rare invention and
wonderful composition thereof, and the strange additions to beautify the
same, in such sort so exquysite, so fitly placed, and so curiously cut and
engraven, as the smallest part thereof could not be accused of any fault, but
the woorkman commended for the perfection of his skill.

First upon my right hand below, I beheld a stilypode or square stone, like
an altar under the bases of the columns, which having upon the upper part a
convenient and meet coronice, and accordingly imbowed, the bottom and lowest
part in like manner was fashioned, so as the quadrate and aforesaid stilypode,
was no brother then long, but a right quadrangule. Which altar (as I may term
it) sidelong about, wrought with leaves, hollowed under with a gulaterie, and
wrapped over with the same foliature and leaf work, hemming in the smooth face
or table of the Stilypode of shining white alliblaster, polished and plain,
the outward part of the quadrangule, equilaterally compassing about the same,
whereupon with a wonderful curiousnes was engraven a man near his
myddle-age, of a churlish and swarffie countenance, with an vnshaply beard,
thick, and turning into his chyn, by the towghnesse of the hard skin, and
uneasy growing out of the hair.

He sat upon a stone with an aporne of a Goats skin, the hinder parts
compassing his waste, and tied behind with a knotte, and the neck part, with
the hayrie side next him, hung down betwixt his legs. Before him in the
interstice of these gross and tumorus calfes, there was an anuill fastened upon
a knottie piece of a tree, whereupon he was fashoning of a bryganine or
habergion of burning metal, houlding up his Hammer, and as it were striking
upon his work.

And there before him was a most noble woman, having two fethered wings set
upon her delicate and tender shoulders, houlding her son an infant naked,
which sat with his little hyppes upon the large and goodly proportioned
thighs of the fair goddess his mother, and playing with her, as she held him
up, and putting his feet upon a stone, as it had been a little hill, with a
furnace in a hollow hole, wherein was an extreme whote burning fire.

This Lady had her fair tresses curiously dressed upon her broad and high
forhead, and in like sort compassing about with abundance, her head in so rare
and delicate a sort, that I marueyled why the Black smithes that were there
busy at their work, left not all to look still upon so beautiful an object.

There was also fast by, of like excellent woorkemanship, Mars.
a knight of fierce countenance, having upon him an armor of brass, with the
head of Medusa upon the curate or breast plate, and all the rest exquisitely
wrought and beautified, with a bandilier overthwart his broad and strong breast,
houlding with his brawny arm a half Pike, and raising up the point thereof,
and bearing upon his head a high crested helmet, the other arm shadowed and
not seen by reason of the former figure: There was also a young man in silk
clothing, behind the Smith, whom I could not perceive but from the breast
upward, over the declyning head of the forenamed Smith. This rehearsed
history, for the better and sweeter pleasing to the eye, the workman had
graced in this sort. The plain ground that was hollow and smoothe in every
cutting out of a limme or body, upon the table of the stylipode, was like unto
red coroll and shyning, which made such a reflection upon the naked bodies, and
their members betwixt them, and compassing them about, that they seemed like a
Carnation Rose color.

Upon the left side of the door in the like altar or stylipode upon the table
thereof, Mercury.
there was engraven a young man of seemly countenance, wherein appeared great
celerity: he sat upon a square seat adorned with an ancient manner of
caruing, having upon his leg a pair of half buskens, open from the calfe of
the leg to the ancle, from whence grew out on either ancle a wing* and to
whom the aforesaid gods with a heavenly shape her breasts touching together
and grown out round and firm without shaking, with her large flanks
conformable to the rest of her proportion before mentioned with a sweet
countenance offered young and tender son ready to be taught: the young man
bowing himself courteously down to the child, who stood before him upon his
pretty little feet, receiving from his tutor three arrows, which in such sort
were delivered as one might easelye conjecture and gather after what manner
they were to be used: the goddess his mother holding the empty quiver and bow
unbent, and at the feet of this instructor lay his vypered caduce.

There also I saw a squier or armor-bearer and a woman with a helmet upon her
head carrying a trophae or sign of victory upon a spear after this manner. An
ancient coate-armor hung up, Amor mi troua di tutt^ disa^mato.
and upon the top thereof or creast, a sphere upon two wings, and betwixt both
wings this note or saying, Nihil firmum, Nothing permanent: she was apparelled
in a thin garment carried abroad with the wind, and her breasts bare.

The two straight pillars of Porphyre of seven diameters upon either of the
aforenamed stilipodes and square aultars did stretch upward of a purnish or
tawnie color, the out sides shining clear and smoothly pollished, chamfered,
and chanelled with four and twenty rebatements or channels in every collumne
betwixt the nextruls or cordels.

Of these the third part was round, and the reason of their cutting in such
sort (that is two parts chamfered, and the third round) as I thought was this:
the frame or temple was dedicated to both sexes, that is, to a god and a
goddess, or to the mother and the son, or to the husband and the wife, or the
father and the daughter, and such like. And therefore the expert and cunning
workmen in elder time for the feminine sex, did use more chamfering and
channelling and double variety then for the masculine, because of their
slippery and unconstant nature.

The cause of so much rebating was to show that this was the temple of a
goddess, for chamfering does set forth the plytes of feminine apparel, upon
the which they placed a chapter with prependent folding, like unto plyted and
curled hair, and feminine dressing, and sometimes in stead of a chapter a
woman's head with crisped hair.

Thores and Cymbies be the outward parts of a chapter or head of a pillar
sticking out further than the pillar wrything and turning in, wrought with
leaves, the work is called of caruers and painters draperie and celerie.
These notable and fair collumnes aforesaid did rise up in length upon their
underset bases of brass with their Thores and Cymbies wrought with a foliature
of oak leaves and acornes winding about their chapters standing upon their
subject Plynths.

The Chapters of the same substance of their bases, with requisite meet and
convenient proportion aunswerable to the harmony of the whole work Such as
Callimachus the chief caruer to Calathus the son of Jupiter did never
perform or come near in the erected sepulcher of the Corinthian Virgin,
beautified with draperie of double Achau^his.

The Plynthes whereon the chapters did stand wrought with winding and turning
works, and in the midst, decoraled with a L^llie, the bowl garnished with
two rows of viii. leaves of Achanthus, after the Roman and Corinthian manner,
out of which leaves came little small stalks, closing together in the midst
of the boule, showing forth a fair and sweet composed Lyllie in the hollowing
of the Abac or Plynth, from the which the tender stalks did turn round
together, under the compass of the square Abac, much after the work that
Agrippa caused to be made, in the porche of his wonderful Pantheon.

Let us come now to the lymet and lowest part of the door, for entrance,
which was of a great large and hard stone, powdered with sundry sorted
spots, white, black, and of a clay color* and diverse other mixtures: upon
this stood the straight cheeks and sides of the door, with an interstitious
aspect, inwardly carved with as great cunning as the rest. Without any sign of
either hooks or hinges, below or above.

The arche of which door compassing like a half cyrcle, was wrought
curiouslye and imbowed, and as it were bound about with laces like beads of
brass, some round, and some like Eglantine berries of a reddish color,
hanging down after an ancient manner, and foulded and turned in among the
tender stalks.

The closing together and bracing of which hemicycle or arch, worthy of
admiration, of a rare and subtle devise, and exquisite polyture, did thus
object and present it self to my sight.

There I beheld in a hard and most black stone, an eagle displayed, and bearing
out of the bigness of a natural eagle, which had lovingly seized and taken in
her foot a sweet babe in the swaddling cloutes, nicely, carefully, and gently
houlding the same, The Eagle of Jupiter that carried Ganimed.
least that her strong, sharp, and hooking pounces, should by any means
pierce thorough the tender skin of the young infant.

Her feet were fixed about the rising up chist of the child, whom she had
made bare from the navel upward and downward* so as the naked hippes might
be seen betwixt the fethered thighs of the Eagle. This little infant and most
beautiful babe (worthy and meet for him that he was seized for) by his
countenance showed as if he had been afraid of his fortune.

And thus lying in the foot of the Eagle, The bones next the qack in the wing,
which in a hawke excels all proportions of other birds.
he stretched both his arms abroad, and with his little fat hands took f^st
hold upon the remigiall bones of the Eagles pinions displayed, as aforesaid.
And clasping his swelling prittie legs and feet, about her subvaging
spreding train, which lay behind the rising up of the arche.

This little child was cut of the white vain of Achates or Onix, and the
Eagle of the other vain of the same stone called Sardins which is of black
color of some called Cordeoll, joining both in one self same stone. Achates
is a precious stone wherein a^e represented the figures of the nine Muses, of
Venus and such like beautiful personages.
Whereat I stood musing and commending to my self the ingenious and apt
invention of the Arthist, in the use of such a stone, which of his own nature
to contrary proportions affoorded contrary colors, and in such sort as by
the raising up of her small plummage above her fear, her beack half open, and
her tongue appearing in the midst thereof, as if she had been resolutely
intended, and eagerly bent to have gorged her self upon it.

The hemicicle or arche rising rownd from the upper part of the straight cheek
of the entrance, according to the thicknes thereof was disposed into losenges
or squares, wherein were carved Roses, their leaves and branches hanging in a
curious and delightful order to behoulde, over the entry of the Gate.

In the two Triangles occasioned by the bow of the arche there were two fair
Nymphs of excellent proportions and shapes, their clothes which covered their
Virgins bodies, giving place for their legs, breasts* and arms to be bare,
their hair loose and flying abroad, and toward the brace, and knitting
together of the arche above, they held a victorious trophae.

The ground of which tryangle was of black stone, the better to show the
perfection and truth of the metals in the trophaes, and the be^utifull bodies
of the delycate virgins.

Above these mentioned parts, was the Zophor, in the myddest whereof, Zophor
is a border wherein diverse things are graven.
I beheld a table of goulde, wherein was this Epigram in Cappitall Creek
Letters of Silver. In this sort reporting.

(...) Diis vene risilio amori, Ba^chus, and Ceres de propriis, S. substantiis
matri pi^ntissimae. Either sides of which table was reteind and held up with
two babes or wynged spyrits of perfect and liuelye shapes, as if they had been
celestial bodies, upon a ground of Iasul or blew Saphyrs to grace the metals
and imagerie.

Upon the face of the Zophor extending and stretching along over the columns
of porphir stone were engraven certain spoils or curates, gorgets of mayle,
Vanubraces, gauntlets, shields, Targets, head-peeces, maces, battle Axes,
spurs, quiuers, arrows, darts, broken lances, curtilaxes, and other
ancient instruments of war. As well ayerie and marine, as for the field
singularly well cut, and manifesting to the behoulder both victories, force,
and triumphs, after a mortal effusion of blood.

Upon this in order stood the Coromie, wrought with such lyneaments as decently
concurred, and were aunswerable to the excellency of the rest of the work:
for otherwise, as in a man's body one quality being contrary to another,
sickness does follow, the humors oppressing one an other in abundance: so in
building if the adjuncts be unaptly disposed, and indecently distributed there
will fall out a foul deformity.

For a frame and building grows weak and unseemly wherein cannot be found a
sweet harmony and commodulate order and concent.

Which thing many modern idiots do confound, being ignorant in Local
distribution. For a cunning crafts master will in his work show an allusion
or resemblance to a human shape and proportion beautifully adorned in
apparel.

Above over the coronice, by an inuers gradation there were four Quadratures
or square Tables, two right over the chanifered columns, and channelled
pyllars, and two within them. Anagliph is smothly chased out with the hammer
and not carved.
In an other division, betwixt the said two contract and inward tables, there
stood a Nymph in her Anagliph most rare and excellent of Orichalke or yealow
Latin, houlding in either hand a Torche, one of them reuersed and turned
downward, beieng extinct and put out, and the other burning toward the
Sun. The burning Torche in her right hand, and the extincte in her left.

In the quadriture upon the right side, I beheld the jealous Climene, with
her hear trans-formed into an herb called Venus maid, Clymene the mother of
Phaeton.
or Lady herb, and Phoebus in a cruel indignation and wrathful displeasure,
she following of him weeping, from whom he fled hastening on forward his swift
horses, as one that flies from his mortal and deadly enemy.

Upon the Table over the Columns on the left side in a curious and rare
unusual caruing, there was the resemblance historyed of the uncomfortable and
still mourning Cyparissus, holding up his hands and arms toward the Sun,
and making his moan to Apollo for the wounded C^rua.

In the third Table next the last mentioned, in a work answerable to the
presedent and former, I beheld Lenco^hoe, wickedly slain of her own Father,
changing and transforming her fair young and tender flesh into smooth bark,
shaking leaves and bending wandes.

In the fourth Table, was represented the discontented and displeasant Daphus,
at the burning desires of the curled headed Delius, rendering up by little and
little her virgins body undefiled, toward the hot heavens, being
metamorphised most pyttifully into a green Laurel.

Now successively in order over the afore-mencioned Tables and quadratures in
the Zophor, wherein these Histories were represented in shapes, there was
extended and laid over a Coronice denticuled and oualld with interset
stralets, betwixt the iates of the Oualls, and leaf work and the Imbrices
with the rest that appertains to the setting forth of the same (past my skill
to report) without any fault or defect: and lastly, the syme was adorned here
and there with the leaves of Aehanthus.

And to return to the view of the whole frame, in the disposing thereof as
afores^^del, A periment in corrupt L^glu^.
the Coronices by a perpendycular line were corrospondent and agreeing with the
faling out of the whole work, the Stilliced or Perimeter, or utter part of the
uppermost Coronice only except.

It follows to show and speak of the Table or inward part of the Trigonall:
within the which, according as the extremes of the same triangle would permit,
there was presented to my view, a Crown or Garland of diverse leaves, fruits,
and stalks, foulded up and wrapte together of a green stone knitte in four
parts, the byndings of the self same stalks, holden by two Mermaydes, the
upper parts of them of a humayne shape, and that under the navel like a
Fyshe, their one hand up, and the other below on the Garlande, their scalye
tails extending to the nethermost corners of the Triangle, upon the top of
the Coronice having at their extreme parts their fishy wings or finnes.
Their faces like vyrgines, their tresses of hair, partly curling up upon
their forheades, some turned about their heads and rolled up, some depending
down upon their temples, and crisping and inanulating by their ears. From
betwixt their shoulders grew their wings like Hapies, stretching down and
extending to the foulding and turnings of their tails, upon their monstrous
flanks grew out their fynnes to swim withal, their beginning, their fishen
and scalye substance, and from thence so continuing their nether parts
downewarde.

Within the said Garland I beheld a rough Milche Got, Jupiter.
which a little child did suck, sitting under her side upon his fleshie young
legs one straight forth, and the other retract and bowed under him. With
his little arms houlding himself by the hearie and rough locks, his
countenance and eyes upon the byg and full vdder thus sucking. And a certain
Nimphe, as it were speaking words, and giving voices of contentment, to the
Goat and bowing down her self with the left hand, held up one of the feet,
and with the right hand putting the pappe to the smacking kissings of the
sucking infant, Jupiters nu^sse.
and under her were these letters Amalthea.

An other Nimphe stood against the head of the Goat, with one arm carefully
compassing the neck, and with the other she held her by the horn.

In the midst stood the third Nimphe with green bowgh leaves in one hand,
The daughter of Melissus and Jupiters nu^sse.
and in the other an oulde fashioned drinking bowl, more long then broad, like
a boat by a little handle. Under her feet was written, Melissa.

Betwixt one and other of the three fore specified Nymphs, there were two
other having Cymbals in their hands, as it were playing and dancing, every
one apparrelled according to the perfection of their beauties, with an
artificial performance of workmanship in the undertaken proportions, that they
rather seemed the substances themselves then a Lythoglyph an Imagerie, either
by Policletus, Anaglipts be cunning carues and Grauers.
Phidias or Lysippus, neither did Anaglipts to Artemisia the Queen of Caria,
Scaphes, Briapis, Timotheus, Leocaris and Theon, come any thing near for the
workmanship hereof seemed to excel the cunning of any human Lapicid^rie,
caruer, grauer, or cutter whatsoever.

Above this foresaid Triangle, and under the upper coronice in a smooth plain
were these two Attic words in capital Letters, (...).

This conspitious porche and gate, most woorthye to be beheld, thus stood of
a marvelous composition, excellently disposed. If I had not explaned the
commodulation and harmony hereof particularly, I might have been blamed for
my prolixitie and tediousness, and for wanting of fit words in the
description. And thus for this time hereof so much.



It must needs follow, that all the rest of the aforesaid court on every side
was beautiful to behold, and of stately workmanship by that which still
remained standing: as in the inward part the naues and columns carrieng and
bearing up an immesurable and monstrous weight, and Corinthies of a lesser
sort, a divine and unknown work abounding in variety of perfections as
proportion required and needfullnes did desire to bear up the burden that was
laid upon them. Their ornature and decking with works, and devises
imitating the apparreling of princely bodies indewed as it were with an
artificial reason. For as to a large big and corpulent body strong legs, and
broad feet, are necessary to bear and carry the same: so in a modulate and
well composed building, to sustain great weights, Naues are appointed, and for
beauty, columns, Corinthies, and slender Ionices, are set upon them. And this
whole work even after such sort as was requisite for the harmony thereof,
even so it stood in an approved excellency.

With diversity of colors, sweetlye set, and aptlye disposed, the reflection
of one beautifing an other, and all together making a gracious object. Of
Porphyrit, Ophit, Numidian, Alabastrit, Pyropecil, Lacedemonian green, and
white marble, diversely watered, and of Andraeme with white spots, and many
others of strange sorts and diverse commixtures.

I found one rare form of a base, in fashion like a cushion upon the plynthe
whereof stood two trochils or torrules, with an interposition of Hypotracles or
shaftes, and Astragals, with a supreme Thore.

Diverse places were hidden and covered over with winding, felted and spreding
Iuie, full of black berries, and green soft leaves hear and there growing up,
and hindering the inward object of the ancient work, with other Murall and
wall weeds coming out of the chinkes and clifts, as the bell flowered
Foxgloue. Venus Nauill, and Erogennet, of some called Love, to whom he is
grateful, bushing down again toward the ground, in other ryft^ grew
Mowse-eare, Polypodie, Adientus or Lady hair, the iagged and curled Cithracus
the knotted Lunarie minor, Prickmaddam, Polytricon, or goulden locks and such
like, which use to grow in decayed buildings, and old stone wales, so that
many worthy pieces were invested and hydden from me, with such like weeds
and green Olyues the garnishers of ruins.

There was in diverse places inestimable huge down falls of many columns or
rather confused piles of broken stones, and vnshapely Culpins mounting up from
the earth.

Among which down fallen pieces I might see the remaynders of diverse shapes of
men of sundry sorts, many naked, other some having their members covered with
folded and plited induments, fast sticking to their naked proportions. Some
standing upon the left foot, others upon the right in a straight sort, with
their heads perpendicularly, ever the center betwixt their heels, and some
looking sidewaies in height, four Cubits of six foot.

Others standing upon both feet, some deal distant one from an other, and
each one in a majesty sitting in their thrones, and the rest with a rare and
modest grace in their best pleasing and appointed seats.

There also I beheld innumerable trophaes, spoils of armor, and infinite
ornaments, with the heads of Oxen and Horses of convenient bigness, and about
their horns part of their garlands of leaves, fruits, twigges, branches and
flowers, and some about part of their bodies, with little children riding upon
them and playing, in so perfect a sort and wished order, as the most skillful
workemaister full of variety, labor, study, and industry, could devise and
perform. With what care and pain his abounding skill did plainly manifest,
and with what pleasure the effect of his purpose did no whit obscure.

And with such an Eurithmie or apt proportioning of members, he did show the
subtlety of the art of Lapicid^rie, as if the substances had not been of the
hardest marble howsoever, but of soft chaulke or Potters claie, and with what
conclansture the stones were couched, and by what Artillery, rule and measure
they were composed and set, it was wonderful to imagine.

This was the true Art enucleating and discovering the ignorance that we work
in, our detestable presumption, and public condemned errors.

This is that clear and perfect light, which sweetly and with our
unconstrained wills draws our dim sighted eyes to contemplate and behold
the same. For none (unless it be he which of set purpose refuses to behold it)
but his eyes would dasell with continual desire to see it.

This is that which accuses horrible covetousness, the deuourer and consumer of
all virtue, a still biting and everlasting greedy worm in his heart that is
captiuated and subject to the same, the accursed let and hinderance to well
disposed wits, the mortal enemy to good Architecturie, and the execrable Idol
of this present world, so unworthily worshipped, and damnably adored. Thou
deadly poison to him that is infected with thee, what sumptuous works are
overthrown, and by thee interdicted.

Herewithall I being ravished and taken up with unspeakable delight and
pleasure in the regarding of this rare and ancient vener^ble monument of such
a grace and admiration, that I knew not to which part to turn me first, here
and there willingly looking about, and thereat amazed, considerately perusing
over what the engraven histories presented unto me, as I removed my self from
place to place, with an unknown delight, and vnreportable pleasure to behold
the same, gaping at them with open mouth, forgetting my self like a young
child, never satisfying my greedy eyes and insatiable desire to look and
ouerlooke the exquisite perfection of the ancient work, I was spoiled and
robbed of all thoughts whatsoever, the remembrance of my desired Polia, often
accurring, only excepted. But with an extreme and deep set sigh, let us
leave her a little, and return again to our continued purpose.

Poliphilus entering a little way in at the described porch, with great delight
he there also beheld how it was garnished and adorned, and after as he was
coming out he met with a monstrous dragon whereat he was extreemlie afraid,
and compelled to run back into the building, and at last getting forth with
much ado he came into a fertile place.
A Great and commendable thing with out dout it should be, truly to discribe,
and from point to point, to set down the incredible work, and vnimagined
composition, of so vast a frame, and ^^ge bigness, of so great a buildinge with
the excellency of the entrance, in a conspicuous and sightly place,
conveniently situated, where of my delight to behold them, did exced the
greatness of my admiration breeding in me such a conceit so as I persuaded my
self that Jupiter durst not undertake the like to the rest of the gods, and
certainly believing that no workman, or human wit could compase so huge a
frame, express so notable conceits, or imagine and invent so rare devises and
so gorgiouslie to garnishe them, in so singular an order and simmetry, to
dispose them, and without supplement or correction perfictlye to finishe them.
A rare and insolent pride in a building. Upon which occasion I was in some
doubt and that not a little that if the natural historiographer had seen or
heard of this, he would have scorned that of Egypt, and the cunning and
industry of the woorking thereof, for that herein the sundry and diverse
works effected by many several wookmen seemed in the perfections, of their
dew proportions as if they had been performed by one himself.

He would also as lightly have regarded the skillfull cunning of Sat^rus the
architect and other of fame, especially Simandrus, for the work of Memnon,
who cut the three statures of Jupiter in one stone, the feet being above seven
cubits long.

To this the representation of the magnanimous Semiramis carved out of the
mountain Bagistanus must give place.

And letting pass to speak of the insolent greatness of the Piramides of
Meniphis, those writers a^ large would have bente them selves to this
description. And leaving vnreported, the famous Theaters, Amphitheaters,
Bathes, and building sacred and profane, carriages, of waters, and colosses,
and that of Appolline translated by Lioculus. Or the temple dedicated to
Jupiter by Claudius Caser. Or that of Lisippus at Tarentum, or the wonder of
Carelindius at the Rhodes, and of Xenodorus in France, and in Room. And the
colosse of Serapus nine cubits long of Smarage or Emerauldes, or the famous
Labyrinth of Egypt. Or the representacion of Hercules at Tire.

They would have accommodated their sweet styles, to the commendation heard
of as above all other most excellent, although the Obelist of Jupiter, compact
of four ^rustes, forty Cubits high, four Cubits broad, and two Cubits
thick, in his deluber within the temple does manifest it self to be a
wonderful miracle.

Insatiable thus casting mine eyes, and turning up my countenance now this way
and now that way, toward this huge and mighty frame, I thus thought with my
self. If the fragments and remaynder of so sacred an antiquity, and if the
greet and dust of such a decayed monument, can breed a stupifaction in the
admiration thereof, and cause so great delyght to behold the same, what would
it have done in chiefest pride.

After this my discourseing, reason persuaded me to suppose, that with in
might be the Altar of Venus for her mystical Sacrifices and sacred flames,
or the representation of her Godhead, or the Aphrodise of her self and her
little Archer, and therefore with a devout reverence, my right foot being
set upon the hallowed lymit of the door, A (...) of slow flight and long
^^uing* in old monuments by Angu^s dedicated to ^^turne.
there came toward me flying a white Horix.

But I sodainlye with out any further regard or curious forcaste which my
searching eyes went in as the spacious and lightsome entry g^ue me leave,
representing unto me such sights as merit; and are Condign of everlasting
remembrance, in either sides stilled with smoth poollishede Marble, in the
middle part where of there was impacte a round table, inclanstrede and
compassede about with a green Stonne very precious and accordingly
asoscociated with curious workmanship. And the opposite of very black stone,
scorning and contemning the hardness of iron, and clear and shining as a
mirror. By means whereof as I passed by (unawares) I grew afraid at my own
shadow, nevertheless I was by an by comforted with unexpected delight, for the
place that occasioned my disquiet now offered unto me the ground of all
sciences, historied in a visible manifest and expert painting.

And on either sides under the same beautiful and most noble tables, there
were placed all a long seats of stone. The pauement neat and clean from dust,
being made of Ostracus.

And so in like manner the coloure^ (...) seeling was pure and void of Spiders
and Cobwebs, Ostracus be pounded shells mixed with lime, whereof a plaster is
made to floor withal.
(...) on of the continual fresh air both entering in and going (...)

The seeling of the walls as aforesaid* mounted up to the bendyng of the
Arche from the Chapters which stood upon their strict and upright Antes even to
the uttermost end of the entry, which was by my perspectiue judgment twelve
paces.

From which perpolyte ligature and fastened joints, the roof of the entry all
the length thereof, did march with a hemicircubate flexure, answerable to the
Antes and straight sides of the before described porche full of varieties and
exquisite representments, rarely engraven and of little water monsters, as in
the water it self in their right and well disposed plemmy rules, half men and
women, with their fishie tails: some embracing one an other with a mutual
consent, some playing upon Flutes, and others upon other fantastical
instruments.

Some sitting in strange fashioned Charriots, and drawn in them by swift
Dolphines, crowned and adorned with water Lillies suitable to the furniture of
the garnished seats: some with diverse dishes and vessels replenished with many
sorts of fruits. Others with plentiful copies, some coupled together with
bands, and others wrestling as they did, riding upon Hipposatamies, and other
sundry and vn^oth beasts, with a Ch^oneall defense.

Some wantonly disposed, others to variety of sportes and feasts, with lively
endeavors and quick motions, most singularlye well set forth, and filling all
over the aforesaid arched suffite.

Along under the bending rise of the entry, I beheld a singular woorkemanship
of sundry representments and counterfeits, in an excellent Thessellature,
bright shining like goulde, and of diverse other colors, with a border two
foot broad, compassing about the turning cover of the roof, both under and
above, and dividing them from the work, upon the plain sides, of so perfect
and (...) colors, as if they had been ^ew set, with a natural leaf work
of an emera^ld green* upon a punice or tawnie ground, with Flowers of
C^ane^^ and Phaenicees adulterated with curious knotte^ (...) windings, and in
the contained space of the aforesaid (...) saw this ancient Hystorye painted.

Europa a young Lady, swimming into Creete upon a prestigious Bull. And the
edict of King Ag^nor to his Sons Cadus, (...), and (...) to (...) defloured
(...), which thing they could not do, but after that they had valiauntly killed
the skalie fierce Dragon that kept the fair Fountain* and consulted with
Appollo, they determined with their followers, and agreed to build a City,
where the be^lowing Heyffer should appoynte, whereupon that country, even to
this day carried the name of the bellowing of a Cow Eu^rope. Cadmus builte
Athens. The other brother ^^micia. The third Cilicia.

This work and m^saicall painting, was rightlye placed in order, as the
beginning and end of the history required with fictions in their natural
colors, their actions and degrees rightlye expressed

On the contrary side, I beheld in the same manner the wanton and lascivious
Pasiphae burning in infamous lust, lying in a Machine or frame of wood, and the
Bull leaping upon that he knew not.

After that the monstrous mynotaure with his vglye shape shut and enclosed in
the intricate Labyrinth. And after that the imprisoned Dedalus, artificially
making of wings for himself, and his young son Icarus, who vnhappylye not
observing his Fathers rule fell down headlong into the deep see, leaving unto
the same se^s his name, after his drowning. And his discreet father, being
safe according to his vow, hanging up his wings in the temple of Appollo.

Upon the which I stood with open mouth attentively gazing with my eyes, and
ravished in mind with the beauty of the history, so well disposed, so
perfectly ordered* so artificiallye painted and curiously expressed, whole and
sound, without any sign of decay, the strength of the glutinous substance,
which joined and held the Thessalature or ^neckers, together was such and so
perfect. For therein the workman had taken great pain and showed a rare
cunning.

And thus foot by foot I went forward bowldly, examining and behoulding what
direction and art of painting he had observed with a pensiled distribution to
make whole proportions in a smoothe and flat plain. Some lines drawing near
to my object, and some seeming as they had been a far of hardely to be
de^erned, and yet both of a like neerenesse. And the same again which was
hardly to be seen, to offer it self more and more, to the judgment of the
eye, with exquisite parergie and shadowing.

Waters, Fountains, Mou^^^ines, Hills, woods, and beasts, in their natural
colors, and distante one from an other, with opposite light. And in apparel
the ply^hts and fouldes so cunninglye perfected and shaddowed that as well in
that as in all the rest, the art did seem to envy nature it self, and that
not a little whereat I greatly woondered.

After this manner I came to the further end, where the beautiful hystories
finished, and beyond the same more inward the darkness was such as I durst not
enter, and coming back again I heard among the ruins a continuing noise like
the cracking of bones or their rattling together, whereat I stood still
forgetting my fore conceived delight being interrupted therewith from the
sweetness of the objects. At length I might hear a rustling as if a dead Ox
had been dragged upon the ground, the noise still approaching and coming
nearer and nearer the poarch that I was to pass out at, where I heard a great
hissing of a huge Serpent: the sudden fear I was in, made me past crying out
for help, neither did I see how to escape, but by running into the dark and
obscure vastues which before I was afraid to enter into.

Oh unhappy wretch oppressed with aduers and sad fortune, I saw in the entry
of the door coming toward me, no hurtful Lion crowching to Androdus, but
a fearful and horrible Dragon shaking her trisulked and three parted tongue
against me, The Dragon is that A^add^^and Apolion, the enemy to mankind.
grating her teeth, and making a skritching or critching noise, her squamy and
scaly hide trailing upon the flowerd pauement, clapping her wings upon her
wrimpled back, with a long tail folding and crinckling like and Eele and
never resting. O hi me, the sight was sufficient to have affrighted Mars
himself in the assurednes of warlike Armor, or to have made tremble the
strong and mighty Hercules, for all his molorchied and clubbed b^t. And to
call Theseus back from his begun imprese and bold attempt, and to terrify
the Giant Typhon, and to make the proudest and stoutest heart whatsoever to
quail and stoop. I wished my self the swiftnes of Atalanta, being but young
and unarmed, no way able to encounter with such a poisonable force, and
perceiving his black infectious breath smoking out at his mouth. Being past
all hope to slip by him, I devoutly cried for divine help. And sodeinly
turning my back, as fast as I could run, I conueighed my fearful body by
the help of my swift pacing feet, into the inward part of the dark places,
penetrating through diverse crooked torments; ambagious passages and unknown
ways.

So that I thought to be in the inextricable frame of the prudent Dedalus, The
dark places is ignoran^e, and the w^se (...) o^ this word which is nothing el^
(...).
or of Pors^^a, so full of ways and winding turnings, one entering into
another, to deceive the intent of the goer out, or in the romthie den of the
horrible Cyclops, or the hollow Cave of the theeuish Carus. In such sort, that
although my eyes were somewhat well acquainted with the darkness, yet I could
see just nothing. But was glad to stretche out my arms form before my face,
groping about me (like one that played blind Sym) least I should run my
face against some pyllers, and feeling with my feet softlye before I did rest
upon them for fear I should tumble down into some vaulte under this mighty
Pyramides.

And looking back, whether this fearful Dragon did still follow me or no,
the light was clean gone. And I remaining in a dark place, full of sundry
turnings and crossing passages, in a greater terror and more deadly heaviness
of mind then Mercury. Making himself Ibis and Apollo, Threicia, Diana, into
the little byrd Cholomene. And Pan into two shapes. I and more afraid then
ever was Oedipus, Cyrus, Craesus, and Perseus. And more trembling then the
thief Thracilius in his bears skin. Cosby for killing the L. Browgh.
In sorrow more abounding then poor Pscyphes. And in more laboursome dangers
then Lucius Apuleus, when he heard the thieves consulting to knock him on the
head and kill him.

Oppressed and laden with all these aforenamed frightes and terrors. I began to
imagine that the Dragon was flying about my head, and with the noise of her
scritching teeth and tearing claws to take hold upon me with her devouring
jaws: my heart giving me to understand, that the carniuorus Woolfe which I
drempt of, was a presage of this my last doubted end. And thus running up and
down like a little poor Pismeere or Aunte, when the Partrich is scratching
upon their hillocks and picking of them up. With my watchful and attentive
ears, listening if the horrible monster with her slimie and filthy poison and
stinking savor were drawing toward me. And fearing whatsoever came first
into my thought.

Finding my self unarmed, void of all help, in this mortal danger, and
miserable perplexity, although that death is naturally bitter and hated, yet
notwithstanding at that time, I did graciously esteem of it, which me
thought I could suffer willinglye, but that will was insufficient: hope still
looking, and persuading me of an uncertain, fearful, and unquiet life.

Alas how my soul and body were loathe to leave one an another, the sorrow
whereof made me unwilling to intertaine so cruel an enemy as death: whereupon I
plucking up a good heart, thought thus.

Shall the greatness of my love so sweetly set on fire, now decaie, frustrated
of any effect, for if at this present I had been but presented with a sight
thereof, I could have been yet the better satisfied.

But yet forthwith returning to the inward impression of my sweetest object,
still dwelling in the secret of my heart, I fell into blobering tears, for the
loss of two so worthy jewels. That was Polia and my precious life.
Continually calling upon her with deep sighs and singultiue sobbings,
sounding in the thick air, incloystered under the huge arches and secret
dark covering, saying thus to my self.

If I die here thus miserably, sorrowfully, and uncomfortably, all alone who
shall be a worthy successor of so precious a gemme? and' who shall be the
possesor of such a treasure of so inestimable valor? And what fair heaven
shall show so clear a light? Oh most wretched Poliphilus, whether do thou go
unfortunate? whether do thou hasten thy steps? hopest thou ever to behold
again any desi^ed good? Behold all thy grations conceits and pleasant high
delyghtes builded in thy apprehensiue thoughts, through the sweetenes of love,
are deadly shaken, and abruptly precipitated and cast down? Look how thy
lofty Amorous cogitations are shaken in pieces and anihilated. Ah me what
injurious lot and maleuolent constellations, have so perniciously driven, and
deceitfully allured thee into this miserable obscure darkness? and now have
despitefully led thee in a heap of mortal fears, and drowning in a deep
sea of unspeakable sorrows. To the unmerciful devouring and sudden gobbling
up of so filthy a monster, and to be rotted and disgested in the stinking
intrailes of so foul a beast, and to be cast out in so vile a place. Oh
lamentable and unaccustomed death. O miserable end of my desired life. Where
are my eyes? what be they barreine? Is their humor gone? Are there no more
tears left to fall trickeling down my blubbered cheeks? Well then I perceive
that death is at my back, who did ever see such a change of fortune? Behold
unhappy and wayward death, and the last hour, and accursed minute thereof at
h^nde, in this dark some shade, where my body and flesh is appointed to be a
food for so foul a beast. What fury? what cruelty? what misery more
monstrous can a mortal creature suffer. That sweet and pleasant light should
be rest from them that be alive, and the earth denied to them that are dead.
What hoggish calamity, and deformed mishap, so grievously and untimely shall
abandon from me my most desired and flourishing Polia, Farewell the merror of
all virtue, and true perfection of beauty, farewell.

And thus beyond all measure tossed and tumbled in such and so great afflictions
my very soul was vexed within me, striving to be set at liberty from my
unfortunate and feeble body, passing up and down I knew not where. My legs
weak, feeble, and fowltering under me, my spirits languishing, and my senses
in a manner gone from me. Saving that I called devoutly upon the omnipotent
God to have pity upon me, and that some good Angel might be appointed to
conduct me out. And with that behold I discovered a little light. To the
which, how gladly I hasted, let every one judge what he would do in such a
perplexity.

I saw an everlasting Lamp, burning before an Altar that was five foot high,
and ten foot broad, with the images of gold standing thereupon, which I
could not very perfectly behold, notwithstanding the burning Lamp, the
grossenes of the air was such and so great an enemy to the light.

And always with attentive ears I diligently harkened, as not yet rid of
fear, and somewhat I saw, the dim images and the large foundations, and
fearful vaultes, and subterraneal buttresses or vpholders and strengthes,
hear and there in infinite places distributed, and many huge and mighty
pillars, some foure-square, some six square, some eight square, aptly set
under and approportioned to sustain the vast bigness of the weighty Pyramides.

There I having small delight to make any long stay, I intended to take an
unknown way further in, which my undertaken course, I espied a light which so
long I had wished for, coming in at a little wicket as small as I could see.

Oh with what joy, and with what a glad heart, I beheld it, and with what
cheer did I hasten my steps toward it. Perchance faster then Canistius or
Philonides my unbridled gladness and extreme desire to come near thereunto
was such, Two blockish lafie lubbers, one of Melite an other of Athens, that
thought it a great labor to eat their own meat.
that I revoked and haled back again the divorce of my discontented and
irksome life, successively comforting my perturbed mind and quailed heart.
Somewhat refreshing and reassuring my self: filling up again my euacuated and
empty heart, and replenishing the same with his old cogitations.

Now I settled my self more toward my lovely Polia, and bound my affections
more surely to her. Being persuaded and firmly opinionated, that this sight
was a trau^ce in love, for showing that I should dye and lose my love. Oh how
extremely did it vex me. Neither did it refuse or make resistance to any
sharp and new assault of love, which in my stricken and sore wounded heart
would lie festering and feeding of himself.

And by this time, all lets and hynderances past over, a spacious and large
going out was offered unto me. Then by means of the clear light I was somewhat
comforted, and reassuming and gathering together again my wandering thoughts,
and restoring my prostrate force, my suspected and unknown voyage, made me to
set out in running: so as the nearer I came to the door, the bigger me
thought it grew. To the which at last by Gods will, Polia in my amorous breast
bearing a predominante vigor, I came, not ceasing to continue forward my fast
course: my hands which before I groping held forth, to keep me from running
against pyllers, I now used like a pair of Ores to hasten me away.

Thus traueling on safely, I came into a very pleasant sight and counttie,
in the which I was not yet without fear, and not daring to rest me down, the
impression of the horrible monster was so fresh in my mind, that me thought I
still heard him behind me, and therefore I could not so easily forget him. But
was rayther persuaded to go on further: first because the country was so
fertile, pleasant and beautiful: Secondly, that I might get far enough off
from the place wherein I was so lately affrighted. That then I sitting down,
might rest my self, and set my mind together again, and forget this
conceived dread, at my entrance in of the gate, the apparation of the white
Sorix graciously coming again into my reteyning memory, an exhortatorie
prouacation, and good occasion to animate and comfort me, because that to
Augures it was a grateful and propitious sign of good luck.

At last I was resolutely persuaded to commit my self to the benignity of my
good fortune, which some time might be unto me an officious and bountiful
handmaide, of prosperous events. And therewithal pricked forward and provoked
to continue on my walk, Capillata ministra.
whether my weary and feeble legs would conduct and bring me. And yet I was
(as in good sort became me) somewhat doubtful to enter into such a place,
(being unknown unto me) where perchance it was not lawful for me to come.
Albeit that I was heerin more audacious and bold a great deal, then in the
enteraunce of the gorgeous Porche. And thus my breast fast beating, and my mind
perplexed, I said to my self.

There is no cause that should lead me to turn back again, all things
considered: is not this a safer place, and more fit to sly from danger? Is it
not better to hassard a man's life in the light and clear Sun, then to dye
and sterue in a blind darkness? and so resolved not to turn back any
more: with a deep fet sighe, I called into memory, the pleasure and delight
that my senses had well near lost: for the work which I had seen was full
of marvelous woonders, and thinking by what mean I was deprived of them, I
called to remembrance the brazen Lions, in Salomons Temple, which were of such
fierce countenances, as that they would bring men to forgetfulness.

And into such an estate I was afraid that the Dragon had brought me, that so
excellent and marvelous works, and rare inventions, in a manner impossible
for any human creature to perform, worthy to be manifested, and by my self
diligently perused, should now be s^ed out of my sucking remembrance, so as I
should not be able to make a true report of them: but therein I contraried my
self: neither did I find that I was (...) a Lithargie passion: But that I
verrie well remembered and held without any defaulte in order and proportion
whatsoever I had seen and beheld. And that the monstrous and cruel beast was
a verrie liuelye substance, and no fiction, the like of any mortal man sildome
seen, no not of Regulus. The very remembrance whereof, made my hair stand
right up, and forthwith moved me to mend my pace.

Afterward returning to my self, I thought thus. Here without all doubt (for
so I imagined by reason of the glorious bounty of the beautiful soil) is no
habitation but for civil people, or rather for Angles and noble personages,
and a place for Nymphs to frequent unto, or for the Gods and Ancients,
Monarchs and princes, in so much as my perswasiue desire did provoke forward
my restrained pace, causing a perceuerance in my late begun journey. And thus
as one captiuated and subject to the sharp spur of insatiable desire, I
purposed to houlde on whether the fayrenesse of my fortune should conduct me,
as yet but indifferent and rather languishing.

Now come to behoulde a fair and plentiful country, fruitful fields, and
fertile grounds, I did exceedinglye commend the desire that moved me first
to enter into them. But especially to give thanks to him that had brought me
out from the fearful place, which now I little regarded being far enough off
from it.

Poliphilus shows the commodiousnesse of the country where-into he was
come, in his travailing within the same, he came unto a goodly Fountain, and
how he saw five fair Damsels coming toward him, and their woondering at
his coming thither, assuring him from hurt, and inuiting him to be a
partaker of their solaces.
THus gotten forth of this fearful hell; dark hollownesse, and dreadful
place (although it were a sacred Aphrodise and reverend Temple:) and being
come into a desired light, louelye air, and pleasant country, full of
contentment: I turned my self about to look back at the place from whence I
came out, and where my life, my life that latelye I esteemed so lightly, was
so greatly perplexed and daungered, where I beheld a mountain unnatural,
with a moderate assention and steep rising, ouer-growne and shaddowed with
green and tender leaves of mastie Oaks, Beeches, Wainescot Oaks, Holmes,
Cerries Aesculies, Cork trees, Yew trees, Holly or Huluer, or Acilon.

And toward the plain, it was covered with Hamberries, Hasels, Fylbirds,
prune, print, or priuet, and whitened with the flowers thereof: by coulered
Xeapie, being red toward the north, and white against the Southe, Plane
trees, Ash trees, and such like, spredding and stretching out their branches:
fowlded and embraced with the running of Hunnisuckles or woodbines, and Hoppes,
which made a pleasant and cool shade. Under the which grew Ladies Seal or
Rape Violet, hurtful for the sight, iagged Polypodie, and the Trientall and
four inched Scolopendria, or Hearts toongue, Heleborous Niger, or Melampodi,
Trayfles, and such other Vi^briphilous herbs and Woodde Flowers, some adorned
with them, and some without.

So that the mouth of the dark place, out of the which I had escaped, was in a
manner within the high Mountain, all ouergrone with trees.

And as I could conjecture it was just against the before spoken of frame, and
in my judgment it had been some rare piece of woork, more ancient then the
other, and by time wasted and consumed, now bearing Iuie and other wall trees,
and so was become an over grown wood, that I could scarce perceive any coming
out, or mouth for easy passage but even for a necessity, for it it was rownd
about compassed and environed with bushie and spreeding trees, so as I was
never determined to enter in there again.

In the straight passage of the valie betwixt the extensed and high mounting
rocks, the air was dim by reason of the retained vapores, and yet I was as
well pleased therewith as Apollo at his divine birth.

But letting pass this hole, from the which I gat out by stooping, let us come
on forward to the sweet liberties which I next beheld and that was a thick
wood of Chestnuts at the foot of the hill, which I supposed to be a soil for
Pan or some Siluane God with their feeding herds and flocks, with a pleasant
shade, under the which a^ I passed on, I came to an ancient bridge of marble
with a very great and high arche, upon the which along winning to either
sides of the walls, there were convenient seats to rest upon, which although
they were welcome to my wearye body, yet I had more desire to go on forward,
upon which sides of the bridge, just over the top of the arche, there was
placed a porphirit table with a gorgeous border of curious workmanship, one
table on the one side and an other on the other side, but that one the left
side was of Ophite.

Upon the table on my right hand as I went I beheld Egiplie hierogliphies on
this sort, An ancient Helmet crested with a Dogs head.

The bony scalpe of an ox with two green branches of trees bound fast to the
horns. And an old lamp. Which hierogliphis the branches excepted because I
know not whether they were of Fur tree, Pineapple, Larix or Juniper, or such
like: I thus interpret.

PATIENTIA EST ORNAMENTVM, CVSTODIA ET PROTECTIO VITAE.


On the other side there was engraven a cyrcle, then an Anchor with a Dolphin
winding about the strangule thereof, which I coniectured should signify this,
(...). Semper festina tarde.

Under which ancient, sure, and fair bridge, did run a most clear swift
water, dividing it self into two several currents, the one one way and the
other an other, which ran most cold, making a soft continual still noise,
in their freesed, broken and nibbled Channels, by their eaten in and furrowed
bancke, full of stones, covered over and shadowed with trees, their spredding
roots appearing in the same bare, and about them hanging Tricomanes, Adiantus
and Cimbalaria, and bearded also with diverse small hayres as use to grow about
the banckes of Ryuers.

The wood that I have spoken of, was to look upon very pleasant, neither
over thick or more large in compass than a man would wish, but building a
delightful shadow, the trees full of small birds and fowls.

Right forward, the Bridge did extend it self, and lead toward a large
plain, resounding all over with the sweet chirpings, melodious recordings,
and loud singing of them. Wherein were leaping and running little Sqirrels,
and the drowsy Dormouse, and other harmeles beasts.

And after this manner as aforesaid, this wooddie Country showed it self,
environed about with high mountains as much as a man might look unto, and the
plain covered all over with a fine variety of sundry sweet herbs, and the
clear channels of Charistaline streams, sliding down along the hills with a
murmuring noise into the leauell valley.

Adorned and beautified with the flowring bitter Olive, Laurel, white Poplar,
and Lisimachia, black Pople, Alders, and wild Ash.

Upon the hills grew high Fur trees unarmed, and the weeping Larix, whereon
Turpentine is made, and such like.

When I had well considered of this so fruitful and so commodious a place for
cattle and beasts to be fed in and kept, (for it looked as though it would
desire a shepheardes company and a pastoral song) I mused what should be the
occasion, that so commodious a place should lie uninhabited. And casting my
eyes further on forward into the plain before me, and leaving this fore
discribed place, I might perceive a building of Marble, showing the roof
thereof over the tender tops of the compassing trees. At the sight whereof, I
grew wonderfully glad and in good hope, that there yet I should find some
habitation and refuge. To the which without delaie I hastined my self. And
being come thereunto, I found a building eight square, with a rare and
wonderful fountain: which was not altogether amiss. For as yet I had not
quenched and slaked my thirst.

This building was eight cornered, small toward the top and leaded. Upon one
side there was placed a fair stone of pure white Marble four cornered, half
as long again as it was broad, which latitude as I supposed was some six foot.

Of this goodly stone were exact two little half pillars, chamfered with their
bases, holding up a straight Sime, with a gule and adiected denticulature and
cordicules, or work of hearts, with their chapters under a Trabet, Zophor and
Coronice, over the which was a trigonall contained, in the fourth part of the
stone smooth and plain without any workmanship in the table thereof saving a
little garland, within the which were two Doves drinking in a small vessel.

All the space unspoken of inclusiue was cut in and euacuated, betwixt the
Pillars the Gulature and overthwart Trabet, did contain an elegant Cigrued
Nymph. And under the Syme was another quarter wrought with Thors, Torques,
Ballons and a Plinth.

Which fair Nymph lay sleeping upon a folded cloth, lap, and wound up under
her head. An other part conveniently brought over her, to hide that bare which
was womanly and meet to be kept secret. Lying upon her right side with that
subjected arm retract, and her open palm under her fair cheek, whereupon
she rested her head.

The other arm at liberty, lying all along over her left ^oyne, stretching to
the middle of her goodly thigh. By her small teates (like a young maids) in her
round breasts did sprowt out small streamings of pure and clear fresh water from
the right breast as it had been a thread, but from the left breast most
vehemently. The fall of both of them, received in a vessel of Porphyrit stone,
with two Receptories joining together in the same vessel, separated and
distinct from the Nymph six foot, standing upon a couenient frame of flint
stone. Betwixt either of the receptories, there was an other vessel placed, in
the which the waters did strive together and meets, running out at the cut and
appointed places, in the middle lymbus of their Receptories, which waters
comixt out of that vessel, vnladed themselves into a little channel sliding
away, and what with one and what with the other, all the herbs and flowers
adjoining, and about were bountifullye benifited.

That of the left breast did spin up so high, that it did not weat or hinder any
that would suck or drink of the water that streamed and sprung out of the
right breast.

And this excellent Image was so difinitelye expressed, that I fear me
Prapitiles never performed the like for Venus, to Nichomides the King of Caria
which Idol he appointed to be adored of his subjects, although the beauty
thereof were such that it moved that filthy people to fleshly concupiscence.

But I was persuaded that the perfection of the image of Venus was nothing to
this, for it looked as if a most bewtifull Lady in in her sleep had been
changed into a stone, her heart still panting and her sweet lips ready to
open, as if she would not be so used.

From her head her loose tresses lay wauing upon the suppressed covering,
fowlded and plited and as it were scorning the hairs of the inglomatede cloth,
her thighs of a conueniente bigness and her fleshie knees somewhat bending up,
and retract towares her.

Showing her straight toes as it were incereating her fingers to handle and
streine them, the rest of her body aunswerable to the perfections of these
several proportions.

And behind her the shadowing of the leaffye Memerill or Arbut full of soft
small Apples and fruit, and prettye birds as if they had been chirping and
singing of her a sleep.

At her feet stood a satire in prurient lust upon his gotishe feet, his mouth
and his nose joining together like a got with a beard growinge on either sides
of his chin, with two peakes and short in the middeste like Goats hair, and
in like manner about his flanks and his ears, grew hair, with a visage
adulterated betwixt a man's and a Goats, in so rare a sort as if the excellent
woorkman in his caruinge had had presented unto him by nature the Idea and
shape of a Satire.

The same Satire, had forciblie with his left hand bent an arm of the Arbut
tree over the sleepie nimphe, as if he would make her a favorable shadow
therewith, and with the other hand howldinge up a curtain by one of the sides
that was fastened to the body of the tree.

Betwixt the comare M^^merill or Arbut, and the Satire, were two little
Satires, the one howlding a bottell in his hands and the other with two snakes
fowlding about his arms.

The excellency, dilicatnes and perfection of this figment and woorkmanshippe
cannot be suffientlie expressed.

This also helping to adorn the sweetness thereof that is the whitnes of the
stone, as if it had been pure iuorie.

I wondered also at the woorking of the clothe coueringe as if it had been
wouen: and at the bows, branches, and leaves, and at the little birds, as if
they had been singing and hopping up and down upon their pretty feet in
every joint single and pounce made perfect, and so the Satire like wise. Under
this rare and wonderful carved woork betwixt the gulatures and vnduls in the
plain smothe was graven in Atthic characters this noesye (...).

(...)


The thirst which I had gotten the day before was so increased, that I was
provoked now to slacken the same, or rather enticed with the fair beauty of
the instrument, the coolenes whereof was such, as betwixt my lips me thought
it stirred and trembled.

And round about this pleasant place, and by the pipplyng channels, grew
Vaticinium, Lilly conuallie, and the flowring Lysimachia or willow herb, the
sorrowful Reeds, Myntes, water Parsley, Baume, Hydrolapathos, or water
Sorrel, and other approved herbs, and fine flowers, a little Channel coming
by a sluice from the Bridge, entering in and vnlading it self, was the cause of
a goodly fair Poole, broad and large, in a very good order, trimmed about and
beautified with a fence of sweet Roses and Gessamine. And from thence running
over it, dispersed it self, nourishyng and visiting the next adjoining
fields and ground, abounding in all sorts of herbs, flowers, fruits, and
trees.

There grew also great store of Cynarie grateful to Venus, wild Tansie,
Colocassia, with leaves like a shield, and garden herbs.

And from thence beholding the plain fields, it was wonderful to see the
greennes thereof, powdered with such variety of sundry sorted colors, and
diverse fashioned flowers, as yealow Crowfoote, or golden Knop, Oxeye, Satrion
Dogs stone, the lesser Centorie, Mellilot, Saxifrage, Cowslops, Ladies
fingers, wild Cheruile, or shepheardes Needle, Nauens Gentil, Sinquifolie
Eyebright, Strawberies, with flowers and fruits, wild Columbindes Agnus
Castus, Millfoyle, Yarrow, wherewith Achilles did heal Telephus, and the rust
of the same spears head that hurt him. With the white Muscarioli, be flowers
and Panenentes in so beautiful and pleasant manner, that they did greatly
comfort me (having lost my self) but even with the looking upon them. And
here and there in a measurable and well disposed distaunce and space between.
In a convenient order and sweet disposed sort by a just line, grew the green
and sweet smelling Orenges, Lymons, Citrons, Pomegranettes, their water
boughs bendyng down within one pace of the ground, covered with leaves of a
glassie green color, of a great height and turning down again their tops,
laden with the abundance of their flower and fruits, breathing forth a most
sweet and delectable odoriferous smell. Wherwithall my appaled heart did not
very lightly revive himself (it might be in a pestilent air and contagious
and deadly savor.)

For which cause I stood amazed and in great doubt what to think or do, and
the rather because in that place I had seen such a marvelous fountain, the
variety of herbs, the colors of flowers, the placing orderly of the trees,
the fair and commodious disposition of the seat, the sweet chirpings and quiet
singing of Birds, and the temperate and healthful air. And which I could very
well have been contented withal, and the worst of them might well have
contented me, if I had found any inhabitant there. And somewhat I was grieved
that I could no longer abide in such a place where so many delightful sightes
did present themselves unto me. Neither was I advised to my better safety and
content which way to turn me.

Standing thus in such a suspense of mind, calling to remembrance the danger
that I had lastly escaped, and the present place that I was newlye entered
into, and thinking upon hieragliphes that I did see in the left side of the
bridge, I was in doubt, to hasten my self toward any unadvised aduers
accident, And that such a monument and warning worthy of golden letters,
should not be set in vain to them that passed by, which was Semper festina
tarde. Behold of a sudden behind me, I heard a rusling noise, like the wind
or beating of a Dragons wings. Alas I knew not what it should be. And
sodeinly ^spasurated and turning my self about, I might perceive upon one side
of me many silique trees of Egypt, with their ripe long coddes hanging and
beating one against an other with the wind, had felled down themselves, which
when I perceived, I was soon quieted, and began to make sport at my own
folly.

I had not continued long thus, but I hard a singing company of gallant
damoselles coming toward me (by their voices of young and tender years)
and fair (as I thought) solacing and sporting themselves among the flowering
herbs and fresh cool shadow, free from the suspect of any man's sight, and
making in their Gate a great applause among the pleasant flowers. The
incredible sweetness of her musical and consonant voice, conueighed in the
roriferous air, and spredding it self abroad with the aunswerable sound and
delectable report of a warbeling harp (for the trial of which novelty, I
couched down under the low bowghes of the next adioining bushes, and saw them
come toward me with gracious gestures) her Maidenly head attyred and bound
up in fillets of glystering gould, and instrophiated redimited, garni^hed over
and beset with floured myrtle, and upon her snowye foreheade, branched out her
trembling curled locks, and about her fairest showlders, flew her long tresses
after a nymphish fashion artyfitiallye handeled.

They were apparrelled in carpanticall habites of fine sylke of sondrye
colors, and weauinges of three sorts, one shorter, and distinct from the
other. The nethermost of purple, the next of green silk, and goulde or
tissew, and the vppermst of curled white sendall, gyrded about their small
wastes with girdles of goulde under the lower parts of their round breasts.
Their sleeves of the same curled Sendall, often doubled, which bettered and
graced the subject color. And tied about their wrists with ribands of silk,
tagged with Gouldsmithes work. And some of them with Pantophles upon their
shoes, the upper part of the Pantophle of gould and purple silk, leaf work,
showing thorough betwixt the void spaces of the leaves, the fine proportion of
their prittie illaquiated and contained feet. Their shoes coming straightly
under their anckles, with two lappes meeting upon their insteps, and closed
fast either with Buttons or claspes of gowld after a fine manner. Above the
hemmes of their nether garments, there compassed about instead of gardes and
imbrodered work of hearts, which now and then blown up with the gentle air,
made a discovery of their fine legs.

And as soon as they were aware of me, they left of their song and stayed
their nimpish gates, being amazed with the insighte, and of my coming into
this place, maruelling together, and whisperinglye inquiring of me, one of
another, for I seemed unto them a rare and unusual thing, because I was an
aliant and stranger, and by chance come into so famous and renowned a
country. Thus they staide still, sometimes looking down upon me, and again
muttering one to another, I stood still like an image. Oh woe was me, for I felt
all my joints quake like the leaves of an Aspe, in a bitter wind. And I was
affraide of the presaging poesy that I had read, otherwise aduising me,
whereof I now thought to late to experience the effect thereof, and looking for
no other event, I remained as doubtful of the divine vision, therewith as much
deceived as Semele with the feigned shape of the Epidaurean Beroe. Alas I
trembled and ^hooke like the fearful hind calves at the sight of the tawnie
Lions roaring out for hunger.

Contending and striving with my self, whether it were better for me
submissiuely to kneel down, or else to turn me about and fly from them) for
they seemed to me by their behavior, to courteous young women, and besides
their humanity of a divine beningnitie) or to remain still immovable. At
length I determined to make trial, and put my self forward to whatsoever
would follow, being very well assured, that by no means I should find any
inhumanitie or cruel dealing by any of them, and espetially, because that
innocence carries always his protection with him. And thus somewhat
comforting my fearful mind, and yet restrained with shamefastness, knowing
that I was unworthily come into this shadowie place, and solicious company of
divine and delicate nymphs, my guilty and troubled mind, telling me that it
was rashly and ouer-bouldly done, and that they were it might be prohibited
places, and a forbidden country for a straining to frequent. And thinking thus
and thus with my self: one amongst the rest of a more boulde and audatious
spirit, very hardly spoke unto me, saying. Ho who art thou? at her speech I
was half afraid, and of my self ashamed, both ignorant what to say, or how
to answer: my voice and spirit being interdicted, I stood stone still like a
dead image. But the fair Damsels and beautiful Nymphs well advised, that in
me was a real and human personage and shape, but distempered and afraid,
they drew all of them more nearer unto me, saying.

Thou young man, whatsoever thou art, and from whencesoeuer thou art come: Let
not our present aspects any whit dismay thee, or occasion thy discouragement,
nor be no whit afraid, for here thou shall not find any cruel customs, or
cause of discontent, but free from displeasures, and therefore be not afraid
to discover thy self, and tell us what thou art.

By this motion having called back again my forgotten and lost senses,
comforted with their fair, pleasant, and favorable aspects, and recovering my
self with their sweet speeches, with a very good will I made this answer unto
them.

I am the most disgraced and unhappiest lover that the whole world can aforde.
I love, and she whom so greatly I esteem, and so earnestly I desire, I neither
know where either she or my self i^.

And by the greatest and most dangerous hap that can be imagined I am come
hither. And now with provoked tears down falling from my waterie eyes along
my pale cheeks, and bowed down to the earth prostrating my self to your
virginal feet I humbly crave and sue for your favorable graces: whereat
their soft and tender hearts moved with pity toward me, and half
weeping with me for company, and as it were dutifullye striving with their
arms to lift me up from the ground, with sweet and comfortable speeches,
they courteouslye spoke unto me.

We are certainly persuaded and knowfull well (poor wretch) that few or none
can escape by that way which thou art come, and therefore be not unthankful
to that divine power, which has thus preserved thee. And now be not doubtful
or afraid of any aduers accident or grief to assail thee. Therefore quiet,
comfort, and settle thy heart to rest. For now thou art come as thou may
evidently perceive, and plainly see, into a place of pleasure and delight,
abandoning strife and discontent. For our vniformed ages: the seat
unchangeable, the time not stealing away, the good opportunity, the gracious
and sotiable familiarity, inticingly does allure us thereunto, and grants
unto us a continual leisure. And this also thou must understand, that if one
of us be merry and delightsome, the other shows her self the more glad and
pleasant, and our delectable and perticipated friendship, is with an attentive
consideration perpetually united and knitte together. One of us increasing an
others content, to the highest degree of delight, and most conuenyent solace.

Thou see also that the air is healthful, the lymittes and bounds of this
place very large: of herbs full of variety. Of plants diversely abounding,
and with fruits plentifully laden, environed and defended with huge mountains
and rocks, well stored with harmless beasts, and fit for all pastimes and
pleasures, replenished with all kind of fruits and graynes, universally
growing, and full of goodly fountains.

An other said: understand, unknown, (and yet assured guest,) good friend,
that this territory is more fruitful then the fertile mountain Taurus in the
aquilonall asspect, whose frame does swell so much, that their clusters of
grapes be two cubits long, and that one Figtree will bear seauentie bushels.

The third: this famous and spacious country, exceeds the fertilite of the
Hyperborean Island in the West India, or the portugalles of Lucitania, now
usurped and tyrannized by the insolent Spanyard.

Nor Talga in the Caspian mountain. The fourth affirmed in her commendation of
that country, that the plentifulnesse of Egypt was but to be accounted
scarsitie, in respect of that although that it were thought to be the garden of
the world.

And the last, of a choice countenance and sweet pronuntiaon above the rest,
added thus much, saying.

In this fair country you shall not find any large fennie grounds, or
offensive and sicklye airs, or craggie and fertlesse mosses but fair and
pleasant hills, environed and walled about with steip and vnpassageable
rocks, and by means thereof, secure and free from all dangers and fear, we
want not any thing which may breed delight, and cause a sweet content. Besides
all this we are attendant upon a renowned and most excellent Queen of large
bounty and exceeding liberality: called Euterilyda of great pity and
marvelous clemency, ruling with great wisdom, and with a kingly government,
with great pomp, ^n an accumolated heap of all felicity, and she will be
greatly delighted, when we shall present thee unto her sacred presence, and
maiesticall sight. And therefore cast away, shake of, and forget all afflicting
sorrow, and frame thy self and thy affrighted spyrits to intertaine of our
comforts solace and pleasure.

Poliphilus settling himself under the assurance of the five Nymphs, went with
them to the bathes where they had great laughter in the devise of the
fountain, and also by his unction. Afterward being brought to the Queen
Eutherillida, ^e did see many things worthy of regard, but chiefly the work
of a fountain.
I Being thus courteously entreated of these gracious and pitiful Nymphs, and
having my safety by them sufficiently warranted with sweet comforts, reviving
my decayed spirits. To whatsoever might seem grateful and pleasing unto them,
so much as was convenient for me, I framed my self to offer my service. And
because that they had boxes of sweet perfumes, and casting bottels of gold
and precious stone, looking Glasses in their delicate and fair hands, and
pure white Vailes of silk plited and folded up, and other necessaries to be
used in bathing, which I offering to help them to bear, they refusing say
thus unto me: that their coming into this place was to bathe, and therewith
showed me^ that it was their pleasure that I should go with them, for (said
they) the fountain is here hard by, have you not seen it. And I reverently
made them this answer.

Most fair Nymphs, if I had a thousand tongues and kn^w how to use them al,
yet could I not render sufficient thanks for your gracious deserts, and make
requital of your great favors, because you have restored unto me my life. And
therefore if I should not consent and yield unto you my service and company, I
might well be accounted of a c^urlish disposition. For which cause, amongst you
I had rather be a servant, then in an other place a Lord and commander, for
that (so far as I can conjecture) you are the tenantes and chamber fellows
of al delight and true felicity.

You shall understand that I did see a marvelous fountain of a rare and
wonderful workmanship, as never before my eyes did behold, and so much my
mind was occupied in the regard of the straungenes thereof, and to quench my
great thirst, that I did look for no further benefit.

One pleasant Nymphe spoke thus merrily unto me saying, give me thy hand,
thou art very welcome. Thou see at this present here, that we are five
companions, and I am called Aphea, and she that carries the boxes and white
clothes Offressi^. These nimphs were his five senses.
This other with the shining Glass (our delights) her name is Orassia. She
that carries the sounding Harp is called Achol, and she that bears the
casting bottle of precious Lyquor, is called Genshra. And we are al now going
together to these temperate bathes, to refresh and delight our selves.
Therefore you also (seeing that it is your good hap to be amongst us) shall be
willing to do the l^ke, and afterward with a very good will we will make our
repair to the great Pallais of our sovereign.

Who is most merciful, bountiful, and liberal, and willing to help and further
you, in your intended loves, burning desires, and high conceits. Pluck up a
good heart, man, come let us go on.

With pleasurable actions, maydenly iestures, swasiuious behauiours, girlish
sportes, wanton regardes, and with sweet words they led me on thither,
being well content with every present action, but that my Polia was not
there to the suppliment of my felicity, and to have been the sixth person in
the making up of a perfect number.

Further, I found my self agrieued, that my apparel was not conformable to
this delicious consort, but growing into some household familiarity, I
disposed my self to be affable with them, and they with me, til at last we
came to the place.

There I beheld a marvelous buildyng of a bathe eight square, and at every
Exterior corner, there were doubled together two Pyles, in fashion of a Pyke,
from the level of the foundation, the subject Areobates Circumcinct and ribbed
about. And after them followed the utmost of like bigness, from the ground of
the other, with their chapters set under the straight beam, with a border
above, under a Co^onice going round about. Which border was beautified with
excellent carved work, of little naked children passing well set forth, and
equally distant one from an other, with their hands intricately tied and
wrapped about, and in them holding little bundels of small green boughs,
instrophiated together. And above the said Coronice, did mount up (by an
elegant arching) an eight square Spyer, imitating the subject. Which from
corner to corner was cut through with a marvelous workmanship of a thousand
sundry fashions, and closed again with quarrels of Crystal, which a far of
I did take to be Lead. Upon the top of which arched Spyer was placed a
Trygon, and from the upper center thereof, did ascend up a strong steal,
wherinto was joined an other steal which was turned about, and to the same
was fastened a wyng, which with every blast of wind carried about, the piping
steal which had upon the top thereof a ball, whereupon stood a naked Boy,
straight upon his right foot, and the left holden out. His head was hollow to
his mouth like a Tunnel, with the Orifice euacuated to his mouth, to the which
was sowdered a Trompet, with his left hand holding the Lanquet to his mouth,
and his right hand extending toward the middle joint* ^ust over the piny on
of it the wing or fane. Al which was of thin brass, excellently well cast and
guilt. Which wing, ball, and boy, with his cheeks and countenance as if he
were sounding, with the hinder part of his head euacunated toward the
blustering wind, as that blew, so he sounded, and as the wind caused a strange
noise among the rods of Siliques of Egypt, even so did it hear in the Trumpet.
Upon which cause I merrily thought to my self, that a man being alone in an
unknown place and out of quiet, may easily be afrighted with such like
strange noyses.

In that part of the building that was on the other side of the Nymph was the
enteraunce into the bathe performed as me thought by the same Lithoglyphe,
that covered the sleepyng Nimphe, upon the phrise whereof, were certain
Greek Caracters, signifying (...).

Within there were four seats which went round about, and one under an
other, and close knitte together, wroght with Jasper and Calcedony stone, in
all kind of colors. Two of the co^passing about seats were covered over with
water, and to the upper margin of the third. In the corners, and in euerry
corner stood a Chorinthian Collumne of diverse colors, waued with so pure and
beautiful Iacintes as nature could afford, with convenient bases and their
chapters curio^sly made under the beam, over the which was a Zoph^r, wherein
were carved little naked Boys playing in the water, with water monsters, with
wrestling and childish strifes, with cunning slights and agi^ities sit for
their years, in lively motions and sportes. Al which was beautiful over
compassed about with a Coronice. Over the which, according to the order of the
little Collumies, from the perpendicular point in the top of the Cupul or
Suffite and cover of the Bathe, there went a Tore moderator, increasing bigger
and bigger of Oak leaves, one folding and lying over an other of green
Diasper, hanging upon their braunshing stalks gilt, which ascending up met
together, and joined round in the aforesaid Cupul: where was placed a Lions
head, with his hair standing up round about his face, and holding a Ring in
his jaws, unto the which were fastened certain chains Orichalke or Copper,
that held a large goodly vessel, with a great brain or lyp, and furrowed of
the aforesaid shyning substance, and hangyng two Cubits above the water, the
bowl of the vessel which was of Crystal only except, the rest as the ribs
thereof and lippings, was of Asure blew, with bubbles of gold and shining
sprinkled here and there.

Not far of, there was a cleft in the earth, the which continually did cast
forth burning matter, and taking of this, and filling the bottom of the
vessel, they did put certain ginnes and sweet woods which made an inestimable
suffumigation, as of the sweetest past, afterward closing the same, and
putting down the cover, both parts being holow, and the lipping and ribbing
perforated and pierced through the transparent, Crystal clear and bright,
they rendered a pleasant and diverse coulered light, by the which through the
small holes the bathes were lightened, and the heat still incarcerated and
interdicted.

The wall equally interposite betwixt Column, and Column was of most black
stone, of an extreme hardness and ^hining, incloystered about and bordered with
a convenient border of Diasper red as Coral, adorned with a Lyneament and
work of double Gurgules or Verticules. In the middle part of which table,
betwixt the Collumnes, there sat an elegant Nymph naked, as if she had been
staying and attending of the stone Gallatitis, of color like Iuorie, the lower
parts of every of the said borders, circulating justly with the b^ses of the
Collumnes.

Oh how exsquitely were the same Images cut, that oftentimes my eyes would
wander from the real and lively shapes, to look upon those feyned
representations.

The paued ground under the water being of a diverse emblemature of hard stone,
checkered where you might see marvelous graphics through the diversity of the
colors. For the clear water and not sulphurous, but sweet and temperatelye
hot, not like a Hotte-house or Stew, but naturally cleansing it self beyond
all credet, there was no means to hinder the object from the sight of the eye.
For diverse fishes in the sides (...) ^eates, and in the bottom by a museacall
cutting expressed, which did so imitate nature as if they had been swimming
alive. As barbles, lampreys, and many others, the curiousnes of whose woo^ke I
more regarded, then their names and natures.

The black stone of the walls was engraven with a leaf work, as if it had
been an illaqueated composition of leaves and flowers, and the little shelles
of cytheriaces, so beautiful to the eye, as was possible to be devised.

Upon the door, the interstice whereof was of stone called Gallactites, I
beheld a Dolphin swimming in the calm waves, and c^rrying upon his back a
young man, playing upon an harp: And on the contrary side upon the cold
Fountain, there was an other dolphin swimming, and Posidonius riding upon him
with a sharp elle spear in his hand.

These histories were perfected within the compass of one self same stone,
and set out in a most black ground. Then deservedly I did commend, both the
archytect and the statuarie. On the other side, the pleasant dignity of the
fair and beautiful sporting nymphs did highlye content me, so as I could not
compare to think whether the excess of my passed sorrow, or present solace
should be greatest. And there was so sweet a smell as Arabia never yielded the
like.

Upon the seats of stone, in steed of an Apodyterie, they did impouerish
their apparel, richely inuoluped, in the casting of it off, from their
celestial bodies. Their fair tresses bound up in nettings of gould, wouen
after a most curious sort. And without any respect at all, they gave me leave
to look upon their fair and delicate personages, their honesty and honor
reser^ed. Flesh undoubtedly like the pure Roses and white Snow. Ah woe is me,
I found my heart to rise and open it self, and altogether to be adicted to a
voluptuous delight. Whereupon I at that present thought my self most happy,
only in the behoulding of such delights, because I was not able to resist the
burning flames which did set upon me in the furnace of my heart. And therefore
sometime for a refuge and succor I durst not look so narrowly upon their
enticing beauties, heaped up in their heavenly bodies. And they perceiving the
same did smile at my bashful behavior, making great sport at me: And thereat I
was glad, and contented that I might any way occasion their pastime. But I was
greatly ashamed, in that I was an unfit companion for such a company, but that
they entreated me to enter in with them where I stood like a Crow among white
Doves, which made me partly ashamed to behold, and ouerlooke such choice
objects.

Then Offressia a very pleasant disposed piece, said unto me. Tell me young man
what is your name? And I reverently aunswesed them, Poliphilus: it will please
me well says she, if the effect of your conditions be aunswerable to your
name. And without deceit, said the rest. And how is your dearest love called?
Whereat I making some pause, answered, Polia: then she replied. A ha I thought
that your name should signify that you were a great lover, but now I perceive
that you are a lover of Polia: and presently she added more, saying: if she
were here present, what would you do? I answered. That which were agreeable
with her honor, and sit for your companies. Tell me Poliphilus do thou love
her well indeed? Then I fetting a deep sigh, answered: beyond all the delights
and cheifest substance of the greatest and most precious treasure in the whole
world, and this opinion has made an everlasting impression in my still
tormented heart. And she: where have you lost or abandoned so loved a jewel? I
know not, neither where I am my self I know. Then she smyling answered. If
any should find her out for you, what reward would you give. But content thy
self, be of good comfort, and frame thy self to delights, for thou shall
find thy Polia again. And with these and such like pleasant and gracious
questions, these fair young Virgins, sporting and solacing themselves, we
washed and bathed together.

At the opposite interstice of the beautiful fountain without, of the fair
sleeping Nymph before mentioned, within the Bathe there was an other of scatnes
of fine metal, and of a curious workmanship, glistering of a golden color,
that one might see himself therein. Which were fastened in a Marble, cut into
a squadrature, and euacuated for the Images to stand in their proportions, with
two half Collumnes that is Hemiciles, one of either side, with a Trabet, a
small Zophor, and a Coronice, all cut in one sollid Marble, and this piece of
work was nothing inferior to any of the rest, which before I had seen, but
with a rare art, and marvelous invention, both devised and performed. In the
void and plain euacuated quadret, there stood two Nymphs, little less then
if they had been lively creatures, apparelled, so as you might see somewhat
above their knees, upon one of their legs, as if the wind had blown it up,
as they were doing their office, and their arms bare, from the elbow to the
shoulder except. And upon that arm, wherewith they sustained the Boy, the
habit that was lifted up was reject. The feet of the Infant stood one in one
of the hands of the Nymphs, and the other, in the others hand. All their
three countenances smiling: and with their other hands, they held up the Boys
shirt, above his nauil.

The Infant holding his little Instrument in both his hands, and continued
pissing into the hot water, fresh cool water. In this delicious place of
pleasure, I was very ^o^und and full of content, but the same was much
apalled, in that I thought my self a contemptible body, among such beauties,
and dew coniealed into Snow, and as it were a Negro or tawnye Moore amongst
them.

One of them called Achoe, very affably and with a pleasant countenance said
unto me, Poliphile take that Crystal vessel and bring me some of that fresh
water. I without stay intending to do so, and thinking nothing, but to do her
service in any sort that she would command me, went to the place. And I had no
sooner set my foot upon the step, to receive the water, as it fell, but the
pissing Boy lift up his prick, and cast sodeinlye so cold water upon my
face, that I had like at that instant to have fallen backward. Whereat they so
laughed, and it made such a sound in the roundnes and closenes of the bathe,
that I also began (when I was come to my self) to laugh that I was almost
dead. Afterward, I found out the concauitie, and perceived that any heavy
weight, being put upon the moveable stepping, that it would rise up like the
Keye and Jack of a Virginal, and lift up the Boys prick, and finding out
the devise and curious workmanship thereof, I was greatly contented. Upon the
Zophor was written in Atthic letters this title (...)



After our great laughter and bathing, and all having washed with a thousand
sweet, amorous, and pleasant words, maydenly sportes, and pastimes, we went
out of the water, and leapt up upon the accustomed seats, tripping on their
toes, where they did annoint themselves with sweet Odours, Diasdasmatic, and
with a Myristic liquor, or water of Nutmegges. And they offered a box unto me
also, and I anointed my self therewithal, and I found great pleasure
therein, for besides the excellent smell and sweet savor, it was very good to
comfort my body, legs, and arms, that had been so wearied in my dangerous
flight.

Afterward when we had made our selves ready, which was somewhat long after the
manner of other women, by reason of so many gewgawes and gimmerie whatchets,
they did open their vessels of dainty confections, and refreshed themselves,
and I amongst them, and with precious drink. When they had eaten sufficiently,
they returned again to their looking Glasses, with a scrupulous examination,
about their bodies, and the attire of their heads, and dressing of their
yealow curling hairs depending, and hemicirculately instrophiated about their
divine faces. And when they had made an ende^, they fayde unto me.

Poliphilus, we are now going unto our gracious and most excellent Sovereign
the Queen Eutheri^^da, where you shall find and conceive greater delight, but
the water is still in your face, whereat they began to renew their laughter,
without all measure at me, glauncing and turning their eyes one to an other,
with a lovely regard. At last they set forth, and as they went round
together, they began to sing verses in a Phrygia^t^n^, of a pleasant
metamorphosing of one, who with an ointment thought to have transfourmed
himself into a Byrd, and by mistakyng of the Box, was turned into a^ude Ass.

Concludyng, that many took Oyntmentes to one purpose, and found the effect
to contrary their expectations.

Whereat I began to be in a doubt, that they had sung that by me, because
that they still smiled as they turned to wards me. But seeing that I
perceived no alte^^tion in my self, but well I was contented to let them laugh
on. Upon a sudden I found my self so lasciuiously bent, and in such a
prurient lust, that which way so ever I turned, I could not forbear, and they
as they sung laughed the more, knowing what had happened unto me. And it did
so increase in me more and more, that I knew not wherewithal I might bridle
and restrain my self from catching of one of them, like an eager and hot
Falcon coming down out of the air, upon a couie of Partriges. I was with
such a violent desire pricked forward, which I felt more and more to increase
in a sault burning. And the more I was to that venerious desire by the violent
offers of so oportune and sweet objects. A food for such a pernicious
plague, and unexperienced burning.

Then one of these flamigerous Nymphs named Aphea, said unto me, How is it
Poliphilus? Even now I did see you very merry, what has altered your
disposition? I answered. Pardon me that I bind and vex my self more then a
willow Garland. Give me leave to destroy my self in a lascivious fire. And
thereat they burst out all in a laughter and said, Ah ha, and if your desired
Polia, if she were here, what would you do, how? Alas my desire, even by the
deity which you serve, I beseech you put not Flax and Rosin to the fire,
which burns me out of all measure. Put no Pitch to the fire in my heart,
make me not to forget my self I beseech you.

At this my lamentable and sorrowing answer, they were provoked to such a
loud laughter, wherein they did exceed so much, that neither they nor my self
with the wearines thereof could go any further, but were constrained to rest
our selves for want of breath, upon the odoriferous flowers and cool grass,
by means whereof, I became somewhat oportunely to be eased, my heat aswaging
and relenting by little and little.

And as they thus contentedly rested themselves a while, under the cool
vmbrage of the leafie Trees, I began to be bold with them saying. O you
women, that are burners and destroyers, do you use me thus? See what an
offered occasion I have, which will hold me excused, to break forth and do
violence unto you. And thereupon somewhat boldly moving my self and fayning
as if I would have done that which by no means I durst, but then with a new
pastyme and laughter they called one for an others help, leaving here and
there their golden Pantof^les and Vailes, to be carried about with the wind,
and their vessels neclected in the grass, they ran all away, and I after
them, that I might well perceive that they had neither crampes nor
stringhawldes or leaden heels, and thus continuing our pastimes a pretty
space, being somewhat pleased that I had made them to run. I returned back
to gather up their Pantophles and such things as they had scattered behind
them. And coming near to a fresh cool River, they began to cease off from
laughter, and to take pity upon me, and Geussia behind all the rest, bowed
her self down to the water, beautifully adorned with the bendyng Bull Rushe,
water Spyke, swimmyng Vitrix, and abundance of water Symples, she did pluck
up the Heraclea Nympha, of some called water Lillye or Nenuphar, and the root
of Aron or wake Robyn, of, some, Pes vituli or Serpentaria Minor.

And Amella or Bawme Gentill, all which grew very near together and not far
distant, which she favorably offered unto me saying, of these which I have
made choice of take, and for my freedom taste.

For which cause I refused the Nenuphar, and rejected the Dracuncle for his
heat, and accepted of the Amella, which she had clean washed, by means
whereof, within a very short space, I found my venerious Lubric and incensing
spur of desire to leave of, and my intemperate lust was clean gone.

And when my unlawful desires of the flesh were brideled, the pleasant
Nymphs came again to me, Unlawful concupiscence blinds a man, and drives
his senses from him.
and as we walked on, we came into a frequented place, and wonderfully
fruitful.

And there in a fine order and appointed distance was a way set on either
sides with Cyprus Trees, with their corner clefted Apples, and as thick with
leaves as their nature will suffer them, the leauell ground being covered all
over, with green Vinca Peruima, or Lawreoll and Chamme, Daphne, and full of
his asurine flowers. Which adorned way of a meet and convenient breadth, did
lead directly on into a green Closure, from the beginning of which walk,
just betwixt the Cyprus Trees, to the entrance and opening of the aforesaid
enclosure, was some four furlonges. Unto which enclosure when we came, I
found it equilaterall, with three fences like a straight wall, as high as the
Cyprus Trees upon either sides of the way, that we had passed along in: which
was altogether of Cytrons, Orenges and Lymonds, bushing with their leaves one
within an other, and artifitially knitte and twisted together, and the thicknes
me thought of six foot: with a Gate in the midst of the same Trees, so well
composed as is either possible to be thought or done. And above in convenient
places were made windows, by means whereof, the bowghes in those places were
to be seen bare, but for their green leaves which yielded a most sweet and
pleasant verdure. Betwixt the curious twistings of the branches and their
green leaves, the white flowers did abundantly show themselves a singular
Ornament, breathing forth a most delectable and sweet odor. And to please
the eye, the fair fruit was in no place wanting, where it should yield
content. And afterward I might perceive, that in the interstitious thicknes,
the bowghes (not without a wonderful work) were so artificially twisted and
grown together, that you might assend up by them, and not be seen in them,
nor yet the way where you went up.

At length coming into this green and delightful ground to the eye, and in a
man's understanding worthy of estimation, I perceived that it was a great
enclosure in the fore front of a marvelous Pallaice of a noble simmetriated
architecturie which of this frondiferous conclausure, was the fourth part in
longitude sixty paces. And this was the Hypaethri to wa^ke in, for open air.

In the midst of this great base Court, I did behold a goodly Fountain of
clear water, spinnyng from the very top as it were to the foundation,
which stood upon a smoothe pauement through little straight Pypes, falling
into a hollowed vessel, which was of most pure Amethist, whose Diameter
contained three paces, the thicknes agreeing therewithal, leauyng the twelfth
part for the thickness of the brimme, round about the same were carved water
monsters, after the best sort that ever any ancient inuentor or woorkeman for
the hardness of the stone could devise to work, it might be the work of
Daedalus, for the wonderful excellency thereof. Pausania, if he had seen
this, would have taken small pleasure to boast of the standing cup which he
made to Hipparis.

Which same was founded upon a steal or small Pillar of Jasper of diverse
colors, beautifully adulterating one with an other, being cut in the midst
and closed up with the clear Calcidonie, of the color of the troubled Sea
water, and brought into a marvelous work, being lifted up with guttured
hollows vessels, one above an other, with a reserved separation, by artificial
and woonderful joints. It stood straight up, fastened in the center of a
Plynth, made of green Ophite which was round, and somewhat lifted up above,
about compassing Porphyr, some five inches, which was curiously wrought with
diverse lyneaments.

Round about the steal which held up the vessel, four Harpies of Gold
did stand, with their claws and tallented feet upon the smoothe Table of the
Ophite.

Their hinder parts toward the steal, one just opposite against an other,
with their wings displaied and spredde abroad, they rested under the vessel
with their feminine countenances, and having hair upon their heads, from the
same, it spredde down to their showlders, their heads under, and not touching
the vessel: with thtir tails like Eeles, and turning round. And upon their
nauels, an Antique leaf work. These were very necessary for the
strengthening of the Pype within the steal and small Pillar.

Within the midst of the womb and bellye, or nauel of the vessel, upon the
Subject steal, there was proportionately raised up of the same vessel of
Amathyst, a substance like a Challice, inward, or the inward moulde for a
Bell, so high as the vessel was deep the middle thereof, level with the
brimme of the vessel.

Upon the which was made an artificious foot set under the three graces naked
of fine Gold, of a common stature, one joining to an other.

From the teates of their breasts the ascending water did spin out like silver
twist. And every one of them in their right hand did hold a copy full of all
kind of fruits, which did extend in length up above their heads, and at the
opening, all three of them joined round into one, with diverse leaves and
fruits hangyng over the brimmes or lips of the wrythen Copies.

Betwixt the fruit and the leaves, there came up six small Pypes, out of the
which the water did spring up through a small hole.

And the cunning Artificer, because that he would not trouble one Cubit with
the tuch of another. With a sign of shamefastnes, the Images with their left
hands did hide that part which modesty would not have seen, but accounts
worthy to be covered.

Upon the brimme of the hollow vessel, whose compass was a foot moreover
about, then the subiacent of it, with their heads lifted up upon their V^pers
feet, with a convenient and decent intercalation, there were placed six
little scaly Dragons, of pure shining Gold, with such a devise, that the water
coming from the teates of the Ladies, did fall directly upon the euacuated
and open crown of the head of the Dragons, before spoken of, with their wings
spredde abroad, and as if they had been biting, they did cast up and vomit the
same water which fell beyond the roundnes of the Ophict, into a receptorie of
Porphyr, and round, which were both more higher then the flatnesse of the
pauement before spoken of: where there was a little Channel going round about
betwyxt the Ophit and the Porphyrite, in breadth one foot and a half, and in
depth two foot.

Which Porphyrite was three foot from the plain ouermost part to the
Pauement, with an excellent vndiculation. The rest of the parts of the
Dragonnes, for the moderate deepenesse of the vessel did grow on, until all
met together, transforming the extreme parts of their tails into an antique
foliature making a beautiful il^ygament with the arule or foot set under the
three images without any deforming hinderance to the hollownesse of the
precious vessel. And what with the green assayling of the compassing Orange
trees, and the bright reflections of the shining matter, and the pure water,
there was such a gracious color, in that singular and most precious vessel,
as if the Rainbowe and the clouds had made their habitaon there.

Then in the corpulent bearing out of the belly of the vessel, betwixt one,
and the other Dragons, in an equal distance, and of a most excellent melting
or casting, there stood out Lions heads of an exquisite exaction, and driving,
casting forth by a little pype, the water that distilled from the six
fistulets, placed in the copy above. Which water, did so forciblie spring
upward, that in the turning down it fell among the Dragons in the large
vessel, where by reason of the high fall, and fashion of the vessel, it made a
pleasant tinckling noise.



All which rare work, by so sharp and fine a wit composed, as this insolent
and precious vessel was, the four perfect harpies, the wonderful and
curious azule, whereupon the three Images of pure gould stood, with what Art,
ordinance, and rule, digested and made perfect: as I am ignorant in them
altogether, so much the less able am I to describe the whole as it did
deserve, being a work past any human reach and capacity to frame the like.

And I may bouldly say, that in our age there was never seen in stone and
mettle such a piece of work embost, chased, and engraven. For it was a
wonder to see, that stones of such extreme hardness, as that which was the
steal to hold up the Vessel, should be cut and wrought to that purpose, as
if it had been as soft as wax. A work t^ither to be woondered at, then
undertaken.

The square base court, (in the midst whereof stood this notable work of
the sumptuous Fountain, was paued with fine Marble of diverse colors and
fashions. Amongst which were appact very beautifully, roundes of Diasper,
equally distant, and disagreeing from the color of the pauement, and the
corners closed up with leaves and Lyllies. Betwixt the square marble pauing
stones, there was a space left like a list, which was filled up with diverse
coulered stones of a lesser cut, some proportioned into green leaves, and
tawnie flowers. Cyanei, Phaenicei, and Sallendine, so well agreeing in their
colors, so glistering and seuerly set of a diligent Xesturgie. As full of
colors as a Crystal glass, repercust and beaten against with the beams of
the sun. Because the circumduct and comp^ssing colors, meeting together in
the self same smoothe and clean stones, did yield a reflection, no part being
faulty, either of the square checkers or scutuls and Trigons. But with a
smoothe and straight ordinance well joined together.

Whereat I remained woonderfully amassed by my self, diligently considering
upon the noblenes of the work, such as I had not been used to see, and very
willinglye I would have been content, to have made more stay in the
contemplating thereof, for so the dignity of the work required, but I could
not because it was necessary for me to follow after my leaders.

Then the aspect of this sumptuous magnificient and statelye palace, the
approved situation thereof, the dew proportion, and the marvelous composition
in my first coming to it, did make me woonderfully contented to view the
woorthines thereof, and in continuance I was provoked to behold more, for
which cause I persuaded my self, as I might very well, that the expert
builder, excelled all other whatsoever. What kind of rafters? what manner of
roof? after what sort the Parlors chambers, closets and lodgings, were
disposed? with what kind of seeling they were enclosed and incrusted?
wherewithal hanged? with what color and kind of painting ouerhead? What
order of columination, and what space betwixt. No other building may go
beyond this whatsoever, but may give place very well, of what kind of
Marble, and what manner of engrauing.

There I beheld the labors of Hercules graven in stone with half the
representation standing out or bearing forth, in a wonderful sort, the
skins, statnes, tytles, and trophes, What an entry, what a stately porche,
what that of Titus Caesar with his stone of Phenicea with all the tinkering and
pullishing about it, there is none whose wit is so gross to commend it, in
respect of this, but will rather scorn to speak of it. As for the worthy
and excellent manner of glasing the gallerie without the palace, the
conspitious porche, the manner of building, the arched seeling above head,
beautified and adorned with foliature and other lineaments of pure gould and
asuer color and excellent painting that whatsoever I had seen before I made
small acount of, as not worthy of remembrance. And being now come to the
door within the porche, the going in was closed up with a hanging, drawn over
before it of gould and silk, wrought together, and and in the same two images.
One of them having all kind of instruments about her, fit and ready to go
to work, and the other with a maidenly countenance, looking up with her eyes
into heaven.

The beautye of which two were such, and so fresh, as I looked about me,
whether Apelles had painted them with his Pensill.

And there my sportfull, fair, and pleasant companions, every one putting
their right hands to mine, willing to have me in, said, Pol^^^ilus this is
the usual way, by the which you must come into the presence of our Gracious
and most excellent Queen.

But you cannot have leave to enter in here through this Curtain, before you
be received of a vigilant and innocent Damosel that is the keeper of this
door, and she is called Cinofia. Who hearing us coming, did forthwith present
her self, and favorably held up the cloth, and we entered in.

There was a room hung about and divided by an other Curtain of excellent
Arras full of Imagerie, as signs, shapes, plants, and beasts, singularly well
done.

In this place at our coming, an other curious woman came toward us, called
Indalomena, and she putting by the Curtain, we entered in. And there was an
other such like room, from the second for quantity, with discourses and
reason marueilously wouen, with infinite knottes, bucklinges, tyings, and old
fashioned harping Irons, or Hooks, as if they had been fastened and knit
together. In which place without any staying, the third woman came and received
us very graciously, her name was Muemosina, and she calling us, gave us free
leave to go in. Where lastly my companions did present me before the sacred
majesty of the Queen Eleutherillida.

Poliphilus shows as well as he may, how exceeding great the Majesty of the
Queen was, the manner of her Residence and service. His favorable
entertainment. How she marueiled at him.
WHen I came toward the first doore-keeper* I was somewhat abashed, but (...)
her in ^ood sort as (...). And she (...) come near. And in like manner the
second.

In whose guard I did see a lofty Gallery as long the content of the Pallaice,
the root whereof, was all painted with a green foliature, with distinct
flowers and folded leaves, and little flying Birds, excellently imphrygiated
of museacall paynting, as without in the first Court, and the stone walls
seeled with Chipworkes of diverse colors.

At the last door, the Matrone Muemosnia persuaded me very effectually, not
to doubt of any thing, but that I should steadfastly follow the royal
persuasion, and healthful counsel of the Queen, and persevere in the
execution thereof, for that the end without doubt would be to my content.

And thus having leave to go in, behold such things presented themselves to
my eyes, as were lyker to be celestial then humane.

A most stately and sumpteous preparation, in a gorgeous and spacious Court,
beyond the Pallaice near and opposite to the other, and four square.

The bewtifull and precious Pauement within a checkered compass going about
the same, there was a space of sixty four Squadrates of three foot, the
dyameter of every one: Of the which one was of Jasper, of the color of
Coral, and the other green, powdered with drops of blood not to be woorne
away: and set together in manner of a Chesse-boord. Compassed about with a
border, the breadth of one pace of a rare invention of work, with small
pieces of stones, of diverse colors, and so compacte together, as if it had
been a strange painted work euenly cut and set by rule, that you could not
perceive the joining, but smoothe and shyning, and so well framed by the Lybell
and Squadrate, that no circulating or sphaericall Instrument would move to
either sides without forcing.

About this, lastly was an other marvelous kind of Pauing of three paces
broad, in knottes of Jasper, Praxin, Calcedonie, Agat, and other sorts of
stones of price.

And about by the sides of the walls, compassing the said Court paued as you
have heard, there were placed Settles, of the wood of Palm Trees, of color
betwixt a yealow and tawny, passing well turned and fashioned, covered over
with green Velvet, and bowlstered with some soft stuff or feathers easy to
sit upon, the Velvet brought down to the frame of the Settles or Benches, and
fastened to the same with tatch Nails of Gold, with bossed heads upon a
plain Silver Nextrule or Cordicell.

The alament of the claustering walls, were covered over with Plates of beaten
Gold, with a grauing agreeable to the pretiousnes of the metal.

And in the coaequated and smoothe plain of the same walls of stone, by
certain Pilastrelles, Quadrangules, or Los^enges, of an equal dimension and
distinct correspondencie in the midst of every one, there were perspicuously
appact round Jewels, bearing out and swelling beyond the plain level of the
wall, after the manner of the tores of bases, and of thicknes according to the
proportion of the Losenge wherein it stood, compassed about with green iagged
leaves, one bending over an other, the tops turned toward the Jewel.

And betwyxt the Foliature and the great Jewel, an other border of precious
stones curiously sorted and conspicuouslie set.

And in the rest of the wall circumvallate of these bearing out rownde Jewels,
the seven Plannets with their nature and properties, with an Encaustic work
were sweetly painted, which I beheld with great delight. The rest of the wall
exclusive from the rowndnes of the Jewels within the Pilastrels, were filled up
and bewtified with infinite variety of works in silver, and powdered with
diverse inestimable stones, singularly well cut, and of diverse fashions.

The wall on the left side was in like sort, and opposite in rundels. Against
the seven Plannettes were there seven Tryumphes over the subjects of the same
predominent Plannettes, and in such like Art of Painting as the other side.

And on the right part I beheld their seven harmonies and friendly aspectes,
and the passage of the blood, with the qualitatiue receiving and retiring and
circulating entrance, with an incredible History of the celestial operation
accedent.

The fourth alament made the Pallaice of such like distribution as the other,
the door except, which did occupy an empty void interstice. The other six
with a regulate correspondence, and harmonye of the rest, in the Iewelles to
the opposite and symentriall congresse of the Plannettes, with their virtuous
inclinations, were expressed in the shapes of elegant Nymphs, with the titles
and signs of their natures.

The seventh Mediane quarter, was the forefront directlye placed against the
seventh Jewel, representing the Planet Soll, which was set up more higher
then the rest, by reason of the Queens Throne.

Every part of matter, number, form, and lyneament, in distribution equally
correspondent to his Lybell, the right with the left, and here and there, with
an exquisite love, and congresse agreeing.

Of which most excellent Court, every side was eight and twenty paces. In
this sort stood this square open Court, all compassed about with fine gold, a
work rather to be wondered at, then spoken off.

The Pilastrelles were discrepant four paces one from an other, with a just
partition of seven (a number grateful to nature) of fine and orient Azure,
Lazull stone, passing well colored according to his kind, with a bewtifull
bestowing of small glymces of gold. In the fore part of which, betwixt the
seven pilastrels, there were appointed little slender Pillars wrought about
with leaves, copies, heads with hair like leaves, boys their hippes and
legs proportioned into brawnches, Birds and copies, and vessels full of
flowers, with other wonderful inventions and devises, from the top to the
bottom of the Anaglyph, as if they had grown out of the foundation, making and
dividing in sunder the spaces, their chapters were wrought of a fashion
answerable to the rest.

Over the which did extend a straight beam with graven lineamentes fitting
the same. And over that a Zophor, containing this work still throughout, that
is, the bonye scalpes of Oxen, with myroll bowghes full of berries, tied about
their horns by a towell of linen.

Upon either sides of them were Dolphines, with their gilles like leaves, and
their Finnes and their extreme parts of a foliature, and upon their heads
and backs certain naked boys, getting hold of their lifted up braunching
tails, with leaves and flowers, and bending them down.

The head of the Dolphine having a Syme, whereof the one part turned toward
the Boy, and the other bent against the vessel with an open gaping, and
endyng in the head of a Storke, with her beak against the open mouth of a
Monster, lying with his face upward, and certain Whorelles or Beads rising
up betwixt his mouth and her beak.

Which heads in stead of hair, were covered with leaves one over an other,
filling the Orifice of the vessel, and from one lyp to an other, and under the
bowl thereof toward the foot, there compassed a fine towell of linen, the
ends hanging down from the knottes, in such an excellent sort as was
convenient both for the place and matter. And in the middle over the heads,
was the face of a child upon a pair of wings.

And with such like linean (...) was the Zophor adorned and covered, with a
Coronice full of excellent workmanship. Upon the plain top whereof, by a
perpendicular line over the Pillars, in the ordeining of the squadrangalles,
there were placed and framed certain old fashioned vessels, by an appointed
distribution, three foot high of Calcedonie, some of Amethist, some of Agat,
some of Jasper, with their bellies furrowed and Channelled, and cut of a rare
and marvelous cunning, and with excellent ears.

In a perfect order over every Jewel above the Coronice, were aptlye joined
traunsomes, squared seven foot high, and the middle space between them of
glistering Gold, with a superadiect extention, closing over the straight
extended transomes. And by a turnyng down the transomes, did join decently
one with the other, with a Topiarie work. Intending that out of the vessels
standing upon the Coronice as aforesaid, Topiaria, the feate of making Images
or Arbours in Trees.
in the corns the transome and the vine should rise up together, but out of
the other vessels, either a vine or some Woodbine of Gold, by courses
meeting over the transwerst traunsomes, with a thick stretching out of their
spreadyng branches, one joining with an other, and twisting together with a
fine and pleasant congresse, covering over all the whole court with a rich and
inestimable suffi^e, with diverse fashioned leaves of green emeralde, grateful
to the sight, more perfect then that wherein Amenon was impressed, and the
flowers dispersed and distributed of Saphires and byrrals. And with an
excellent disposition and artificial, betwixt the green leaves and the gross
veins, so precious hunge down the clusters of grapes made of stones,
agreebale and fitting to the natural colors of Grapes.

All which most rare devises, of pryse incomparable, incredible, and past
imagination, did shine all over most pretiouslie: not so much to be marueyled
at for the costlinesse of the matter, but for the large greatness of the work.

For not without great cause, from place to place, with a diligent and jealous
examination I did carefully consider the large extention of the inmost (...)
branches, and their proportionate strength and thick^^^ so cunningly done,
by such an art, boulde attempt, and continued intent, they were so aptly led
out, whether by sowdering, or by the Hammer, or by casting, or by all three,
me thought it an impossible work to make a covering of such a breadth, and so
twysted and twyned together.

In the middle prospect, oppossite against our going in upon a degreed regal
throne, set fu^l of glystering stones in a marvelous order, far more
excellent then the seat in the temple of Hercules at Tire, of the stone
Eusebes. The Queen with an imperial Majesty sitting upon it, goddess like,
and of a wonderful magnanimity in countenance: gorgiously apparrelled in
clothe of goulde, with a sumptuous and c^^ous attire, upon her he^d of a p^rple
color, with an edging of Orient Pearl, shadowing over her large forhead,
aunciently and princelike, ever pressing her plemmirrulate tr^m^nels of hair,
as black as iet descending down her snowie temples, and the rest of the
abundance of her long hair, fastened round in the hinder part of her head,
and divided into two parts or tresses, lapt about this way and that way,
behind her small ears, over her straight proportioned head, and finished in
the crown, with a flower of great Orient, and rownd Pearls, such as be found
in the Indian promontorie Perimula.

The rest of her long spreding hair was not seen, but covered over with a
thin veil, edged with gould, hanging down from the said flower and knot of
pearl, to her delicate shoulders, and flingering abroad with the air.

In the middle of the edging of her dressing, upon the highest part over the
midst of her forhead hoong a rare jewel. And about her round and snowie
neck, went an inestimable Carkenet with a pendent over the division of her
rownde breasts, of a table Dyamond, in fashion of an Egg, sparkling, and of a
monstrous largenes, set in gould with wire work.

At her ears most richelye were hanged in the typpes two earinges, two great
shynyng Carbunckles of an inestimable price.

Her shoes were of green silk, and her pantofles of gould imbrodered in a
leaf work. Upon a foot stool above the which, and under her feet, was
laid a cushion of white Velvet, with a purfeling of silk and Orient Pearls
of Arabia, within the persick golph, with four Buttons wrought with precious
Stones, and tasseld with goulde twist, and crimosen silk, depending.

Upon either sides along upon the aforesaid benches covered over with green
velvet, sat her Ladies of honor, attendant in a goodly and commendable order,
according to their estates, apparrelled in clothe of goulde in an incredible
bravery, as in the world may be seen. And in the midst of them this
renowned and famous Queen in great pomp and unspeakable statelynes^, and the
hemmes of her vestures so edged and set with pearl and stone, as if nature had
rayned and powered them down upon her.

At her high and imperial aspect, with great reverence bowing their knees to
the ground unto her, her women did rise up from their seats, occasioned by
the novelty of the spectacle, and greatly marueiling that I should come into
such a place.

But I found my self more amazed, my heart quayling, and dilating both of
the troubles that I passed, and the present estate that I was brought into,
which did enuiron and fill me with an extreme amasement, reverend fear, and
honest shamefastness.

And they asking the five Nymphs that brought me in, whysperinglie what I was,
and the strangeness of my hap, directing, bending and intentiuely fixing all
their eyes upon me. Where finding my self so base a worm in such an excellent
conspect, I was woonderfully astonished, and like one that had no spyrite.

But the success and manner of my coming being demanded of them, the Nymphs
did plainly, open and manifest the same at large, whereat the gracious Queen
being moved to compassion, caused me to stand up, and understanding what my
name was, began to say.

Poliphilus, be of good comfort, and pluck up a good heart, and tell me how
thou come hither, and by what means, and how thou did escape that
mortal and horrible Dragon? and how thou did find away out of that odious
and obscure darkness, I have been told of it: But I marvel me not a little*
because few or none dare adventure that way. But seeing that grace has
safelye brought thee hither unto us, I will not deny thee (any cause
notwithstanding) a gracious and favorable intertaynement.

To whose liberal inuiting, royal words and intertaynement, better then I
could have imagined to desire, with diuote and honorable thanks, given
abundantly from point to point, I told how I escaped and fled from the
Dragon, that fearful monster. And consequently with what travel and pain I
came to the desired place. And how the five Nymphs did find me wandering and
afraid. Which when I had at large declared and ended my speech, I began with
great desire to frame my self to be a pertaker of their solacious and
magnicifient pleasures.

After that she said unto me with a smiling and pleasant countenance. It is a
woo^^hie matter to consider, that an evil and discontented beginning often
time falls out to a happy and good success in the end: and before that any
thing be committed (...)

After that she said with a smiling and pleasant countenance, It is a worthy
matter to consider, that an evil and discontented beginning, often times
falls out to a happy and good success in the end. And before that any thing
be committed unto you to perform, as touching your amorous and firm conceit,
it is our pleasure, for the asswagement and mitigation of thy commendable
griefs, that in this company thou especially should associate thy self
with Philo^esia, seeing that the fair heavens have showed thee of thy
entertainment, and brought thee into our triumphant mansion place. And
therefore my Poliphilus, without any more ceremonies take thy place there and
sit down, for thou shall see (with a very good will) part of our sumptuous
and stately manner of service, the plentiful diversity and number of my more
then princely dainties, the honorable attendance of my household, and excellent
order thereof, the inestimable pretiousnes of my great abundance, and the
large effects of my bounty.

At which imperious command, her eloquent and favorable speech ended, humbly,
and with a little more audacitie than before, upon one of the benches of my
right hand I did sit down (lapping my torn gown together before me with
certain brymble leaves still sticking in it) betwixt the five Nymphs that
brought me in, and amongst them next unto Offresia and Achoe, placed behind
the Queen, and six other of the chamber upon the other hand; and in the
midst on high upon a throne did the Queen sit in an imperial Majesty.

The Cover over the Throne was of an inamelled couloring containing in it a
beautiful image without any beard, the head bushing with yellow hair, part of
his breast covered with a thin cloth over the displayed wings of an Eagle,
her head turning up, and beholding of him. The head of which image was
redymited with an azure Diade^e, adorned with seven beams, and at the foot of
the Eagle two branches of green Laurel, one one way, the other contrary
toward either side. And in every garland I beheld the figment proper to his
planet, and behind at my back was the jewel, containing the history of the
winged Mercury, and how the benignifie of his good disposition is depraved,
when he is in the malignant ta^le of the venomous Scorpion. And looking upon my
self, I was ashamed to see my vile habit among such sumpteous induments,
that me thought my self no otherways but even like that vile and mortiferous
beast among the most noble signs of the Zodiac. The bewtifull and honorable
damsels sat in order upon the Benches, compast about all along by the sides
of the walls upon the right side, and the best of the Court, with a rare and
strange kind of womanly dressing upon their heads, as is in the world, with
the tresses of their hair lapt and bowed up in Caules of gold.

Some with their hairs of Amber color, curled and dressed up with flowers of
the same upon a wire, with the ends turning down and wauing upon their
snowy foreheades and smooth temples, bewtified with Rubies and Diamonds pricked
in the hair.

Others of the color of the Obsidium of India, black and shining, adorned
with flowers of Orient Pearl, and Carkenets of the same. They stood all
waiting with such a venerate attention, that when the service was brought to
the table, they all at one instant time alike, made their reverent courtesies in
bowing of their knees, and in like manner when they did rise from of their
seats, every one apparrelled in cloth of Gold, but they did not sit and eat
at the same table.

Sreight before the triumphant Queen was the opening of the third Curtain,
covering a great and goodly door, not of Marble, but of rare and hard Diasper
of the East, of an artificial and ancient work, wonderfully bewtifull to
behold. Upon either sides of this door, their young dam^sels Musicians, seven
upon a side in a Nimpish apparel, notable for the fashion and very rich:
which at every change of service, did alter their Music and Instruments, and
during the banqueting, others with an Angelike and Syreneall consent, did tune
the same to their hands. Then in a sudden was placed frames of Hebony, with
three feet, and other temporary tables, without any noise or brustling. Every
one ready to his appointed Office, with a careful, diligent, and affecting
iudeuour, wholly to that service which was enjoined him.

And first before the Queen, there was placed a frame of three feet of this
form, upon a round of fine Dyasper, with curious Lineaments. To the which
were three stypits, the lower parts whereof, did finish in the form of the
tearing claw of a Lion, with an exsquisite foliature, compassing about the
steals of the stypets, having in the midst of every one, fastened the head
of a child betwixt two wings, from the which betwixt one and other of the
stypets, there hung in manner of a Garland a bundle of leaves and fruits bound
together, and biggest toward the midst, and upon the top of the stypets or
steals, was put a proiection to bear up the round table before the Queen.

This frame was immovable, but the round table was to be quickly taken of and
on, according to the substance of the vessels at every changing of the table.

And straight way as it were in the twinkling of an eye and turn of a hand,
there was put upon this three footed frame a round table of Gold, three
foot by the Diameter, and of an indifferent thickness, and of this form and
bigness were all the rest.

Upon this table was laid a Carpet perfumed, of cloth of Hormisine of a green
color, euenly distended large and long down to the pauement: fringed upon the
sides with twisted threede of the self same, and mixed with Silver and Gold,
depending down under a border of imbroyderie of Pearl and precious stone,
with a hand-breadth of the pauement on every side hanging down. And of this
sort were all the Carpets bordered and fringed.

Afterward followed a fair young Damsel and quick, with a great Basin of
Gold filled with the flowers of Violets, tawny, blew and white, and sweet
smelling, as in the prime spring time, and strewing of them upon the tables,
except that before the Queen.

Her sacred majesty, having put off her robe so gorgeous as Lolia, wife to
Paulus Aemilius never saw in her husbands tryumphes, and she remained in a
gown of purple Velvet, having wouen in it birds, little beasts, leaves and
flowers in knottes, the work somewhat raised up with pearl and stone, with a
thynne veil covering it all over of silk syprusse, showing through it the
covered works and cloth by reason of the clear subtlety and thinness
thereof, and imperial and gracious apparel.

After came in two beautiful Damsels bringing in an artificious fountain
continually running with water, and reassuming the same again, which was of
fine gold, and in a vessel of a curious workmanshippe, which was brought
before the Queen, and after the pr^senting of it upon the table of gold they
bowed their knees down to the pauement, and like reverence at the same
instaunt made all the rest of the attendant Ladies, both at the presenting of
every thing, and at the taking away. Three other fair Damsels followed near
after them, one carrying an Ewer of gold, the second a basin, and the other a
towell of white silk.

The Queen whilst she did wash her hands, one that carried the golden basin,
received therein the water, that it might not fall again into the reassuming
fountain: and the other with the Ewrie, powered in as much sweet water as was
borne away, because that the fountain should not be empty, and hyndered in
his course. The third did wipe and dry her hands.

The broad and large Receptorie of this fountain was carried upon four little
wheels, which they drew upon every table to wash the hands of all that were
set.

The brim of the vessel wherein the rising up fountain did stand, was
adorned with bubbles of pearl standing up, and under the same was set an
other of an other sort, and both joined together with two claspes of an
exquisite dipoliture, fine work, and pretiously garnished. For among other
iewelles of inestimable price, upon the very top in a flower, there was
set a Diamond in fashion of a pear, glistering and sparkling of a huge and
unseen bigness.

And as near as my smell could tell me, I did judge the water to be of
Roses, mixed with the juice of Lymon pills, and a little Amber artificially
composed, which yielded a sweet and pleasant smell.

In the midst of this admirable and stupendous Court, there was set out a
marvelous perfuming vessel, not so much for the excellent and perfect
substance thereof, which was pure and fine gold: but for the conspicuous,
rare, and ancient fashion of the base, standing upon three Harpyes feet, the
which in a foliature made a trianguled illygament to the base, full of devises,
as the metal required, over every Angle or corner whereof stood three naked
shapes of flying spirits orderly set, of two cubits high, with their
shoulders turned one toward an other, and somewhat near together.

They stood upon the base with the right foot toward the corner, and the left
stretching toward the fixed foot of the other boy. Their cubits bending up,
and holding the handle of the perfuming pan, very slender in the steal, and
upward in fashion of a bowl, somewhat furrowed and broad lipped.

There were six in a round circuit, one toward an other: And betwixt their
shoulders in the Center point of the trianguled base, there rose up a steal
like an old fashioned Candlestick, holding on the top thereof such a bowl
or vessel as aforesaid, and so broad as did fill up the void place in the
midst betwixt the other six.

Which bowls were filled with burning coals covered over with embers, and in
every vessel upon the ashes did boil a little pot of gold, which contrary
liquors infused with sweet odours.

And as I suspected, every pot had several water, as it were, one with
Rose Water, another with water of Orange flowers, another of myrtle, tender
green Laurel leaves, elder flowers, and diverse such like sociable symples.
And these boiling together, they did yield a most pleasant and fragrant smell.

In the presence of the magnificent Queen there did always wait and attend
three honorable Nymphs, their apparel being of gold and silk, maruelously
wouen and adorned, and set with pearl and stone. The lyninges of their
gowns going about their snowie shoulders, and coming down upon their little
round breasts to the lower part of their wastes, of such color as the
napkins, leaving to be seen the pleasant valleys betwixt their fair breasts,
an extreme delight and desired nourishment unto a narrow look and greedy
eye, with a thousand small chains, pretty iewelles and flowers of gold in a
faeminine sort, a sweet bayte to carry a man headlong into forgetfulness of
himself, being inchaunted with choice and amorous regards, far passing the
desire of any other delycate vyands. Their shoes of gold cut with half
Moons, and closed up at the joining of the horns or corners with buttons and
flowers of gold-smithes work in a curious sort, and the trammels of their
fair and plentiful hair above their forheads and temples instrophiated with
large and round oryent pearl.

They stood thus on either hand and before the Queen with a singular and
reverent regard, attending and readily perfourming that charge whereunto they
were appointed. And these served but an one Table: which being changed, they
withdrewe themselves by, and stood still upon their feet arm in arm, other
three having supplied their places: And the three that waited, she in the
midst was caruer.

The other upon the right side held under a plate if any thing should fall
by: and the third upon the left hand held a most white and clean towell of
silk to dry her lips, and in every action a reverence.

The towell was not used but once, and then cast by upon the pauement, and
carried away by one that stood near. And so many morsels as she did eat, so
many sweet perfumed clean towelles of silk plyted and finely wrought were
used.

And the like was done to every guest, for not one at that banquet did touch
any thing saving only the cup.

After that the Queen had washed, and had her first service, then all the rest
did wash at the same fountain, casting out water of it self, and reassuming
the same in a wonderful manner by two small pypes on either sides, and running
up straight in the midst from the bottom of the vessel, the deuyse whereof
when I did understand, I was much contented therewithal.

After the washing of the Queen first, and successively of all the rest, there
was delivered to every one of the wayters a round ball of gold wyer-woorke
full of small holes, and within stuffed with Amber past of a most perfect
composition, set with precious stones, to the end their hands, eyes, and
senses should not be idle.

Then there at every change of course, two Edeabri^^s that had the ordayning
of the Queens meat, did bring into the midst of the royal Court upon
four turning wheels a stately repositorie or cupbord, in fashion like unto a
ship, and the rest like to a triumphant Chariot, of most fine gold, with
many fishes and water monsters, and infinite other exquisite shapes maruelously
wrought, and set full of rich stones, the sparklings and glisterings whereof
did shine round about the sides of the Court, and reincounter upon the
roundelles of the other before spoken iewelles, on every side fitly placed, as
if Phoebus had been set by a Nymph to grace her eyes and countenance with
his shining brightness.

To all which continual glistering of ineffable workemanshippe, there could no
more be devised of equal comparison, although it were the Temple at Babylon
with the three golden statues.

Within the which was put all such necessaries perfumed, as were meet and
convenient for the changing of the tables, as clothes, flowers, cups,
towelles, and vessels, to power out of, to drink in, and plates to eat upon.

And these two Nymphs plaustraries, did take them down, Which did draw in the
cupbord.
and deliver them (as need required) to the wayters.

And the first Table being changed, every thing was brought back again to
the plaustraries, at whose going away the Trumpettes sounded in such a sort,
as Piseus Therrenus never came near unto, nor Maletus Trumpetor to the King of
Hetruria.

And then they did wind their Cornettes, thus doing every time that the
repositorie was drawn out, until that it came in again, at what time they
ceased.

And when the Table was changed, they altered their musical instruments,
which being ceased, the singers began ^o heavenly, that it would have caused
the Sirens to sleep, having mixed with their voices still wind instruments of
wood, such as the Tr^ezein Dardanus never invented.

And by this appointed order, there was continually heard melodious soundes,
and pleasant harmonies, sweet consortes, with delightful Music presented,
odoriferous perfumes smelt, and stately viandes plentifully fed of. And
eeuerie thing whatsoever, without any defect of grace or delight answerable,
according to the dignity of the place.

To this first princely table, all the vessels and instruments together with
the table it self, were of pure fine Gold. Whereupon there was appresented a
Cordial confection, and as I could conjecture, it was made of the scraping of
Unicorns horn, Date stones and Pearl, often hette, and quenched and pownded
small, Manna, Pineapple kernels, Rose water, Musk and Lyquid, Gold, in a
precious composition by weight, and made Losenges with fine Sugar and Amylum.

This was eaten without any drinking upon it, and it was a Confection to
prohibit all Fevers, and to drive away Melancholy wearines.

This being done in a moment, all things were taken up and removed, the Violets
cast upon the ground, and the table bare. And as soon as this was done, the
table was laid again covered with cloth of Talasike, and also the wayters,
and as at the first, there was cast upon them the sweet flowers of Cedars,
Orenges, and Lymons, and upon that, they did appresent in vessels of Beryl, and
of that precious stone was the Queens table (except the skinking pottes which
were all of pure fine Gold) five Fritters of paste of a Saffron color, and
crusted over with extreme hot Rose water, and fine pownded Sugar, and then
again cast over with musked water, and with fine Sugar like frost upon Ise.
These Services of a most pleasant taste, and of sundry fashions were laid in
thus. The first, in oil of the flowers of Orenges. The second, in oil of
Gilliflowers. The third, in oil of the flloures of Gessamin. The fourth, in
pure Oil of Benjamin.

And the last, in the oil of Musk and Amber. And when we had well tasted and
eaten of the same delectable meat, there was delivered to us a goodly cup of
the aforenamed Beryl, with his cover, and covered over that also with a thin
Veyle of silk and Gold, curiously folded into the form of a Canapie, the
ends cast over the shoulders of the bearers, and hanging down their back.

And in this sort they did present all drinking vessels and others, with meats
and sawces covered. Within the drinkyng cup they had infused a precious Wine,
so as me thought that the Gods of the Elysian fields, had transformed their
power into the sweetness of the lyquor: surpassing the wine of Thassus.

Without delaie (after our drinking this table being taken away, and the sweet
flowers cast upon the pauement, there was forthwith spread a cloth of murry
silk and carnation: with Roses white, read, Damask, Musk, and yealow cast
upon the same. And presently new wayters brought in (apparielled in the same
colors) six pieces of bread cut for every one, tossed and dressed with
refined marrow, sprinkled over with Rose water, Saffron, and the juice of
Orenges, tempering the taste and gilded over, and with them six pieces of pure
manchet were set down. And next unto them a confection, of the juice of Lymons
tempered with fine Sugar, the seeds of Pines, Rose water, Musk, Saffron, and
choice Synamon, and thus were all the sawces made with convenient gradation and
delivery. The vessels were of Topas and the round table.

This third magnificent table being taken up as before said, there was
presently an other innouated, with a cloth of silk smooth, and of a yealow
color, (the wayters suitable) and strewed with Lilly Conually, and Daffadil,
immediately this course was presented, seven morsels of the flesh of a
Partridge in a sharp broth, and so many pieces of pure white Manchet. The
sauce Acceres, minced and dissolved in Sugar thrice sodden, Amylum, Saunders,
Musk and Rose water. The vessels and the round table of Chrysolite. Lastly,
they offered a precious drinking cup, and so observed in the rest.

The fourth table being taken away, the fifth was reuested with a cloth of
silk, of a crimosen color, and in like sort the Nimphish apparel. The
flowers of purple, yealow, white, and tawny. The Seruis, eight morsels of the
flesh of a Pheasant roasted lying in the grauie, and withal so many pieces of
fine white manchet. The sauce was this, water of Orange flowers, the juice of
Pomegranets, Sugar, Cloves, and Cynamon. The vessels of Smaragde, and the
table of the Sovereign Queen.

This being taken away very solemnly, there was spread an other cloth of
silk of a purple color, and so the apparel of the wayters.

The flowers were of three sorts, of Iessamine, tawny, yealow, and white. The
Service was nine morsels of the flesh of a restoratiue Peacocke, moystened in
his grauie. The sauce was most green and tart, with Pistacke, Nuttes pownded,
Sugar, Cypricum, Amylum, and Musk, Time, white Marioram, and Pepper. The
vessels of Saphyre, and the Princely Table.

At the seventh change, they brought in a sumpteous table of white Iuory,
bordered, trayled, and finely wrought with many small pieces upon the precious
wood of Aloes, and joined and glued together, and from one side to the other,
wrought with knottes and foliature, flowers, vessels, monsters, little
Birds, and the strikes and caruings filled up with a black paste and mixture
of Amber and Musk. This me thought was a most excellent thing and sumpteous
breathing out, a most delightful sweet smell. The cloth white and subtily
wrought with drawn work with Satin silk, the ground powdered and filled,
and the work white and plain, with the representation of shapes, birds,
beasts, and flowers, and in like sort the apparel of the wayters. The flowers
Lady steal, Rape, Violet, and all sorts of sweet Gilliflowers. And thus
there varied every where such diversity of smelles, severally brought in, and
so delighfull to the senses, as I cannot sufficiently express.

Then there was given to every one a confection in three morsels of the shell,
fish, Dact^lus, with Pistacke, Nut kernels pownded and put into Rose water and
Sugar, of the Islands, and Musk and leaf Gold, beaten and adulterated
therewith, that every piece taken up, seemed as if it had been all Gold.

The vessels were of Iacynth, and the table circulare. An apt and convenient
stone to so excellent disposition and royal board and strange banquets, such
as before were never heard of.

After the taking away of these wonderful Confections, and the flowers cast
down upon the pauement in a princely magnificence, there was presently brought
in, a great vessel of Cold full of kindled coals, into the which the table
clothes, napkins and towelles of silk were thrown, which presently burned
light, and after that being taken out and cool^d, they were whole, unhurt and
clean, as at the first. And this yet was the wonderful straungest of all the
rest. And then the tables and frames were taken down and carried away.

Which most excellent order and sightes, the more that I carefully endeavored
to consider of them, the more ignorant and amazed I found my self.

But in all things assuredly I did take great pleasure with my intended
admiration, in seeing of such, so great, plentiful, and tryumphant
sumpteousnes, of so incredible costly a banquet, that it is better to hold my
peace then not to speak sufficiently in the report thereof. For that the
bankets of Sicilia be in respect but beggarly, and so were the stately
Ornaments of Attalus. The Corinthian vessels, the dainties of Ciprus, and
Sa^^ari^ suppers.

Yet notwithstanding so supreme and excessive alacrity, and cordial
delectation, and that only and extreme pleasure (occasioned by such and so
unexpected delights) by one of those three which in the last change attended,
was quayled, overthrown, interrupted, lamed, intercepted and made vain. For
she did represent in her behavior, the sweet iesture and resemblance of
Polia, stirring up by them in me stealing regardes.

This was no small hinderance unto me, in the taking of those pleasant
dainties and princely refection. Yet notwithstanding my eyes would now and then
with much adoo, be withdrawn to behold the beauty of the Jewels and precious
stones, sparkeling and glistering in every place, in such diversities of
strange and unseen gloriousnes and conspicuous decoraments, as if they had
all ought a duty to her, which made me with an immoderate desire, to behold
the correspondency of her excellent beauty.

Lastly, in such order and sort, as aforesaid, the tables being taken away,
I hung down my head, because that I might not follow after the last
iunckates which I had lost by minding of her that ministered.

Then first before the sacred Majesty and royal person of the Queen, and
afterward to us, five fair Nymphs apparelled in blewe silk and gold
curiously wouen together in works, did all together appresent themselves.

The middlemost of them did bear a branch of coorrall, like a tree, such as
is not found amongst the Islands Orchades, of one cubite high, which stood as
upon a little mountain, which was the cover of an old fashioned vessel of
pure gold, in form of a Challyce, as high again as the cover and the tree of
coorrall, full of curious workmanshippe and leaf work, never made in our age,
nor the like seen.

Betwixt the gracy lament of the foot and the cup, it was knitte together
with a handle of inestimable workmanship, and in like manner the foo^e and the
bowl were of an excellent anaglyphie of foliature, monsters and byformed
Scyllules, so exquisitely expressed, as could be imbossed, chased, or engraven
by proportionate circulation.

And the mordy cant cover of the same was thick set with incomparable
iewelles: and in like sort all the base and handle whereas conueniencie
required, and glystering about.

Upon the branches of the coorrall, there were artificially set certain
open flowers with five leaves, some of Saphyre, some of Iacynth and Berill, and
in the ruiddest of them a little round seed of gold, fastening the leaves to
the stalk of corrall.

Which young woman reverently bowing to the earth with her right knee,
reserving the other still up, whereupon she held this cover of coorrall,
which also besides the flowers, had upon the points and tops of other
twigges or sprouts curiously in fixed monstrous great pearl. An other of them
had a cup full of pre^ious lyquor, better then that which the proud
Cleopatra gave unto the Roman Captain: The rest did execute their offices ^o
aforesaid, and plucking off one after another, with a little instrument with
two teeth of gold they offering the same fruits unto us, to me unknown, for
that I had never seen the like, we did taste them.

But the unexpected pleasure of them, and sweetness of their taste, was no
otherwise to me than like a gracious substance wanting his desired form.

And there were restored again the balls of gold before mentioned.

Upon this appeared an other marvelous work, that was a perpetual running
fountain artificially devised of the aforesaid matter, but of an other notable
fashion and workemanshippe, founded upon an immovable axeltree, upon the
which two wheels turned about.

Above the which stood an unequal quadrature three foot long, two foot broad,
and six foot high.

In every angular part did sit a Harpie with both her wings extended and
stretched up to the breadth of a higher ves^ell, standing up upon the midst
of the measured quadrangule, coronized at the extreme and upper parts, and
beautified with chanelling and foliature, circumuesting the lower part.

And upon every side the same divided into three, the middle part betwixt
the fall of the waters intercepted, did contain in half bodies carved, a
triumph of Satyrs and Nymphs, with Trophies, and exquysite actions, except
the forepart and hinder part moderately sinuated and bent in. The which in
stead of squadred lyneament, did contain a roundnesse waued between, in the
which was maruellously engraven a little sacrifice with an old Altar on
either sides, with many figures and actions, the rest that was void, the
tails of the foresaid Harpyes joining together, and turning here and there
into leaves, did excellently cover the same.

Out of the medyan center of the equature and quadrangule before specified and
described out of an antyke folyature, did rise up an old fashioned vessel,
and very beautiful, the cyrcuite whereof did not exceed the content of the
quadrangulate plain, and this with all the rest of the work, and every
proportionate disquisition, trial, and examination, both in the highest
breadth and thickness, with most convenient vesseling lineamentes, diligently
delymated and fyled, and then finished with an absolute and depolyte
deformation.

The which out of the suppressed orifice thereof did ascend up an other hollow
vessel, the compass whereof did exceed the aforesaid subject vessel
furrowed and channelled round about, of a great breadth and large brymmes so
well fashioned, as is possible for any goldsmith to beat out with his hammer.

In the center point whereof did rise and mount an other vessel of incredible
workmanship.

In the bottom of which third there were small ridges swelling outwardes, the
tops of them compassed about with a row of diverse inestimable stones,
bearing out and differing in colors, as best might content the eye of a
curious Lapidarie and skillful understanding.

Upon the same on either sides was made a head of a monster, from the which
on both hands did proceed the garnishing thereof in an exquysite and most
rare work of leaves, inuesting the same about with the congresse of the
opposyte head, and finely gracing that part of the vessel.

And in the bearing out of the lip of the vessel over the perpendicular
point of the head there was fastened a ring, from the which upon either
sides there hung down a garland of branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits
growing bigger toward the midst, with a perpolyte bynding to either ringes.

Over the middle bending of the garland, and under the proiecture of the lyppe
of the vessel, there was fixed and placed the head of an old man, with his
beard and hair of his head transformed into nettle leaves, and out of whose
mouth gushed out the water of the fountain by art continually into the
hollownes of the broad vessel under this.

Upon the mouth of this last described vessel did mount up a pretyous hill
maruellously congest, and framed of innumerable round precious rock stones
closing one with another unequally, as if nature had joined them growing,
making a round composed hill, beautifully glistering of diverse sorts and
colors in a proportionate bigness.

And aloft upon the top of this little hill, there grew a fine pomgranate
tree, the body, boughs and fruit made all of gold, the leaves of green
Smaragde. The fruit of their natural bigness here and there aptly placed,
their sides cut open, and in place of kernelles they were full of most perfect
Rubyes, as big as the kernels.

After that, the ingenious Artificer wanting no invention, he separated the
graynes in stead of the fyline with silver foil.

And moreover, in other apples, opened, but not ripe, he redoubled the
thickness of the foil, making the kernelles of an oryentall color, so also
he made the flowers of perfect corrall, in the cups full of bees of gold.

Besides this, out of the top of the hollow steal, like a pype, there came
out a turning steal, the lowest part whereof rested in a head, framed from
the middle trunk or pype just over the axeltree.

Which steal or stypet being strongly fastened, it bare up a vessel of Topas
of an ancient form, the bowl whereof in the bottom was broad, and swelling
out with rigges in the opening, rarely bewtified with a coronice, and put under
with another.

In which closing and binding together in four equal divisions, there were
four winged heads of a little child, with four pipes in their mouths.

The rest mounted up so much as the lower bigness of the vessel was, being
closed up at the orifice with an inuerse foliature. Upon the which there was
placed an other vessel as it were a circular cover of a most curious leaf
work, with a small coronice, and an artificial orifice.

From the bottom of which there began a flourished tail of a Dolphin
fastened and sowldered to the gracy lament of the vessel, descending down
with his head finned with leaves, to the circulating brymme of the vessel
where the boys heads were fixed. And with a moderate swelling out about the
head, and streightning in toward the tail, they fitted for the ears in a
beautiful manner. And all that inclining part with an exquisite polishing did
make an express show of most curious lineaments.

The upper vessel was so perfectly wrought, that when the wheel was moved,
the steal with the vessel upon the top thereof, turned about and powered
out water through the tree, and when the wheel stood still, then that left
turning.

The wheels were half covered with two wings, the typpes turning one one
way, and the other an other way, adorned with a chasing of Mermaydes or
Scillaes.



This excellent piece of work thus running before every one, and weeting our
hands and feet of an incredible sweetness, such as I never had felt before,
we dried our hands, and it was carried away.

And being thus sprinkled with this rare and maiesticall water, the wayters
with great reverence presented unto the Queen first a great cup of gold,
and her highness affably saluting us, drunk Nectar, and afterward every
one of us after other, with reverent, mutual, and solemn honors done, did
drink a most pleasant farewell and shutting up of all the precious dainties
that we had tasted and fed upon.

Lastly, the redolent flowers being diligently taken away, and all things
that had been used borne from thence, the pauement remained pure and shining
as a most clear steel glass, and as it were emulating the precious iewelles
rownde about.

And every one being set in his appointed place, the high and mighty
Princess did command a company to come in, and stand upon the diasper
checkers, never the like before seen or imagined of any mortal creature.

Poliphilus follows to show besides this great banquet of a most excelcellent
dance or gain, and how the Queen did commit him to two of her Nymphs, the
which did lead and condust him to the sight of many wonderful things, and as
they talked, showed unto him the secrecies of such things as he stood in doubt
of. Finally, how they came to the three gates, in the middlemost whereof, he
remained amongst the amorous Nymphs.
Having spoken something of the exceeding and incomparable glory, triumph,
unknown treasure, plentiful delights, solemn banquet, and the most honorable
and sumptuous drinking of this most happy and rich Queen, if I have not
distinctly and perfectly expressed her chiefest dignity, let not the curious
company marvel thereat, for what soever ripe, sharp, and ready wit, with a
frank, eloquent and plentiful tongue adorned, is not able to perform the least
part of his duty.

And much less I, who continually suffer in every secret place of my burning
heart, an incessant strife notwithstanding the absence of Polia my mistres, the
owner of all my skill, and imprisoner of my perfections.

Besides that, in truth the many maruels in excellency, and variety unhard of,
so uncouth, rare and strange vnlikes inestimable, and not humane, have so
oppressed, laden and born down my senses, with the greedy and excessive
contemplation and beholding of their variable diversities, as that from point
to point I am no whit able to describe them, and much less worthy to publish
them.

All and the most that I can do, is to think of the rich apparel, exquisite
provision, curious dressings, perfect ambitious and wounding bewties without
imperfections, their deep judgments, Aemilian eloquence, and bounty more
then princely, the notable disposition and order of Architecture, the durable
Symmetrie and proportion of the building, perfect and absolute, the noblenes of
the Art of Masonrie and Lapycidarie, the directions and placing of Columns,
the perfection of statues and representations, the adornment of the walls, the
diversity of the stones, the stately entrance and princely porch, large
Gallery, artificious pauements, no man will think with what cost and charge
bewtified and hanged with precious Arras and Verdure. The spacious and lofty
inner Court, goodly bed chambers, inner withdrawing chambers, parlours, bathes,
library and pinacloth, where coat Armors escuchions, painted tables, and
counterfeates of strangers were kept, and with a maiestical comelines and order
placed and solemnly distributed.

In which conceiving capacity, marvelous performance, incredible charge and
high commendation of the most excellent Artificer, woorthily allowed in every
partition and elegant conuention of exquisite Lineaments. I also beheld
^marueilous twisted conlignation or covering of goldsmiths work, over a four
square plain Court, growing up alike, without comparison like a heaven, with a
disposite distance of many sorted proportions, with sundry lybellated
Dimensions, shadowing over the Court, with an Arched Eminence, which was under,
adorned with coronised Lyneaments and grauings, thereunto convenient, as
Fasheols, Gululles, and Oualling, and the leaves of Achanthus, licking up as it
were in the corners of the quadranguled Court. With Roses and the growing order
of their leaves, the top leaf least, their iaggings about the leaves, and
space between leaf and leaf. All things covered with pure fine gold and
Azure color, with diverse other proportions and counterfets of substance, equal
with their workmanship. The roofing of Salances King of Colchis, may not
compare with this.

Then the delightful fruitfulnes of the set hedges, Orchards, watered Gardens,
springing Fountains, current streams in Marble Channelles, contained, framed,
and held in, with an incredible Art, green Herbs, still fresh and
flowering, a sweet air, warm and spring winds, with a confused charm of
singing and chirping birds, a pure, fair and bright air, and still continuing
temperate and healthful, country free from danger and cloane, No craggy nor
rockie places, nipt and blasted with sharp winds, nor burnt with an
intemperate hot Sun, but under a sweet and pleasant temperature, in a
moderate mean rejoicing, betwixt two extreemes, the fields fruitful and
without tillage and manuring, yielding all commodities, warm hills, green
woods and sweet cool shadows.

Also the inestimable furniture, the attendant household and great number,
their excellent service, the diversity of youths, and all in the prime of
their years. The delighfull presence of the Nymphs, both attending abroad in
the presence and chambers, her baser sort, their ^onourable and gracious
behauiours, their diversity of apparel, attire and dressings set with Pearl
and stone, in an allowed, pleasant and lovely sort, as any can imagine or
express. With these infinite riches, supreme delights, and immeasurable
treasure, neither Dariu^, Craesus, or any other humane state, whatsoever might
any way compare.

And thus to conclude, being overcome with the glory of them, I know not what
more to say, but that I stood amazed, and as it were senceles* and yet in great
delight and without wearines, beholding those present obi^cts, and casting with
my self what fate and destinate should conduct and lead me into such a place.

But afterward finding my self in such an accumulation of glory, pleasant
seat, happy Country, great contentment and tryumphant company, such as
Clodius the Player in Tragedies never had seen. I was but moderately
converted, notwithstanding the promise of the Queen, to f^uour my amorous
desire, accouating all, but as eye pleasures that ^itherto I had seen and had
been presented unto me, still desiring a greater happiness.

For which cause, and for the greater setting out of the excess and abounding
excellency, beyond all the rest of her royal magnificence, every one sitting
in their place after the miraculous, wonderful, and sumpteous banquet, without
any delaie, she commanded a game to be played by parsonages, not only worthy
the beholding, but of eternal remembrance, which was a game at Chesse, in this
sort as follows.

By the entrance of the curtain there came in thirty two Nymphs, whereof
sixteen were apparrelled in cloth of gold (eight uniformly without
difference of degrees) afterward one of those sixteen was apparrelled in
princely rob^^ like a King, and the other like a Queen, with two tower-keepers
or Rookes, as we term them, two counsell-keepers or Secretaries, we term
them Bishops, and two Knights. In like sort were eight other in cloth of
silver, under the like government and magistracy as aforesaid.

Every one of these according to their duties* took their places upon the
checkers of the pauement, that is, sixteen in gold of one side in two rows,
and sixteen in silver of the contrary side.

The Music began upon a sudden with a rare invention to sound a charge
with a pleasant concord, participating together a sweet and thundering
melody, having in it a divine fury.

At the measured sound and time of the Music upon their checkers, as it
pleased the King to command, the pawns turning themselves with a decent
revolution, honoring the King and the Queen, leapt upon an other checker
before them.

The King of the white men, his music sounding, commanded her forward that
stood before the Queen, and the same with like reverent behavior marched
forward her continent, and stood still. And according to the mensuration of
the musical time in this order, so they changed their places, or continued
upon the checkers dancing, until that they were either taken or commanded
forward by the King.

If the music kept^ still one time, those eight vnyforme pawnes did spend
the time in marching forwards into an other checker, never coming back
until that worthily without touch or appalement of courage, they had leapt
upon the line of that square where was the residence of the Queen, proceeding
straight on, unless she took a prisoner by a Diagonick line.

The Bishop went in a Diagonike lin^, still holding that (...) loured checker
wherein he stood (...).

The Knight over two checkers before him takes the next of either hands, and
of a contrary color to that he stood in immediately before.

The Castle-keepers or Rookes might pass over many checkers straight on as
they pleased at commandment, so that they might go one, two, three, four,
or five checkers* keeping a measure, and not staying in their march.

The King might go upon any checker if none were in it, or backward, and
cause any other to remove for him, and make him room.

The Queen might go any way, but it is best when she is near her husband on
every side.

And when soever the officers of either of the Kings shall find one without
guarde of help, they take her prisoner, and both kissing one another, she that
is overcome and taken, goes forth and stands by.

Thus they continued playing and dancing according to the time of the musi^ke,
with great pleasure, solace, and applause, until the King of the silver
Nymphs was victour and conqueror.

This solemn sport, what with resistance flying back, and seconding of one an
other, with such a measured circulation, reverence, pause, and modest
continency, endured the space of an hour, whereat I took such pleasure and
delyght* that I imagyne (and not amysse) that I was rapt upon the sudden from
the liking of the sportes of Olympus to a new felicity.

This first game being ended, and conquest obtained, all returned into their
accustomed places, and in like manner as at the first, so the second time
every one in their appointed checkers, the Music changing their measure, so
the moouings and gestures of the players were altered.

And observing the time of the music in a convenient order, and approved
gesture and art, that it was no need to command or say any thing.

But the cunning and expert Nymphs, with their plentiful tresses effused
over their delicate shoulders hung wauing, and in their motion forwards would
stream out at length, somewhat showing their backs, about their heads
wearing Garlandes and Crowns of Violets. And when any one was taken, they
lifted up their arms and clapped hands. Thus playing and coursing up and down,
the first continued still conqueror.

In the last game and daunsing, they being all returned to their distributed
places, the Music again sounded a measure phrygiall in as perfect and
provoking fury as ever Marcias of Phrygia invented.

The King in robes of Cold, caused the young Damsel that stood before the
Queen, to march forward to the third Checker, direct in the first remove,
whereupon immediately there was seen a battle and Torney, with so swift and
sudden forces, bending themselves to the ground as it were lying close upon
their Guard, and presently upon it capering up with a turn twice above ground,
one rust opposite against an other, and upon their down come withal a turn
upon the toe thrice about.

All this Action they did at one time, with such a grace and agilitie, as
nothing could be better, with their low inclinatitions, high Capers and
Turnings, without affectation of strayning, as it should seem with facility
and careless ease at pleasure and sweet iestures, as in such a thing may be
imagined, and not else where to be seen. Never any one troubling an other,
but who so was taken prisoner, did presently kiss their Conqueror, and voyded
the place. And the lesser number that there was, the more pleasure it was to
perceive the policies of either sides to overcome other.

And such an order and motion was used of every one, in a commendable sort
without fault, as the measure and time of the Music appointed, stirryng even
them that looked on to have a motion in their sinowes and minds to do the
like, there was such a concord and agreement betwixt nature and the Music
especially, seeing the performance of the same in the actions of others.

Upon this occasion I was moved to call to remembrance the force of Timotheus,
the most cunning musician, who with his voice and measure upon his Instrument
would provoke the great Macedonian Alexander, violently to take Arms, and
presently altering his voice and tune, to forget the same, and sit down
contentedly. In this third game, thy apparrelled in gold did triumph in the
victoritie.

Thus honorably with exceeding pleasure and great solace, this sumpt^ous feast
being ended, every one framed themselves to sit down. And I rising up, made
reverence before the Royal seat of her sacred majesty, and kneelyng down
upon my knee, she thus said unto me.

Poliphilus, forget now, and wype out of thy remembrance all forepassed
griefs, occursiue troubles, pensive conceits, and ouergone dangers, because
that I am assured of thy forthwith full contentment of desire.

And seeing that thy determination is to persevere resolutely in the amorous
flames and love of Polia, I think it convenient, that for the recovery
thereof, thou repair to the three Ports, which are the resident places of the
high and mighty Queen Telosia, in which place upon every of those Ports
and Gates, thou shall see her title and name inscrypt. Read it diligently, but
for thy better direction and safegarde, thou shall have to accompany thee, two
of my handmaydes, which know very well the way thither, and therefore go on
undoubtedly with a happy success.

And thereupon with a princely bounty, she drew of from her finger a Ring of
gold, having set in it an Anchit, and delivered it unto me to remember her
bounty by.

At this advise and precious gift, I became amphasiatike, not knowing what to
say or do, in requital or giving of thanks. Which her Highness perceiving,
motherly and with a natural promptnes in a maiestical gravity, turned her
countenance to two noble and goodly Nymphs, attending near unto her Royal
and imperial Throne, saying thus to one of them upon her right side.

Logistica, you shall be one that shall accompanye our guest Poliphilus, and
with a sacred and honorable grace, she turned to the left hand saying,
Thelemia, you shall also go with him. And both of you show and instruct him at
what Gate he must remain, and then Poliphilus, they shall bring you to an
other mighty and maiesticall Queen, who if she shall be bountiful unto
thee in entertainment thou art happy, if contrary, then discontented.

Notwithstanding, none does know her intent by her countenance, because that
sometime she shows her self full of favor, love, and pleasant
dispositions. An other time she is malignant, froward, disdainefull, with
unstable incursyue passions. And she it is that determines such events as
thou seek after. And for her obscure condition, she is rightly called
Thelosia.

Her residence is not in such a stately Pallaice, as thou see me to dwell
in.

Therefore I would have thee to vnderhande, that the chief woorkeman in the
creation of nature, did make no thing comparable to me, neither can the earth
show thee greater treasure then to come to my presence and taste of my bounty,
obtain my favor and participate of my quality.

And therefore esteem of it according to the value, for that thou find in
me, is a heavenly Tallent above all earthly Jewels, for I have not had my
residence in man since his fall.

They may imagine of me, but they know me not, neither do I bear any rule
with them to the good of my self.

Now the Queen Telosia, she dwells in a place of cloudie darkness, her
house is kept close and shut, for that she will not show her self unto man,
nor anothomise, discover, and lay open her self unto any as she is, and for
this cause the event of her variable determination is kept secret.

But in a marvelous sort considerately, she transformeth her self against
the hair, into diverse fashions, not manifesting her self, although desired.

And when the ancient Gates shall be opened unto thee, in every one shall be
written what shall befall thee, but thou shall not perceive the same, unless
that in some part thy understanding and wisdom enigmatically and with a right
and sincere judgment look unto it, and quickly consider of it, for because
that she ambyguously changes her self in habit and countenance, and
through this doubtful anymaduersion, a man remains deceived of his
expectation without remedy.

And therefore Poliphilus, that which these my consigned, trusty and appointed
handmaydes by suggestion shall persuade thee unto, and at what Gate thou
ought to enter in and remain, even which of those two it shall best please
thee to give ear unto, do: for they have some understanding of her.

And having thus spoken, she made a sign or beck with her head to the two
Nymphs Logistica and Thelemia, who presently without delaie, were obedient to
her command. And I being ready to speak, neither knew what to say, or yet
durst to so high a majesty, and for so great bounties give a word.

The two appointed companyons of my journey, very fauourablye, and with a
familiar readiness and virginlike iestures, took hold of me, one by the right
hand, and the other by the left, and reverently obteyning license, first of
the Queen, and taking their leave of the rest, went out the same way that I
came in.

And I being desirous and not satisfied, turned me about toward the
conspicuous Poarch, to behold diligently the artificious Pallaice, wonderful
and perfinite of the Art of building.

The subtlety of which, no humane excogitation is able to imitate.

And therefore I thought that nature had made that for a marvel of all her
works for commodity, use, grace, beauty, air, and continual durablenes.

For which cause, I was excessiuely desirous to stay and look upon it, but
my leaders and guides would not suffer me, and yet by the theft of my eye in
the Zopher, over the gate I noted this inscription, (...).

And as much as with my quick senses I could carry, I took in my going
forth, with as great pleasure and delight as is possible to express. O
happy were he that might be but a drudge or kitchen slave in such a
Paradise.

Now being come into the base Court, compassed and set about with Orange
trees, Thelemia in great courtesy said thus unto me, besides and above all
the marvelous and wonderful things which thou have yet seen and beheld,
there be sower yet remaining behind which thou shall see.

And upon the left side of the incomparable palace, they brought me into a
fair Orchyard of excogitable expense, time, and subtletie of woorke-manshippe,
the contynent and cyrcuite whereof was as much as the plot of the Palace,
wherein was the resydence and abiding of the Queen.

Round about fast by the walls of the Orchyard there were set conuenyent
garden pots in the which in stead of growing plants, every one was of pure
glass, Ar^ toparia is the way of cutting of trees in gardens or other places
to proportions or shapes.
exceeding a man's imagination or belief, intorpiaried box the roots and
stalks of gold, whereout the other proceeded.

Betwixt one and other of the which was placed a Cyprusse tree, not above two
paces high, and the box one pace full of manyfolde marvelous symples, with a
most excellent imitation of nature, and pleasant diversity in the fashions
of flowers in distinct colors very delyghtfull.

The plain labiall compassing about the quadrant Orchyard coming out from the
walls as a seat for these aforesaid garden pottes and trees to stand upon,
was subcoronized with gold by excellent lyneamentes wrought and adorned. The
upper face whereof, and whereupon those pottes and trees did stand, was
covered with a plaster of glass gilte, and a curious historographie to be
seen in the same, and compassed about and holden in with wyering and netting
of gold.

The wall that compassed about the Orchyard with a convenient distance, was
bellyed out with columns of the same matter, and invested with flowring
bindings naturally proportioned, and here and there were quadrangulate
columns of gold chamfered, arching from one to an other, with a requisite
beam Zophor and coronice, with a meet and convenient proiecture over the
chapter of glass upon the round.

The substance of which subject proiecture of the bryttle matter, was of
counterfayte diasper diversely colored and shining. Which bryttle substance had
some void space betwixt that and the other.

The mouth of the arches were stopped with rombyes of clear glass in form of
a tryangle, and the pypes beautified all over with an Encaustick painting,
very gracious to the sight of the beholder.

The ground was here and there covered with great round balls of glass like
gunne stones, and other fine proportions much pleasing* with a mutual consent
immovable like pearls shining without any adulteration by folyature. From
the flowers did breath a sweet fragrancie by some clear washing with oil for
that purpose.

There most cunningly did Logistica like an Orator make a discourse in
commendation physically of that excellent confection of the noblenes of the
substance, secrecy of the art, and straungenes of the invention. The like is
not to be found.

And after she said, Poliphilus let us go and ascend up this mount next
the Garden, and Thelemia remaining at the stayre foot, we ascended up to the
plain top. Where she showed unto me, with a heavenly eloquence, a Garden
of a large compass, made in the form of an intricate Laborynth allies and
ways, not to be trodden, but sailed about, for in stead of allies to tread
upon, there were ryuers of water.

The which mystical place was of a very lusty mould and fruitful,
replenished with all sorts of fruits, beautified with fair springs, and green
herbs and flowers, full of all solace and delight. Whereupon she spoke thus.

I do imagine ( Poliphilus) that you do not understand the conditionate
state of this marvelous seat, and therefore give attendance to my words.

Whosoever enters in cannot come back, but as you see yonder mountains
here and there distributed, seven circuits and the about goings distant one
from another.

And the extreme molestation and sorrow of the enterers in, is this: In the
myddle mountain within the center thereof, and open mouth of the same, there
lurketh inuisibly a deadly devouring old Dragon, he is utter destruction to
some, and others are not hurt to death by him. He cannot be seen nor
shunned, neither does he leave any unassaulted, but either in the entry, or
in their journey, he destroys or wounds. And if he kills them not
betwixt one mountain and another, they pass the seven circuites to the next
mount.

And they that enter in by the first tower or mount (whereupon is this title
inscript (...).) They sail in a little ship with a prosperous wind, and
securely at pleasure: the fruits and flowers fall down upon their hatches,
and with great solace and pleasure they cut through by the seven reuolutions
with a merry wind, until the second mount be discovered and come unto. And
mark and behold ( Poliphilus) how clear and bright the air is in the
entrance, over that it is in the center, about the which is thick darkness.

In the first mount or tower there is always resident a pitiful matron and
bountiful, before whom stands an ancient appointed vessel called Vrna, in
a readiness, having upon it seven Greek letters as thus (...), full of
appointed honey, and to every one that enters in, very courteously and with
a good will she gives one of them without respect of state and condition,
but according to their entrance.

These being received, they came forth, and begin to sail in the Laborynth,
the water being enuyroned upon either sides, with roses, trees, and fruits.

And having sailed the first seven reuolutions of Aries, and being come to the
second mount, there they meet with innumerable troops of young women of diverse
conditions, which demand of every one the sight of their honye, which being
showed unto them, they straightwayes know the property of the honey, and the
goodness thereof, and embracing him as their guest, they inuyte him with them
to pass through the next seven reuolutions, and with diverse exercises
according to her inclyned promptnes, they accompany them to the third mount.

In this place he that will go on forwards with his companion, she will
never abandon or leave him: for there be far more pleasant voluptuous
women. And many refuse the first and make choice of them.

In the putting off from the second mount, to come to the third, they find the
current of the water somewhat against them, and stand in need of oars, but
being fallen off from the third mount, making their course toward the
fourth, they find the tide and stream more against them, and in these seven
oblique courses their pleasure is variable and unconstant.

Being come to the fourth mount, they find other young women combatting and
fighting, and those examining their pottes of honey, they entice them to their
exercise, but those that refuse to leave their first companions, they let pass
together, and in this cyrcuite the water is yet more contrary and troublesome,
where there is need of great study and labor to pass on.

And being come to the fifth mount, they find it speculable, like a mirror
wherein they see their representations, and in that they take great delyght,
and with a fervent desire they pass on their labor some course. In that mount
they see this sentence and golden saying manyfested, Medium tennere beati: not
lyneall, nor local, but temporal, where by a sincere and perfect examination
he discerns that mean wherewith he has joined his felicity, wisdom and
riches: which if not well, in the rest of his course he faynteth the more.

And losing off from thence, the Waters by reason of the broken circles,
begin to be very slyding toward the Center; so that with small or no rowing
they are brought to the sixth Mount. And there they find elegant Women, with a
show of heavenly modesty and divine worship, with whose amiable aspects and
countenaunces, the Trauailers are taken in their love, condemning their former
with despite and hateful abhorrence* And with these they fall acquainted, and
pass the seven reuolucions.

These being come over with an obscure and foggy close air, with many losses
and a grievous voyage, they begin to remember what they have past and lost:
for the more that the compass of the reuolucion, draws near to the
discovery of the Figure of the Center, the sooner they are passed over, still
shorter and shorter, and the more swyfter the course of the stream is into the
devouring swallow of the Center.

And then with extreme affliction and bitter anguish remembering the abuse of
their pleasures, and companions that they have forsaken* and sweet places,
which so much the more augmenteth their sorrows* for that they cannot return
o^ go back with their Ship, such a company still follow them upon the
stearne with their fore-castles. And most of all dysmayeth them the heavy
sentence over the median Center, Theon^ykos Dys Algetos.

And there, considering the displeasant title, they curse the time of their
entrance into the Labirinth, which has in it so many sundry delights, and the
end of them subject to such miserable and inevitable necessity.

And then she smyling, said: Poliphilus, over the devouring throat of this
Center, there sits a severe Judge, balancing every ones actions, and helping
whom he will help. And because that it will be tedious to tell thee all, let
thus much hereof suffice. Let us go down to our companion Thelemia, who
demanding the cause why they staid so long above, Logistica made answer, it
does not content our Poliphilus, only to behold, but also to understand by me
the secrecy of those things, which he could not go to know, wherein I have
satis-fied him* And when she had ended, Thelemia said.

Let us go a little while to an other garden no less pleasant joining to the
glass garden, upon the right side of the Pallas: and when we were come in
thither, I was amazed with excessive wondering, to see the curiousness of the
work, as uneasy to report as incredible to believe: aequiuolant with that of
glass, with like disposition of benches or banks; their lyppes set ou^ with
coronising and golden ground work, and such trees, but that the boxes and
Cyprus trees, were all silk, saving the bodies and greater branches, or the
strength of the arms: the rest, as the leaves, flower^, and outermost ^ynde,
was of fine silk, wanting no store of Pearls to beautify the same: and the
perfect fine color, smelling as the glass flowers before mentioned, and
alike, but that they about compassing walls, of merua^lous and incredible
sumpteousnesse, were all covered over with a crusting of Pearl, close joined
and set together: and toward the ^oppe, there sprouted out green y^ie, the
leaves thickning and bushing out from the Pearls, with the stranges and
veins of gold, r^nning up in diverse places betwixt the Pearls, in a most
rare and ^urious sor^, as if it had been very growing yuie, with berries of
precious stones set in the stalks in little bunches: and in the bushes were
Ringe-doues of silk, as if they had been feeding of the berries, all along
the sides of the square plotted garden walls: over the which, in master-like
and requisit^ order, stretched out the beam Zophor and of gold.

The plain smoth of the settles, whereupon the box trees stood, covered
over with Histories of love and venerie, in a work of silk and threddes of
gold and silver, in such a perfect proportioned ymaginarie and counterfaiting
as none may go beyond. The ground of the level garden, was of leaves,
grass, and flowers of silk, like a fair sweet meddowe: in the midst
whereof, there was a large and goodly round Arbor, made with gold wire, and
ouerspread with roses of the like work, more beautiful to the eye, then if
they had been growing roses, under which covering, and within which Arbor
about the sides, were seats of red Diaspre, and all the round paueme^t of a
yellow Diaspre, according to the largen^s of the place, with diverse colloured
spottings, confusedly agreeing together in pleasant adulterated uniting, and so
clear and shining, that to every object was it self gain represented. Under
the which Arbor, the fair and pleasant Thelemia, solaciously sitting down,
took her Lute which she carried with her, and with a heavenly melody and
vn-hearde sweetness, she began to sing in the commendation and delights of
her Queen. And seeing what a grace unto her, the company of her fellow
Logistica was, I maruailed why Apollo came not to harken the Harmony made by
them: it was so melodious, that for the present time a man would have thought
that there had been no greater faelicitie. And after that she ended her
divine Poems, Logistica took me by the hand and led me forth of the Arbor,
saying unto me.

Poliphilus, thou shall understand that the devise of these objects, are more
pleasant to be understood then beheld, and therefore let us enter in
here, to be satisfied in both.

And from thence, she and her companion brought me from this garden to an
other, where I beheld an arching Areostile, from the ground bent to the top,
five paces in height and three over, and thus continued round about the
compass of the garden, in an orderly and requisite proportioning, all invested
and covered over with green yuie, so that no part of the wall was to be seen.
And there were a hundred Arches to the compassing of this garden.

By every of the Arches, was an Altar of red Porphirite, curiously
proportioned with exquisite lyneaments; and upon every one of them was placed,
an image of gold, like a Nymph, of rare and beautiful semblances, diversely
apparelled, and varying in their attire and head dressing, every one bending
their eyes toward the Center of the garden.

In which middle Centricke place, there was founded a Base, of a clear
Christal-like Calcedonie stone, in a Cubic form: that is, every way a like
square. And upon that was set a round stone, but flat upon both sides, two
foot high, and by the Diameter, one pace and a half over, of most pure red
Diaspre. Upon the which, stood a most black stone, in form three square,
and in quantity for breadth, fitting the round, and in height one pace and a
half. The corners of which triangle did iumpe with the sides, and lymbus of
the subiacent plynth or round stone.

In the smooth polished fronts of which triangle, there was appact a beautiful
Image, of a heavenly aspect, grave and modest, with their feet not touching
the stone, but standing out from the same just over the suppressed and
vnder-put round stone. Their statures as tall as the trygonall would bear,
unto the which they did stick fast by their back parts. Their arms were
stretched abroad, both the right and left to the corners of the triangle,
where they held a Copy, filled and fastened to the corners of the Trigonall,
the length of every one of which Coppies of fine gold, was seven foot.

And the Images, the Coppyes, and their bands wherewith they were tied in the
midst and held by, were all shyning, and their hands inui^uped* with the sundry
stringes, flynging about the plain smothe of the black stone.

Their habits were Nymphish, of most rare and most excellent working. The
Sepulcher of Tarnia the Queen of the Scythians in Asia, was nothing comparable.

In the lowest Cubicall Figure, upon the smoth plain of every square, were
engraven Greek Letters, three, one, two and three on this sort. (...).

In the circular there were three Characters Hieragliphicall, perpendicularly
under the feet of every Image. For the first, was impressed the form of the
Son. Next under another, the figure of an old fashioned Ower.

Thirdly, a dyshe with a burning flame in it.

Upon the head of the trygonall black stone, toward every corner, I did
behold an Egiptian Monster of Gold, four footed couchant. One of the^ having a
face like man altogether. The other like half a man, and half a beast. And the
third like a beast. With a linen veil over every of their heads, with two
Labels hanging over their ears, and the rest descending down and covering
their necks and backs, with the bodies of Lions. Their looks directly forward.

Upon the backs of these three, did stand rising up a massiue Pyre of Gold,
three square, sharpning up to the top, five times as high as broad below.
And upon every front or foreside, was graven a circle, and over one circle a
Greek Letter, O. over another, a Letter (...). and over the third, a Greek N.

There Logistica began to speak unto me, saying, by these Figures are
discribed, so far as man's reason can show, the celestial harmony. And
understand Poliphilus, that these Figures, with a perpetual affynitie and
conjunction, are ancient Monuments, and Egiptian Hieragliphs, signifying this,
Diuinae infinitaeque trinitati vnius essentiae. Which is now by his holy word,
in a most loving sort manifested to the whole world, according to his will: and
yet it shall not be a miss to see antiquities, and consider what greater
benefit is had by the precious Gospel.

The lower Figure was consecrated to the Deity, because it is every way
alike, and all one: and upon every side, and turned every way, of like
stablenes; upon every base, constant and permanent.

The round Circular standing upon that, is without beginning or end. Upon
the circumferent sides whereof, these three lyneaments are contained, directly
under every Image, according to the property attributed.

The Sun with his comfortable light, gives life to every thing, and his
nature is attributed to GOD.

The second is the Ower, which is provident direction, and government of all
with an infinite wisdom.

The third is a Fyerie Vessel, whereby is understood a partycipation of Love.

And although that they be three distinct things, yet they are contained and
united in one sempeternallie, with great love communicating their blessings, as
you may see by the coppies at every corner of the trygonall stone.

And continuing her delectable speech, she said, under the form of the Sun,
note this Greek word, Adiegetos. By the Owe look upon this, Adiachoristos.
And by the Vessel of fire, was engraven, Adiereynes.

And to this end are the three Monsters placed under the golden Obelisque,
because that there be three great opinions like those Monsters: and as that
with the humane countenance is best, so the other be beastly and monstrous.

In the Spyre there be three plain sides, lyneated with three circles,
signifying one for every time. The past, the present, and to come; and no other
figure can hold these three circles, but in that inuariable. And no mortal
man can at one instant perfectly discern and see together two sides of the
same figure, saving one integrally, which is the Present: and therefore upon
great knowledge were these three Characters engraven, O. (...) N.

For which cause Poliphilus, not that I excuse my self for being over prolix
and tedious, but briefly to teach thee* and set thee right up. In the
knowledge hereof, thou shall understand, that the first busiall Figure is
only known to himself, and to one Son of man, which has a humane body
glorified and without sin: and the brightness thereof we see but as in a
glass, and not clearly as it is, for that it is incomprehensible for a fynite
substance.

But he that is endued with wisdom, le^ him consider of the glorious
brightness thereof. But to the third Figure, which is of a dark and black
color, wherein be the three golden Images: The Black stone is the Law: the
Coppies food: the three Women the preservation of Mankind.

Now they which will look higher, they see a Figure in a tryne aspect, and
the higher that they go toward the top, where the union of the three is,
be they never so wise, their understanding is imperfect: and although that they
see it, yet they know not what they see, but that there is such a thing, in
comparison whereof, they are fools, their power weak, and themselves nothing.

And there Logistica having ended her allowed talk, proceeding from an
absolute knowledge, deep judgment, and sharpness of wit in Divine matters,
and unknown to weak capacities, I began heereat to take greater delight, then
in any other marvelous work what soever, that I had graciously beholden with
my greedy eyes. Considering with my self of the mystical Obelisque; the
ineffable equality statarie* for durablen^sse and perpetuity immovable, and
enduring incorruptible.

Where there breathed a sweet air from heaven, with unvariable winds, in this
Garden round about full of flowers* of a large and circular permanent plot:
compassed about with all sorts of fruits, pleasant in taste and full of
health; with a perpetual greenesse, disposed and set by a regular order, both
beautiful* pleasant, and convenient; with the perfect labor and endeavor of
Nature to bring it to that pass, and beautified with precious gold.

And Logistica holding her peace, they took me both by the hands, and we went
out at the mouth of one of the Arches from the precyncts of the Iuied
enclosure. And being gone from thence* very contentedly passing on betwixt
them both, says Thelemia, let us now hasten on to our three Gates whether we
are sent.

Whereupon, we passing through a plentiful seat and pleasant Country, with a
reasonable convenient pace, I beheld the heavens very clear and bright, and
beguiled the time with merry, sweet, and delightful discourses. And I desirous
to understand every particular of the inestimable riches, unspeakable delights
and incomparable treasure of the sacred Queen, (to the which Osyris the
builder of the two Temples of Gold, one to Jupiter, and the other to the
kingdom, must give place,) I moved this question.

Tell me I beseech you fair Nymphs, (if my curiosity be not to your
coffeehouse) amongst all the precious stones that I could perfectly behold
of great estimation and price, one I deemed inestimable, and without comparison
most precious; The Jasper which had the effigies of Nero cut, it was not much
bigger. Neither was the Coruscant to pass in the statue of Arsinoe the Arabian
Queen equal with it. Next her, of such value was the Jewel, wherein was the
representation of Nonius the Senator, as this sparkling and shyning Dyamond, of
a rare and unseen beauty and bigness, which did hang upon a rich Carkenet
about the snowie neck of the sacred Queen, what cutting was in the same,
which I could not perceive by means of the brightness and my being somewhat
far of. And therefore I being therein ignorant, desire to know the same.

Logistica considering of my honest demand, answered me incontinently. Know
this Poliphilus, in the Jewel was engraven an imperial throne, and in the
throne the mighty name of Jehovah in Hebrew Letters, and before that throne,
are cast down and trodden under foot, the Giants which proudly have lift up
themselves against his word, and resisted his will: upon the left side of the
throne is a flame of fire, upon the right hand a horn of salvation, or Copy
full of all good blessedness, and this is all that is contained in the Jewel.

Then I presumed further to know, what should these two things upon either
sides of the throne signify* that were holden out in two hands: Thele^ia
quickly answered me, God of his infinite goodness, proposes to mankind his
mercy and his judgment, choose which they will.

For this being satis-fied, I said moreover. Seeing that most gracious Nymphs,
my speeches be not displeasant unto you, and that I am not yet satis-fied in
all that I have seen, I pray you let me understand this.

Before the horrible fear that I was driven into by the Dragon, I beheld a
mighty huge Elephant of stone, with an entrance into his belly, where were two
Sepulchers, with a writing, the meaning whereof is too mystical for me, that
was, that I should not touch the body, but take away the head.

Logistica forthwith made me answer. Poliphilus, I do understand very well
your doubt, and therefore you shall understand, that this monstrous shape and
machine was not made without great and wonderful humane wisdom, much labor,
and incredible diligence, with a perplexibility of understanding to know the
mystical conceit. Thou remembrest that upon the face there hung an ornament,
with certain Ide^nix ionic and Arabic, which in our Mother Tongue, is as much
to say, as labor, and industry. Sgnifying thereby, that in this world,
whosoever will have any blessing that shall do him good, he must leave the
body, which is ease and idleness, and betake himself to travail and industry,
which is the head.

She had no sooner ended her words both pleasant and piercing, but I
understood it very well and gave her great thanks? And yet desirous to be
resolved in whatsoever I stood in doubt, and seeing that I might speak boldly,
I made this third question. Most wise Nymph, in my coming out of the
subterraneall vast dark some place, as I passed on, I came to a goodly bridge,
and upon the same, in a Porphyrite stone upon the one side, and an Ophite
upon the other, I beheld engraven certain Hieragliphs, both which I did
interpret* but I stood doubtful of certain branches, that were tied to the
horns of the scalpe of the Ox, and the rather because they were in the
Porphyrite stone, and not in the Ophit upon the other side.

She answered me straight way. The branches, one is of the Thistle or thorn
of Judea, and the other of the Turbentine. The crown of thorn upon Christ's
head.
The nature of which Woods be, that the one will not easily take fire, and
the other will neither bend, rotte, consume, nor be eaten with worms. And so
that patience is commended, which with anger is not kindled, nor by adversity
will be subdued.

The nature of the Porphy^it stone is of this secrecy, tha^ in the furnace it
will neither burn it self, but also causes other stones near adjoining that
they shall not burn. And of that nature is patience, that it will neither be
altered it self, nor suffer any other wherein it bears rule to fall into a
fury. And the Ophite stone is of such nature also.

Now Poliphilus, I do greatly commend you, in that you are desirous to
understand such secrets: for to behold, consider, and measure the same, is a
commendable virtue, and the way to knowledge: whereupon I had occasion given
to render innumerable thanks, for her great and favorable courtesies.

And thus with allowed and delightful discoursing speeches, we came to a fair
River, upon the banck whereof, besides other fair green and flourishing Trees,
and water herbs, I beheld a fine Grove of Plane Trees, in the which was an
excellent fair bridge over the River made of stone, with three Arches, with
pyles bearing forth against the two fronts, to preserve the work of the
bridge, the sides thereof being of excellent workmanship.

And in the middle bending of the same, upon either sides, there was a square
stone of Porphyrite set, having in it a Catagliphic, engrauing of Hieragliphies.

Upon the right hand as I went over, I beheld a woman, casting abroad her
arms, sitting only upon one buttocke, putting forth one of her legs as if
she would rise; In her right hand, upon that side which she did sit, she
held a pair of wings, and in the other hand, upon that side whereon she was
arysing, a Tortice.

Right against her, there was a Circle, the center whereof two little Spyrits
did hold, with their backs turned toward the circumference of the Circle.

And then Logistica said unto me, Poliphilus, I am sure that thou do not
understand these Hieragliphs, but they make much for thy purpose: and therefore
they are placed for a Monument and thing to be considered, of such as pass by.

The Circle Medium tenuere beats.

The other, temper thy have by staying, and thy slownesse by rising, consider
hereof as thou see cause.

This bridge was built with a moderate bending, showing the cunning
disquisition, trial, examination, ar^e, and discretion of the excellent
workman and inuenter, commended in the continuance and durablenesse thereof,
which many of our Bayard-like modern Idiots, without knowledge, measure and
art buzzing on, neither observe proportion nor lyneaments, but all out of
order.

This bridge was all of pure Marble.

When we had passed over the bridge, we walked in the cool shadow, delighted
with the variable notes and chirpings of small byrds, to a rocky and stony
place, where high and craggie Mountains lifted up themselves, afterward
continuing to abrupt and wilesome hilly places, full of broken and nybled
stones, mounting up into the air, as high as a man might look to, and
without any green grass or herb, and there were hewn out the three gates,
in the very rock it self, even as plain as might be. A work very ancient
and past record, in a very displeasant seat.



Over every one of the which, I beheld in Letters Ionic, Roman, Hebrew* and
Arabic, the title that the sacred Queen Eleutherillidae foretold me that I
should find. The Gate upon my right hand, had upon it this word, Theodoxia.
That upon my left hand, Cosmodoxia. And the third, Erototrophos. Unto the
which as soon as we were come, the Damsels began to instruct me in the
tytles, and knocking in the resounding leaves of the Gates, upon the right
hand covered over with green moss, they were presently opened.

And there did an old woman present herself unto us, of an honorable
countenance, out of an old dawbed and smoakie house, having a poor base
little door, over the which was painted Pilurania. She came with a modest and
honest shamefastness, and her dwelling place was in a solitary site and
shadie Rock, decayed and crumbly, her clothes were tattered, her face lean,
pale and poor. Her eyes looking toward the ground, her name was Th^nde. She
had attending upon her six Handmaydes, basely and slend^rly apparrelled. One
was named Parthenia, the second Edosia, an other Hypocolinia, the fourth
Pinotidia, the next Tapinosa, the last Prochin^. Which reverent Matron, with
her right arm naked poynted to the heavens.

She dwelt in a place very hard to come unto, and full of troubles to pass on
the way, being hyndered with thorn and briars, very rough and displeasant, a
mistie cloud cast over it, and very hard to clymbe up into.

Logistica perceiving by my look that I had no great lyking in this place,
somewhat grieved therewith, said, this Rock is known never but a^ the end.
And then Thelemia said, Poliphilus, I see you make small regard of such a
painful woman. Whereat I assenting to her with my countenance, we departed,
and the gate being shut we came to the next.

Where knocking, it was presently opened, and we entering in, there met us a
brown woman, with fierce eyes rolling, and of a quick countenance, lifting
up a naked glittering sword, upon the middle whereof was a Crown of gold, and
a branche of Palm tree intrauersed.

Her arms brawnie like Hercules, in labor and acts magnanimious and nobly
minded. Her belly small. A little mouth* strong and stooping shoulders, by her
countenance seeming to be of an undaunted mind, not fearing to undertake any
enterprise how hard soever.

Her name was Euclelia, very honorably attended upon with six young Women.
The first was called Merimnasia, the second, Epitide, another, Ergasilea, the
fourth, An^ctea, the fifth was named Statia, the last was called Olistea.

The situation and place me thought was painful, and Logistica perceiving my
inclynation, presently took into her hand Thelemias Lute, and began to
strike a doricall tune, and sung to the same very sweetly, saying. O
Poliphilu^* be not weary to take pains in this place, for when labor and
travel is overcome, there will be a time of rest. And her song was of such
force, that I was even consenting to remain there, notwithstanding that, the
habitation seemed laboursome. Whereupon, Thelemia inticingly said unto me, I
think that it stands with very great reason my Poliphilus, that before you
set down your rest here in this place, you ought in any case to see the third
Gate.

Whereunto I consented with a very good will, and therefore going out from
hence, we came to the other Gate, where Thelemia knocking at a ring of Brass,
it was forthwith set open, and when we were come in, there came toward us
a notable goodly woman, and her name was Phil^ronia.

Her regards were wanton, lascivious, and unconstant, her grace wonderful
pleasant, so as at the very first sight she violently drew me into her love.

This place was the Mansion House of Voluptuousnes. The ground decked with
small herbs, and adorned with all sorts of sundry flowers, abounding with
solace and quiet ease. Issuing and sending forth in diverse places small
streams of water, pyppling and slyding down upon the Amber gravel in their
crooking Channels here and there, by some sudden fall making a still
continued noise, to great pleasure moystning the open fields, and making the
shadowed places under the leaffye Trees, cool and fresh.

She had with her also six young women of like statures, passing fair, of
pleasant countenaunces, amorously adorned, and dressed as may be desired of an
ambitious beauty and gesture.

The first was called Rast^nelia. The second, Cortasina. The third, Idonesa.
The fourth, Tripheliae. The fifth, Epiania. And the last was named Adi^.

These and their company, were very delightful to my gasing and searching
eyes. VVhere-vppon Logistica presently with a sad and grieved countenance,
seeing me disposing my self abruptly to the servile love of them, she said
unto me, O Poliphilus, the alluring and enticing beauties of these, are vain,
deceivable, and counterfeited, unsavory and displeasant, and therefore if
thou would with aduisement look upon their backs, thou would then
have, contemn, and abhor their loathsome filthiness and shame, abounding in
stink and noisome sauoure above any dunghill, which no stomach can abide.

And therefore what is slypperie and transitory fly and eschew, despise that
pleasure which brings shame and repentance, vain hopes, a short and small
joy, with perpetual complaynts, doub^full sighs, and a sorrowful life never
ending.

Oh adulterated and unkindly pleasure, fraught with misery, containing such
bitterness, like honnie, and yet gall dropping from green leaves.

O life worse then death, and yet deadly, delighted in sweet poison, with what
care, sorrow, pensive thoughts, mortal and desperate attempts, art thou sought
for to be obtained by blind Lovers, who without regard or advise cast
themselves headlong into a gulf of sorrows.

They be present before thine eyes, and yet thou see them not. Oh what and
how great sorrows, bitter and sharp pain and vexation do thou bear,
wicked, execrable and accursed appetite.

O detestable madness, oh beguiled senses, by your fault with the self same
beastly pleasure, miserable mortal men are overthrown.

Oh filthy lust, absurd fury, disordinate and vain desire, building nests
with errors, and torments for vvounded hearts, the utter destroyer, and idle
letting go by of all good blessings.

Oh blind Monster, how do thou blind, and with what deceit do thou
cover the eyes, and deceive the understanding senses of unhappy and miserable
Lovers with vailes and mystes.

O monstrous and slavish, which compassed with so many evils, hastenest to so
small pleasure poisoned and feigned.

Logistica speaking with vehemency these and such like words, her forehead
fr^^ning, w^^^npling with sorrows, and veins, rising up in a great (...),
sh^e cast ^er Lute upon the gro^nd and brake it*

VVhere-vppon (...), with a smyling countenance, nodded toward me, as if
she should say, let Logistica speak her pleasure, but do as you see good
your self.

And Logistica seeing my wicked intent and resolute determination, being
kindled with disdain, turned her back, and with a great sigh hastened away.

And I remained still with my companion Tibelemia, who with a flattering and
smyling grace said unto me, Poliphilus, this is the place where thou shall not
continue long, but thou shall find the dearest thing which thou love in the
world, and which thou have in thy heart, without in^ermission determined to
seek and desire.

And doubtfully then discoursing with my self, I was resolved that nothing
could breed quiet, or bring content to my poor grieved heart, but my best
desired Polia. The promise and warrantise of Thelemia for my obtaining the
same, bred in me some comfort.

And she perceiving that the Mistress of this place, and the seat it self,
and her Women did both please me well, and entertained me courteously, she
kissing me, took her leave and gave me a farewell.

The metallyne gates being shut, I remained incloystered among these fair and
beautiful Nymphs, who began very pleasantly and wantonly to devise with me:
and being hemmed in with their lascivious company, I found my self provoked
by their perswasiue alluring intisements, to unlawful concupiscence, feeling
in my self a burning desire, kyndled with their wanton aspects, an increasing
provocation of a lusting fie^ I doubt me that if Phrine had been of that
favor, and force in gesture of speech, cold Xenocrates would have consented
to her (...), and not have been accused by her, to be an image of stone. Their
countenances were so lascivious, their breasts naked and intycing, their eyes
flattering, in their roseall forheads, glystering and rolling, their shapes
most excellent, their apparel rich, their motions girlish, their regards
biting, their ornaments, sweet and precious, no part counterfeited, but all
perfected by nature in an excellent sort, nothing deformed, but all parts
aunswerable one to an other.

Their heads yellowe, their tresses fair, and the hair soft and fine, in
such a sort dressed up and rouled into trammels, with laces of silk and gold,
passing any joy that a man may behold, turned about their heads in an
excellent manner, inuiluxed, and bound up together, their forheades compassed
about and shaddowed with wavering curles, mouably praepending in a wonderful
manner, marvelous delightful, perfumed and sweet, yielding an unknown
fragrancie. Their speeches so perswasorie and pleasing, as might rob the
favor of an indesposed heart, and violently draw unto them any mind, though
Satyr-like or churlish howsoever, to deprave Religion, to bind every loose
conceit, to make any rusty Peasant amorous, and to mollify any froward
disposition. Upon which occasion, my mind, altogether set on fire with a new
desire, and in the extreme heat of concupiscence, provoked to fall headlong
into a lascivious appetite, and drowned in lustful love unbridled: in the
extreme invasion and infectious contage thereof, the Damoselles forsook me
and left me all alone in a fruitful plain.

In this place Poliphilus being left alone, a most fair Nymphe (when he was
forsaken of the lascivious company) came unto him, whose beauty and apparel
Poliphilus does amourously describe.
MY tender heart thus excessiuely wounded with amorous provocation, I think I
was mad, I stood so amazed, or blind at the least, because that I could no^
perceive in what sort or how this desired and delightful company gave me the
slip: and at last not knowing what I did, but casting mine eyes right forward,
I beheld before me, a fine Arbor of sweet Gessamine, somewhat high, lifting
up and bending over, all to be painted and decked with the pleasant and
odoriferous flowers of three sorts commixt, and entering in under the same.
Wonderfully perplexed for the loss of my company, I knew not how or in what
sort, and calling to remembrance the diverse, rare and wonderful things past,
and above all the great hope and trust which I had conceived upon the Queens
promise, that I should find my love Polia.

Alas said I, with a deep sigh, my Polia, that the green Arbor resounded
again therewithal, my amourous breathings were such, framed within and sent
out from my burning heart. And I was no sooner entered into this agony, and
overwhelmed in this passion, but as I passed on to the other end of the Arbor,
I might perceive a far off, a great number of youths, solacing and sporting
themselves very loud with diverse melodious soundes, with pleasant sports and
sundry pastimes, in great joy, and passing delight assembled together, in a
large plain. Upon this grateful and desired novelty, I set me down
marueiling at it, before I would step any further on.

And behold, a most noble and fair Nymph, with a burning torch in her hand,
departing from the company tended her course toward me, so as I might well
perceive that she was a real maid indeed and no spirit, whereupon I moved
not one whit, but gladly expected her coming, who with a maidenly have, modest
access, star-like countenance, and smiling grace, drew near unto me with
such a Majesty, and yet friendly, so as I doubt me, the amorous Idalea never
showed her self to Mars, nor to her the fair Pastor Adonis. Nor the delicate
Ganimed to Jupiter, or the the fayrer Psyches, to her spouse Cupid.

For which cause, if she had been the fourth among the three contending
Goddesses, if Joue had been Judge, as in the shady Wooddes of Mensunlone was
the Phrigian Shepherd, without all doubt she had been judged of far more
excellent beauty, and without equiuolence, more worthy of the golden apple,
then all or any one of the rest. At the first sight I was persuaded that she
had been Polia, but the place unaccustomed and her apparel made me think
the contrary, and therefore my doubtful judgment remained in suspense,
having only a reverent suspicion thereof.

This honorable Nymph, had her virgineall divine and small body covered with a
thin subtle stuff of green silk, powdered with gold, upon a smock of
pure white coorled Lawne, covering her most delicate and tender body, and
snowye skin, as fine and good as ever Pamphila the daughter to Platis in the
Island of Coo, did invent to weaue. Which white smock seemed as if it had
covered damask Roses.

The coat which she wore over that, was not like our fashioned petticoates
with French wastes, for that her sweet proporcioned body needed no such
pinching in, and unwholesome wear, hyndering procreation and an enemy to
health: but rather like a wastcoate, with little plightes and gathers under her
round and pretty bearing out breasts, upon her slender and small waste, over
her large proportioned flanckes and little round belly, fast girded about with
a girdle of gold: and over the same, a gown or garment side to the ground,
and welted below.

This garment being very side, was taken up round about the pitch of her
hippes, and before upon her belly, and tied about with the studded marriage
girdle of Citherea, the plucking up of y^ garment, bearing over the girdle
about her like a french vardingale, and the nethermost part falling down about
her feet in plightes and fouldes, unstable and blown about with the sweet
air and cool wind, causing sometime, by the thinness thereof, her shape to
be seen in it, which she seemed with a prompt readiness to resist and
hinder. Her beauty and grace was such, as I stood in doubt whether she were
begotten by any human generation: her arms stretching down, her hands long
and slender, her fingers small and fair, and her nails thin and ruddy, and
shining, as if she had been Minerua her self. Her arms to be seen through
the clear thinness of the Lawne, the wings about the size of her garment
where her arms came out, were of gold, in an excellent sort and fashion
welted, and set with Pearl and stone: and in like sort, all the hemming about
of her vesture, with gold ooes, and Pearl, and spangles of gold in diverse
places, distantly disposed in a curious and pleasant sort to behold.

Upon either side, under the arms to her waste, her upper garment was unsown
and open, but fastened with three buttons of great Orient Pearl (such as
Cleopatra never had to dissolve in a Potion) in loopes of blow silk, so that
you might see her smock between the distance of one Pearl from an other,
covering her dainty soft snowye thin skin: except her small neck and the
upper half of her spacious and delitious breast, more desired and contenting
mine eyes, then the water brooks and cool Ryuers to the emboste and chased
Heart, more pleasing then the fisher boat of Endi^ion ^o Cynthia, and more
pleasant then Cithera to Orpheus.

The sleeves of her smock of a convenient largeness, and about her wristes
plighted and tied with Bracelets of Gold, double and united with Orient
Pearl. And besides all her ornaments and gracious gestures, she endeavored
now and then with stolen and affected regards, in a sweet and pleasant sort,
to cast down her eyes upon her little round swelling breasts, impatient at the
suppressing of her soft and fine apparel: so as I judged upon good
consideration, and thought that in the dignity and honorable frame of her
personage, the Creator had framed and united together, all the violence of
Love. The four Nourses of the royal Kingdom of Babylon, called The tongue of
the Gods, had not that power to win favor and love of the King, which this
most sweet Nymph had.

About her fair Neck, more white then the Scithian snow, she wore a
Carkenet of Oryent Pearl: Cerna the wife of Caesar never had the like, and I
doubt me that that of Eriphile, which she took to Amphiaraus, was nothing
comparable unto it. And in the bending down over the division of her breasts,
betwixt two great Pearls, there was laced a corruscant round Rubie, and upon
the collaterate sides of the said Pearls, two glistering Saphires, and two
Pearls, next them two Emeraldes, and two Pearls, and after them two fair
lacinthes: all these Pearls and Stones were laced in a work in losenges, in a
rare and beautiful manner.

Her fair head, sending down and unfolding a loose spreading abroad of
plentiful hair, like the smallest threads of gold, wauing with the wind, and
upon her crown, a garland of tawny vyolets sweetly smelling, and covering the
same almost to her forheade: from the middle upper point whereof, in form of
two Hemycycles to the half of her ears, it mounted up in curled trammelles,
falling down again upon her fair Temples, moueably wauing and shaddowing
the same, and hyding the upper half of her small ears, more fair then ever
was reported of Mimoria.

The rest of her yellowe hair, descended down over her fair neck, well
disposed shoulders, and straight back, to the ca^^es of her slender legs,
moderatly wauing and blown abroad, in greater beauty than the proud eyed
feathers of Iun^es Bird. Such hair as Berenice did never vow in the venereous
Temple for her Tholomaeus, nor Conus the Mathematrician did ever behold the
like placed in the Triangule.

In her forehead, under two subtle black* Hemyci^les and distinct eye brees,
such as Abacsi^^ in Aethiopia had not to boast of, or compare with, nor Juno
her self, did look ou^ and present themselves two pleasant radious and
glistering eyes, which would enforce Jupiter to rain gold, of a clear sight,
quick and pearcing, with a brown circle betwixt the Apple and the mi^chie
white: near to the which, were her purple and Cherry cheeks, beautified with
two round smyling dimples, gracing the pleasure of her countenance, of the
color of the fresh Roses gathered at the rising of the Sun, and laid in a
vessel of the Crystal of Cyprus, and showing through the same, as me thought.

Under her nose to her lyppes, passed a little valley to her small mouth of a
most sweet form, her lyppes not blabbered or swelling but indifferent, and of
a rubye color, covering two uniform sets of teeth, like yuory, and small,
not one longer and sharper than an other, but in order euenly disposed and set:
from betwixt the which, Love had composed an everlasting sweet breathing, so as
I presumed to think, that the snow white teeth betwixt her gracious lyppes,
were no other but Oryent Pearls, and her sweet breath hot Musk, and by her
delightful voice that she was Thespis with her nine daughters.

By all which sight I was greatly moved and my senses ravished with a kindled
appetite, causing among them great strife and bitter contention, such as I
never felt before, by any other presence or excellent sightes whatsoever. My
searching eyes commended one part above another, to be more beautiful: but my
appetite rapt into an other part of her heavenly body, esteeming that above the
other. And thus my insatiable and wanton eyes, were the evil beginning of all
this perturbing and contentious commotion, whom I found the seminaries and
moouers of all so great strife and trouble, in my wounded and festering heart.
Through their contumacy, I was now brought from my self, and nevertheless, I
could not be satisfied by them. My greedy appetyte, extolled her delicate
breast above any comparison, my eyes delightfully consenting thereunto, said, at
least by that we may discover what y^ rest is; And they, glauncing from that to
the regard of her grace and gesture, set all their delight therein: and my
appetite strengthened and not easily removed from thence, I persuaded my
self, that the plenty and fayrenesse of her head and hair, and the dressing
thereof, and the beauty of her forheade, could never be compared with of any
one or other, like the scrapings of gold always turning into little roundels.

With two eyes like morning stars in a clear heaven, more beautifully
adorning her head, than any that ever the warlike Neco beheld among the
Acitanians, wounding my heart like one of the arrows of the angry Cupid. And
thus to conclude, I dare be bold to say, that no mortal man has seen, so
gracious, so shyning, so clear and pleasant lights as these were, placed in
the forhead of this heavenly creature; so that by them my heart was taken
prisoner, and was filled with such continual controversies of desire, as if a
leaf of the Laurel of the Tomb of the king of Bibria had bin placed betwixt,
and that strife should never cease whilst it was there: so as I thought that
this strife would never cease, until the pleasure were taken away, by reason
whereof, I could not perceive how I should obtain the fulness of my desire, or
how it could agree with either one or other. Like one extremely hungry among
a number of prepared meats being desirous of all, feeds of none, his burning
appetite remaining satisfied with none, but still hungry.

The most fair Nymph being come to Poliphilus, bearing a Torch in her left
hand, with the other took him and invited him to walk with her, and there
Poliphilus by her love was more inflamed.
THus seeing before me, a real and visible object of a most excellent
representation, lovely presence and heavenly aspect, of a plentiful store and
universal gathering of unseen beauty, and inhumaine comeliness. I made
light and slender account, in respect hereof, of all the inestimable delights,
riches, and great pomp which before I had beheld and seen, thinking their
worthiness nothing to speak of, in comparison of this. Oh happy he that may
enjoy such and so great a treasure of love; and not only a happy possessor I
account him, but most happy that shall possess and obtain her obedience, to
his desire and rule. But if Zenes had beheld this substance, he would have
commended the same above all the Ag^gientine maids, every proprotion would
have made unto him an oportune show of the absolutest perfection in the whole
world.

Which fair and heavenly Nymph now coming near unto me, with a cheerful
countenance, incontinently her most rare beauty, before somewhat a far of
looked upon with mine eyes, but now, by them more near and narrowly beheld,
I was ravished and amassed.

And her amorous aspect and lovely presence, was no sooner brought by the
message of mine eyes to my inward parts, but my recording and watchful
remembrance, stirring and waking up my heart, presenting and offering her
unto the same: it is become her shop; the quiver for her piercing arrows and
wounding regardes, and the dwelling place and conseruable mansion house, of her
sweet picture. Knowing that this was she which had ^aediously consumed my
tender years, in her hot and prime love, not to be resisted. For I felt the
same leaping and beating against my breast, without ceasing, like as one that
strikes upon a hoarse Taber. And still me thought by her lovely and
delightful countenance, by her fair tresses, and the curling and wauing
hair, playing up and down upon her forheade, that it should be Polia, whom
so greatly I had loved and desired, and for whom I had sustained so many and
sundry griefs, without intermission, sending out scalding sighs, the outward
reporters of my inward flames. But her rich and Nymphish habit, unaccustomed,
and the place unknown and strange, made me still doubtful and suspicious.

She (as beforesaide) carried in her snow white left arm, close to her body,
a kindled and burning Torch, somewhat higher then her head a good deal, and
the lower end growing smaller and smaller, she held in her hand: and
stretching forth that which was at liberty, more white then ever had Pelopea,
wherein appeared the thin smoothnes of the skin, and the blewnesse of the
veins like Azure streams* upon the fair and whitest paper. She toooke me
by the left hand with a sweet and loving countenance and smiling grace, and
with an eloquent speech, she pleasantly said in this manner.

Poliphilus, I think my self to come in saftie, but it seems that you stand
doubtful. Heereat I was more amazed, and my senses in a manner gone to imagine
how she should know my name; and al my inward parts vanquished, and hemmed in
with burning amorous flames, my speech was taken from me with fear and
reverent bashfulnesse.

In this sort remaining, I knew not upon the sudden what good answer I
might make, or otherwise do her reverence, but to offer her my unworthy and
unfit hand; Which when it was streined in hers, me thought that it was in hot
snow and curded milk, and me thought indeed, that I touched and handled
something which was more then human; which when I had so done, I remained
moved in mind, troubled and doubtful, unaccustomed to such a companion, not
knowing what to say, or whether to follow her, in my simple apparel and
homely bringing up, not agreeable with hers: and as a fool, unworthy and unfit
for her fellowship, persuading my self, that it was not lawful for a mortal
and earthly creature to enjoy such pleasures. For which cause, my color red
and blushing, with reverent admiration, being grieved at my baseness, I settled
my self to follow her.

At length, and yet not with a perfect recalled mind, I began to reduce and
sommon together, my fearful and distempered spirits: persuading my self,
that I must needs have good success, being near so fair and divine an
object, and in such a place; And so followed her on with a panting heart, more
shaking than the bird Sisura, or a Lamb carried in the mouth of a Wolf.

And thus touched most fervently with pleasant heates, growing and increasing
more and more, they began to boil and kindle my cold fear, and dispositiuely
to adopt my altered heat to sincere love. Which being thus brought to this
pass, by a provoked inward desire, yet inwardly as I reasoned with my self,
it was wonderfully variable and doubtful. Oh most happy Lover of all Lovers,
that in requital of his, might be sure to participate of hers.

On the other side, I persuaded my self, that if I should offer unto her my
amorous heart and love, having no better thing to bestow upon her, or present
unto her, it might be that she would not refuse it: like Artaxerxes, the King
of the Percians; who having water presented to his hands, accepted of it
bowing down himself. Heerewithall, me thought yet that a fearful and chill
trembling invaded me, infusing it self over all my body and breast, renewing
the force of the extreme fire, even like dry reed: which being once kindled,
is enflamed and nourished with the fresh air, until at length it is increased
so mightily, that it consumes all to ashes.

And in like sort, I fully found in my self, an increase and flashing
abroad of my inward flames, in their prepared subject, so effectually, that
her amorous regardes gave me mortal and deadly wounds: even as lightning and
thunder, among the strong and mighty oaks, suddenly with a great force,
scorching and tearing them. And therefore I durst not look upon her bright
eyes, because that doing so, (being overcome with the incredible beauty of her
gracious aspect) if peradventure her radious beams did reincounter mutually
with mine, for a little while every thing seemed two unto me, until I had
closed the lyddes together, and restored them to their former light.

Whereupon, and by reason of these things captiuated, spoiled, and overcome, I
determined at that instant to pluck up some fresh flowers, and in all humble
sort to offer them unto her, and it came to pass, that whilst my secret
thoughts consented thereunto, consygning a free mean and large entrance, for
the discovery of my desire. But my burning heart humbly having opened the same,
even as a ripe Apple being either bytten or shaken, so it fell and failed me.
And receiving into his wounded and familiar estuation, in some interposition of
time, immediately his accustomed heat and feruor increased* piercing the inward
parts with her virgineall aspects, exceedingly beautified with a comely grace
and vnexcogitable elegancie; Because, that into this sweet introduction into
my mind, of these first amorous flames, (like the Trojan horse, full of
weapons and deceit) the entrance was made for an everlasting, unknown, and
incessant plague, deeply festering in my tender and poor heart, perpetually
remaining: which easily overcome with one sweet look, inconsiderately without
delay, hasteneth his own hurt, and wholly lays it self open to amorous
incursions, and burns it self with sweet conceits, going into the flames of
his own accord.

To all which burning desires, her present company did greatly enforce me,
which I esteemed to yield me more comfort, then the North star in a
tempestuous night to the troubled Mariner: more acceptable then that of
Melicta to Adonis, or to Phrodites, the obsequious Nymph Peristera: and more
delightful then Dittander to the daughter of Dydo, with the Purple flower for
the wound of Pius Aeneas: And finding my heart strooken and inwardly pricking,
secretly filled and compressiuely stuffed; recording and gathering together into
it, varyable thoughts and working of Love, my immedicable wound grew greater
and greater. But gathering up the remaynder of my senses, as one that durst, I
assured my self to manifest and lay open before her, my intended desires and
amorous conceits. And thus loosing my self in a blind folly, I could not
choose but give place to my inuading desires, fervently boiling and enforcing
me to say thus.

Oh delycate and heavenly Damsel, whatsoever thou art, thy forcyble love has
set me on fire, and consumes my grieved heart; I find my self all over,
burning in an incessant flame, and a sharp da^t cast into the midst of my
breast, where it sticks fast, having made a mortal wound incurable. And
having spoken thus, to the end I might discover unto her my hidden desire, and
moderate by that means the extreamitie of my bitter passions: which I felt,
the more they were concealed, the more to augment and increase, I patiently
held my peace: and by this means all those fervent and grievous agitations,
doubtful thoughts, wanton and vyolent desires, were somewhat suppressed; with
my ill favored Gown, that had still some of the Bramble leaves and pricks in
the Wood hanging upon it, and even as a Peacocke in the pride of his feathers,
beholding the fowlenesse of his feet, pulls down his train: so I
considering the inequallitie of my self, with such a heavenly object, appaled
the prouocations of my contumacious and high desires, looking into the vanities
of my thoughts.

And then I earnestly endeavored by all the means that I might, to subdue,
encloyster, and keep in, my unbridled gadding appetite, wandering mind, and
immodest desire, intending now that it should never be uttered again.

At length I began to think in the secret depth of my wounded heart, that
undoubtedly this my present continued grief, was equal with that of wicked
Tantalus, to whose hot and thirsting lyppes, the cool and clear water did
offer it self, and to his hungry appetite, the sweet fruits honge over his
gaping mouth appresenting, but he never tasted any of either.

Ah woe is me even in like sort, a most fair Nymph of an excellent shape, of
a flourishing age, of Angel-like behavior unspeakable, and of rare honor and
exceeding courtesy as mine eyes could behold, whose company exceeded any
exquesite human content; and I, just by her, full of all whatsoever
provocation, forcing sollaciously love and desire, heaping up in her self
the whole perfections of delight, and yet my yauning and voluptuous desire,
never the more thereby satisfied.

Well, on this sort my burning concupiscence nothing allayed, as much as I
might, I comforted my languishing heart, vnmeasurably tormented, in putting of
it in mind, of solacious and amorous hope: and with that, there was never a
coal so near put out, but it was presently renewed and set on fire, with the
company of the next. And my unbridled eyes, the more they were unarmed to
resist her power, the more they were inflamed with the insolent desire and
liking of her wonderful and heavenly beauty; Still seeming more fair, more
excellent, more lovely, more to be desired, extremely apt and praepared for
love: euedently showing forth in her self, a wonderful increase of sweet
pleasure.

Afterward I thought with my self, it may be that she is some creature which
I may not desire, and it may be the place is not fit for such thoughts, and
then it may be I have made a wise work, and spunne a fair thread, if I should
be punished for my impudency, like Ixion. In like sort, the Thracian had
never found the deep seat of Neptune, if he had not meddled with Tethis: and
Gallantide, the maid of Lucina, should not have brought forth in her mouth,
if he had not deceived. It may that this Nymph is spowsed to some high and
mighty Prince, and I to offer her this dishonor, what am I worthy of?

And thus resoning with my self, I thought that those things which had but
slender assurance, would lightly slyppe away, and that it would not be hard to
deceive, where was no watchful regard: and to bold spirits, Fortune was not
altogether failing: and besides, that it was hard to know a man's thought.
Whereupon, even as Calistone, being ashamed at her swelling belley, shronke
aside from the presence of Diana; so I withdrewe my self, blushing at my
attempt, and bridling my incouenient desires. Yet with a lincious eye, I never
left to examine, with great delight, the extreme beauty of the excellent
Nymph, disposing my self to her sweet love, with an vnfallyble, obstinate,
and firm resolution.

Polia, as yet unknown to her Lover Poliphilus, she graciously assures him:
who for her extreme beauty, he indeuoreth his mind to love. And both of
them going to the triumphs, they see innumerable youths and Damsels, sporting
with great delight.
THE Archer Cupid, in my wounding heart having his residence, like a Lord and
king, holding me tied in the bands of Love, I found my self pricked and
grievously tormented, in his tyrannous and yet pleasant regiment. And abounding
in doubtful delight, vnmeasurably sighing, I watered my plaints; and then the
surmounting Nymph, with a pleasing grace, incontinently gave me comfort, and
with her ruddy and fair spoken lyppes, framing violent and attractiue words,
she gave me assurance: abandoning and removing from my heart, all fearful
thoughts, with her Olymphicall aspects, and cooling with her eloquent speeches,
my burning heart; and with an amorous and friendly regard, and cast of her
eyes, and smiling grace, she said thus unto me.

Poliphilus, I would thou should understand and know this, that true and
virtuous love has no respect of outward things, and therefore let not the
baseness of thy apparel, diminish or lessen thy mind, if perhaps noble and
gentle, and worthy of these places, and fit to behold these marvelous
tryumphes; Therefore let not thy mind be dismayed with fear, but dilligently
behold what Kingdoms they possess, that are crowned by Venus. I mean, such
as be strongly agonished and yet persevere still, serving and attending upon
her amorous Aultars and sacred flames, until they obtain her lawful favor.
And then making an end of her short and sweet speech, both of us making
forward, our pace neither too fast nor too slow, but in a measure; I thought
thus, and thus discoursing with my self.

Oh most valiant Perseus, thou would more feirsly have fought with the
cruel Dragon, for the favor of this, then for the love of thy fair
Andromada. And after.

Oh Jason, if the marriage of this had been offered unto thee, with a more
greater and more dangerous adventure, then the obtaining of the golden fleece,
thou would have let go that, and undertaken this, with a greater courage,
esteeming it above all the iewelles and precious treasures of the whole world;
I, more then those of the rich and mighty Queen Eleutherillida. Continually
seeming more fair, more beautiful, and more lovely. Hippodamia, and all the
greedy scraping and doubtful Usurers, never took such delight in getting of
gold. A quiet Harbor was never so welcome to a destressed Marryner, in a
stormy, dark, and tempesteous winter night: nor the wished and oportune fall
of rain, at the prayer of Craesus, as the loving consent of this dainty
Nymph: more welcome to me, then bloody broils to warlike Mars, or the first
fruits of Creta to Dionisius: or the warbling Harp to Apollo: and yet more
grateful, then fertile ground, full ears, and plentiful yielding, to the
laboring Husbandman.

And thus in most contented sort, passing on and pressing down the thick,
green, and cool grass: sometime my searching and busy eyes, would have a
cast with her pretty and small feet, passing well fitted with shoes of Red
leather, growing broader from the instept, narrow at the toe, and close about
the heel; and sometimes her fine and moveable legs, (her vesture of silk
being blown about with the wind, upon her virgineall parts) discovered
themselves. If I might have seen them, I do imagine that they did look like
the finest flower of Peloponesus, or like the purest milk, coagulated with
Musk.

By all which most delectable things, tied and bound in the hard and
inextricable knots of vehement love, more uneasy to undo then that of
Hercules, or that which Alexander the great did cut in sunder with his sword:
and amorously masked in rolled nets, and my subdued haert, held down with
grieved cogitations and burning desires, leading me whether they would, I
found in it more pricking torments then faithful Regulus in Aphrica. So that
my sorrowing spirits exasperated with an amorous desire and extreme vexation,
continually burning in my panting breast, could by no means be assuaged, but
with supping up of continual sobbings, and breathing out of their flying
loss. And thus drowned in a mist of doubts, and seeing me vyolently taken in
her love, I said thus to my self.

O Poliphilus, how can thou leave at any time thy inseparable love, kindled
toward thy sweet Polia, for any other? And therewithal, from this Nymph,
thus close and fast bound, more strongly the^ in the claws of a Creuise or
Lobstar, endeavoring to untie my self, I found it no easy piece of work, so
that I could not choose but grievously bind my troubled heart, to the love and
affecting of this; by all likelihoodes, having the true shape, sweet
resemblance, and gracious behavior of my most beloved Polia. But above all
things, this came more near unto me and grieved me worst, how I should be
assured that she was Polia. Whereupon, from my watery eyes, the salt tears
immediately tryckling down, it seemed unto me a hard and contemptuous matter,
to banish from my forlorn and poor heart, his old sovereign Lady and
Mistress, and to entertain a new, strange, and unknown Tyrannyzer.

Afterward, I comforted my self again, with thinking that peradventure this
was she, according to the sacred Oracle and true speech, of the mighty Queen
Eleutherillida: and therefore, that I should not shrink or stoop under my
burden; for if I were not greatly deceived, this was she indeed. And having
made this amorous and discoursiue thought and swasiue praesuppose, abandoning
all other desires whatsoever, I only determined with my heart and mind, to
come back again to this noble and excellent Nymph; in whose great love I
being thus taken, with extreme compulsion, I was bold with an unaccustomed
admyration, dilligently to look upon her rare shape, and lovely features, my
eyes making themselves the swallowing whirlpooles of her incomparable beauty:
and they were no sooner opened, hotly to take in the sweet pleasure of her so
benign and conspicuous presence, but they were strengthened for ever, to hold
with them solaciously agreeing, the assembly of all my other captiued senses,
that from her and no other, I did seek the mittegation and quenching of my
amorous flames. And in this sort we came, whilst I was thus cruelly wounded by
exasperating Love, somewhat upon the right side of the spacious field.

In which place, were set green trees, thick with leaves, and full of
flowers, bearing fruit, round about the place and seat of such variable and
diverse sorts, never fading but still green, giving great content to the
delightful beholder.

The gallant* and pleasant Nymphe there stayed; and I also stood still: Where
looking about, by the benignity of the fruitful plain, with half my sight,
because I could not altogether withdraw the same from the amorous object; I
beheld very near unto us, a certain show of an inuyroning company,
tryumphing and dancing about us, of most brave and fine youths, without
beardes and unshorn hears, but that of their heads bushing, curling, and
wrything, without any art or effaeminate crysping: crowned and dressed, with
garlands and wreathes of diverse flowers, and red Roses, with leauye Myrtle,
with purple Amara^th or flower gentle, and Melliot: and with them a great
company of young maids, more fair and delicate then be to be found in
Sparta; Both kinds apparelled very richly, in silks of changable colors,
hyding the perfect color: some in Purple and Murry, and some in white curled
Senda^l, such as Aegipt never affoorded, and of diverse other colors: some
Tawney, some C^ymosen, others in Green, some in Vyolet, some in Blewe, Peach
color, Peacocke color, perfectly engrayned, as ever Corica could yield:
and powdered and wouen with gold, and edged and hemmed about with orient
Pearl and stones set in pure gold; some in gowns, and others in hunting
suits.

And the most of the beautiful Nymphs, had their fair hair smoothly bound
up together, and thrice rolled about, with an excellent finishing knot;
Others had their unstable and wauing tresses, spreading down over their fair
necks. Some, with abundance of hair, cast up over their forheades, and the
ends turning into curles, and shaddowing over the fayrenes of the same: so as
Nature and not Art, showed her self therein a beautiful mistress; With
fillets and laces of gold, edged with orient Pearl, and others in Caules of
gold, wearing about their slender necks, rich and precious Carkenets and,
necklaces, of Pearls and stone, and depending iewelles. And upon their small
^ares, did hang^ diverse precious stones, and over the variable dressings of
their heads, before in two Hemycicles, were set shoddowes of oryent Pearl and
stone, in flowers of hair.

All which excellent ornaments, together with their most elegant personages,
were easily able to alter, any churlish, vile or obstinate heart.

Their fair breasts, in a voluptuous and wanton sort, were bare to the
midst of them: And upon their pretty feet, some wore sandalles, after the
ancient manner, being soles, and the foot bare fastened to the same, with a
small chain of gold, coming up betwixt the great toe and the middle, and the
little toe and the next, about the heel over the instep, and fastening upon
the upper part, betwixt the toes and the instep, in a flower. Others having
straight shoes, clasp^ upon the instep with flowers of gold. Their stockings
of silk; some of Purple, some of Carnation, some of parted colors: such as
Caius Galicola never first brought up. Others wearing Buskins, upon the white
swelling calfes of their legs, and laced with silk; some bu^ned with gold
and precious stone.

Their fore-heades most fair, and beautified with the moveable wauinges of
their crysping hair, covered over with a thin veil, like a Spiders vvebbe.
Their eyes biting and alluring, more bright, than the twinkling stars in a
clear air, under their circulate brees: with a small nose, betwixt their
round and cherry cheeks: their teeth orderly disposed, small and even set, of
the color of refyned silver: upon the test, betwixt their sweet and soft
lyppes: of the color of Corrall.

Many of them carrying instruments of Music, such as never were seen in
Ausonia, nor in the hands of Orpheus: yielding in the flowring Meadowe and
smoth plain, most delightful sounds, with sweet voices and noyces of joy
and tryumphing: and to increase the glory, amorously stryuing and contending
one with an other, with solacious and pleasant acts, accompanied with fair
speeches and friendly aspects. And in this place, with a most delectable
applause, I beheld four Tryumphes, so precious and sumptuously set forth, as
never any mortal eye has seen.

Poliphilus in this prescribed place, did behold four tryumphing Chariots,
all set with precious stones and uwelles, by a great number of youths, in the
honor of Jupiter.
THE first of the four marvelous tryumphant Chariots, had four round
wheels, of Perfect green Emeralds of Scythia; the rest of the Chariot did
amase me to behold, being made all of table Dyamonds: not of Arabia or
Cyprus, of the new Mine, as our Lapidaries call them: but of India, resisting
the hard strokes of iron and steel, abiding the hot fire and striving
therewith, mollified only with the warm blood of Goats, grateful in the
Magical art; which stones, were wonderfully cut of a Cataglyphic explicature,
and set very curiously in fine gold.

Upon the right side of the Chariot, I saw expressed, the representation of a
noble Nymph, with many accompanying her in a Meddowe, crowning of victorious
Bulls with garlands of flowers, and one abiding by her very tamely.

The same Nymph, upon the other side was also represented, who having mounted
up upon the back of the Bull, which was gentle and white, he carried her over
the sea.

Upon the fore-ende I beheld Cupid, with a great number of wounded people and
Nations, marueiling to see him shoot into the air. And in the hinder part,
Mars standing before Jupiter, mourning because the boy had shot through his
impenetrable Breast Plate, and showing the wound; and with the other hand,
holding out his arm, he held this word Nemo.

The fashion of this Chariot was quadrangulat, of two perfect squares, long
ways, of six foot in length and three foot in height, with a bearing out
coronice above and under the plynth: and about the same a plain, in breadth
two foot and a half, and in length five foot and a half, bearing toward the
Coronice, all over scally, with precious stones, with an altered congresse and
order of colors, variably disposed. And upon the four corners, were fastened
four coppies, inuersed, and the mouth lying upward upon the project corner of
the Coronice, full of fruits and flowers cut of precious stones, as it were
growing out of a foliature of gold. The horns were chased near their mouth,
with the leaves of Poppy, and wrythen in the belly: the gracylament and outward
bending* joining fast to the end of the plain, and breaking of in an old
fashioned iagged leaf-worke, lying a long under the back of the Coppisse, and
of the same metal. Upon every corner of the Plynth, from the Coronice
downward, there was a foot like a Harpies, with an excellent conversion and
turning upon either sides of the leaves of Acanthus.

The wheels, above the naues and axeltrees, were closed within the Chariot,
and the sides thereof under the Harpies feet, bent somewhat upward and growing
lesser, turned round downward, whereunto the furniture or trace to draw it
by, were fastened: and where the axeltree was, there upon the side of the bottom
of the Chariot, over the naue of the wheel, there came down a prepention
joining to the Plynth, twice so long as deep, of two foliatures, one extending
one way and the other an other way: and upon the middle thereof and lowest
part, was a Rose of five leaves, in the seed whereof, the end of the axeltree
did lie.

Upon the aforesaid Plain, I beheld the image of a fair white and tame
Bull, trymmed and dressed with flowers, in manner like an Ox for a Sacrifice.
And upon his large and broad back, did sit a princely virgin, with long and
slender arms, half naked; with her hands she held by his horns. Her
apparel was exquesite of green silk and gold, marueilously wouen, and of a
Nymphish fashion, covering her body and girded about her wast, edged about with
Pearl and stone, and a crown of glittering gold upon her fair head.

This Triumph, was drawn by six lascivious Centaures, which came of the
fallen seed of the sausy and presumpteous Ixion: with a furniture of gold upon
them, and a long their strong sides, like horses, excellently framed and
illaqueated, in manner of a flagon chain, whereby they drew the Triumph; such
as Ericthonius never invented, for swiftness.

Upon every one of them did ride a goodly Nymph, with their shoulders one
toward an other: three, with their beautiful faces toward the right side of
the Tryumphes, and three to the left, with Instruments of Music, making
together a heavenly harmony and consort. Their hayres yellowe, and falling
over their fair necks, with Pancarpiall garlands of all manner of flowers,
upon their heads. The two next the Triumph, were apparelled in blewe silk,
like the color of a Peacockes neck.

The middlemost in bright Crymosen: and the two foremost in an Emerald green,
not wanting any ornaments to set them forth, singing so sweetly with little
round mouths, and playing upon their instruments, within so celestial a
manner, as would keep a man from ever dying.

The Centaures were crowned with yuie, that is called Dendrocyssos. The two
next the triumph did bear in their hands, two vessels of an old fashion,
of the Topas of Arabia, of a bright golden color, grateful to Lucina, and to
the which, the waves will be calm: slender at the bottom, big swelling in
the belly, and lessening small up toward the Orifice; In height two foot,
without ears: out of the which, did ascend a thick smoke or fume, of an
inestimable fragrancie. The middlemost, did sound Trumpets of gold, with
banners of silk and gold, fastened to the Trumpets in three places.

The other two foremost, with old fashioned Cornets, agreeing in consort with
the Instruments of the Nymph.

Under the which triumphant Chariot, were the Axeltrees conuently placed,
whereupon the wheels turned, and of a balustic lyneament, waxing small
toward the end and round: Which Axeltrees, were of fine pure gold and
massiue, never cankering or fretting; which is the deadly poison and destroyer
of virtue and peaceable quiet.

This triumph was solemnly celebrated, with moderate leaping and dancing
about, and great applause: their habites were girded with skarfes, the ends
flying abroad.

And in like sort, those which did sit upon the Centaures, commending in their
song, the occasion and mystery of the Triumph, in voices consonant and
cantionell verse; more pleasant than I am able to express, but let this
suffice.

The second Triumph.
The next Triumph, was not less worthy to be beholden then the first. The
four wheels, the spokes, and naues, were all of Fulkish Agate, and in diverse
places white veins: such as King Pyrrhus could not show, with the
representation of the nine Muses, and Apollo playing in the midst of them
upon his Lute.

The Axeltrees and fashion of the same like the other: but the Tables were of
orient blewe Sapphire, having in them, as small as motes in the Sun, certain
glinces of gold, grateful to the Magic Art, and of Cupid beloved in the
left hand.

Upon the Table on the right side, I beheld engraven, a goodly Matron lying in
a princely bed, being delivered of two eggs in a stately Palace: her
Midwyues and other Matrons and young women, being greatly astonished at the
sight. Out of one of the which, spronge a flame of fire: and out of the other
egg two bright stars.

Upon the other side were engraven, the curious Parents, ignorant of this
strange birth, in the Temple of Apollo, before his image, asking by Oracle the
cause and end hereof, having this dark answer. Vni gratum Mare. Alterum
gratum Mari. And for this ambiguous answer they were reserved by their
Parents.

Upon the fore-ende of the Charyot, there was represented most lively the
figure of Cupid, aloft in the skies, with the sharp heads of his golden
arrows, wounding and making bleed the bodies of diverse four footed beasts,
creeping Serpents, and flying Fowls. And upon the earth, stood diverse
persons, vvondering at the force of such a little slave, and the effect of
such a vveake and slender Arrowe.

In the hinder end, Jupiter appoynting in his stead, a prudent and subtle
Sheepehearde as a Judge, awakened by him, as he lay sleeping near a most
fair Fountain, whether of the three most fair Goddesses, he esteemed best
worthy. And he being seduced by devising Cupid, gave the Apple to the
pleasant working Venus.

This tryumphant Charyot, was drawn by six white Elephants, coupled two and
two together, such as will hardly be found in Agesinua, nor among the Gandars
of India. Pompei never had the like in his Tryumphes in Affricke: neither were
the like seen in the Tryumphes of the conquest of India; their tronckes armed
with deadly teeth of yuory, passing on their way and drawing together, making a
pleasant braying or noise. Their furniture and traces of pure blewe silk,
twisted with threads of gold and silver: the fastnings in the furniture, all
made up with square or true love knots, like square ears of corn of the
Mountain Garganus. Their Poyterelles of gold, set with Pearl and stone
different in colors; the beauty of the one striving to excel the beauty of
the other. And thus was all their furniture or armings to the traces, of silk
as aforesaid.

Upon them also, did ride (as before) six young and tender Nymphs, in like
sort, ^ut their Instruments different from the former, but agreeing in consort:
and what soever the first did, the same did these.

The first two were apparelled in Crymosen: the middle most two in fine hair
color: and the foremost in vyolet. The Caparisons of the Eliphants were of
cloth of gold, edged with great Pearls and precious stones: And about their
necks were ornaments of great round iewelles, and upon their faces, great
balls of Pearls, tas^ed with silk and gold, unstable and turning.

Over this stately Chariot tryumphant, I beheld a most white Swanne, in the
amorous embracing of a noble Nymph, the daughter of Thes^us, of an incredible
beauty: and upon her lap, sitting the same Swanne, over her white thighs.
She sat upon two cushines of cloth of gold, finely and softely wouen, with
all the ornaments necessary for them.

Her self apparelled in a Nimphish sort, in cloth of silver, here and there
powdered with gold, over one and under three* without defect or want of any
thing, requisite to the adorning of so honorable a representation, which to the
beholder, may occasion a pleasurable delight. In every sort performed with as
great applause as the first.

The third Triumph.
Then followed the third Triumph, with four wheles of Aethyopian Chrysolite,
sparkling out gold: that which has been held in the same, in old time has
been thought good to drive away malignant spirits. The wheels vpwardly
covered, as aforesaid, and the naues and spokes of the same fashion, of green
Helitropia of Cyprus: whose virtue is, to keep secret in the day light, to
divine gifts, full of drops of blood.

This History was engraven upon the right side of the Table thereof, as
follows. A man of great Majesty, requesting to know^ what should happen to
his fair daughter: her Father understanding, that by her means he should be
dispossessed of his Crown and dignity; and to the end she should not be
carried away or stolen of any, he buil^ a mighty strong Tower, and there,
with a watchful guard caused her to be kept: and she remaining there in this
sort with great content, had falling into her virgineall lap, drops of Gold.

Upon the other side was chased out a valiant youth, who with great reverence
did receive a protection of a Crystal shield, and with his sword afterward
cutting off the head of a terryble woman, and afterward proudly bearing her
head in sign of victory; Out of the hot blood of whom, did rise up a
flying horse: who striking upon a Mountain with one of his houes, made a
strange spring of water to gush out.

Upon the fore end I beheld the mighty Cupid, drawing his golden Arrowe, and
shooting the same up into the heavens, causing them to rain blood: whereat a
number stood wonderfully amazed, of all sorts of people. Upon the other end,
I did see Venus in a wonderful displeasure, having taken her son by a Knight
in a Net, and getting him by the wings, she was about to pluck of his
feathers: having plucked of one handful, that flewe about, the little elph
crying out pitteously; and an other sent from Jupiter, took him away and saved
him from his mother, and presented him to Jupiter: against whose divine mouth,
were in Attic Letter these words written, (...) and he covered him in the lap
of his celestial gown.

This tryumphant Chariot, was pompously drawn with six fierce Unicorns:
their heads like Hearts, reuerencing the chaste Diana. The poyterelles and
furniture about their strong breasts, was of gold, set with precious stone,
and fringed with silver and hair colloured silk, tied into knots, in manner
of a net work, and tasseled at every prependent point, their caparisons like
the other before spoken of.

Upon these did sit, six fair virgins, in such pomp and manner as before,
apparelled in cloth of gold, wouen with blewe silk into diverse leaves and
flowers; these had a consort of liuncyers wind Instruments, full of spirit.
And upon the top of the Chariot, was placed a stool of green Jasper, set in
silver: needful in birth, and medicinable for chastity; at the foot it was
six square, and growing smaller toward the seat, and from the middle to the
foot, champhered and furrowed, and upward wrought with nextrulles: the seat
whereof was somewhat hallowed, for the more easily sitting upon it. The
Lyneaments thereof most excellent.

A loft upon the same did sit a most singular fair Nymph, richly apparelled
in cloth of gold and blewe silk, dressed like a virgin, and adorned with
innumerable sorts of Pearls and stone; she showed an affectious delight, to
behold drops of gold fall from heaven into her lap. She sat in solemn
pomp like the other, and with great applause, with her fair and plentiful
hair spreading down over her back, crowned with a Dyademe of gold, set with
sundry precious stones.

The fourth Triumph.
The fourth Triumph was borne upon four wheels, with Iron strakes, forcibly
beaten out without fire; All the rest of the Charyot, in fashion like the
former, was of burning Carbuncle, showing light in the darkest places, of an
expolite cutting: past any reason, to think how or where it was possible to
be made, or by what workman.

The right side whereof, held this History. An honorable woman with child,
unto whom Jupiter showed himself (as he was wont with Juno) in thunder and
lightning: insomuch, as she fell all to ashes, out of the which was taken up a
young infant.

Upon the other side, I beheld Jupiter, having the said Infant in his hands,
and delyuering him to a young man, with winged buskyns, and a staff, with two
serpents winding about it: who delivered the Infant to certain Nymphs in a
Cave, to be fostered.

In the fore-ende, I might see how Cupid having shot up into heaven with his
mischeeuous Arrowe, had caused Jupiter to behold a mortal Nymph: and a great
number of wounded people woondering at it.

In the hinder end was Jupiter sitting in a tribunal seat as judge, and
Cupide appeering limping before him, and making grievous complaints against his
loving mother, because that by her means he had wounded himself extreemly with
the love of a fair damsel, and that his leg was burnt with a drop of a lamp,
presenting also the young Nymph and the lamp in her hand. And Jupiter with a
smiling countenance speaking to Cupid, Perfer scintillam qui coelum accendis
and omnes. This Monostic^n was graven in Latin letters in a square table
before the faces of their supreme majesty's, the rest as is described.

This mystical triumph was drawn by six spotted beasts of yealow shining
color, and swift as the tigers of Hyrcani^ called Leopards, coupled together
with withes of twined vines, full of tender green leaves, and stalks full of
green clusters. This chariot was drawn very leisurely.

Upon the middle of which plain there was placed a base of gold by the lowest
diameter, one foot and three handfuls high, the lataster or lowest verdge
round and hollowed, in the middle under the upper sime or brimme in form of a
pullie with nextrubs, rules and cordicels: the upper plain of this base was
euacuated, wherein rested the trains of the four eagles standing upon the
plain, smooth superficies of the base, which were of precious Ae^ite of
Persia, of the color of a sakers plume. And these stood with their shoulders
one opposite against another, and their pounces of gold fastened and sticking
in the said base, every one surueying with their wings, and the flowering tips
of their sarcellets touching one another. Over these as upon a nest, was placed
this marvelous vessel of Ethiopian Hyacints clear and bright, C^lso
ini^ic^^, Comiti gratiosus. This vessel was crusted with emeralds and veins
of diverse other precious stones, a work incredible. The height thereof two
foot and a half, the fashion in manner round, the breadth by diameter one
foot and a half, and the circumference consisted of three diameters. From the
heads of the eagles the bottom or foot of the vessel did ascend up one
triens, and a border going about the thicknes of a hand, from which border to
the beginning of the belly of the vessel, and to the bottom of the foot with
this hand breadth, was a foot and a half. Upon this stood the form of the
vessel aforesaid one handful and a half broader, which half handful was
distributed to the border, about the brimme of foulding leaves and flowers
standing out from the hyacinth. The diameter two quarters and a half. Under
this border there did stick out round about certain proportions like walnut
shells, or the keele of a ship, somewhat thick and broad at the upper end, and
lessing themselves to nothing below. From thence to the orifice it did rise up
two quarters and a half, furrowed with turning champhers, and an excellent
sime: and in steed of ears to take up the vessel by, it had two lips standing
out and turning in round like the head of a base vial.

Under and above the borders, the vessel was wrought with turned gululs,
vnduls, and imbossings, and with such lineaments were the borders wrought, both
under and above. Upon the border in the neck of the cover, were two half
rings, suppressed in the border by transuersion, one of them just against
another, which were holden in the biting teeth of two Lysarts, or biting
Dragons of green emerauld, bearing out from the cover. They stood with their
serpent like feet upon the lower part of the cover under the neck, betwixt
the which and the lower vessel, was one quantity, and from his upper
gracilament descending, he joined with the turned in sime of the circumferent
lymbus or verdge, where they did closely byte together. This cover to the neck
was made in skalie work of Hyacinth, except the veins of smaragd, for the
little dragons, their bellies and feetes fastening to the skalie cover. These
little dragons one against an other, their breasts and throtes hollowing out
from the border and the cover, and their tails turning upwards again, did
serve for the ears of the cover, just over them of the lower vessel.

The lower turning about, where the cover did close with the vessel being of
two parts, joined together with an excellent foliature, half a foot broad, as
if they had bin inseparable.

The body of this vessel was all run over with a Vine, the stringes and
veins whereof, and small curling twists, were of Topas, far better then is
found in the Island Ophiadis, the leaves of fine smaragd, and the branches of
Amethist, to the sight most beautiful, and to the understanding wonderful
contemplable. The subject vessel appearing thorough the same of Hyacinth so
round and polished, as any wheel can send forth: except, under the leaves
there was a substance left, which held the foliature to the vessel of
Hyacinth, passing over and separated from the subject. The hollowed and bending
leaves with all the other lapicidariall lineaments, were performed with such an
emulation of nature as was wonderful.

Let us now return to the circumferent brim of the precious vessel. In the
smooth parts whereof, upon either sides of the tails of the Lysarts, I
beheld two hystorials worthy of regard, engraven in this sort. Upon the
foreside of the vessel, the representation of Jupiter, holding in his right
hand a glistering sword, of the vain of the Ethiopian Chrysolits: and in the
other hand a thunder bolt of shining Rubie. His countenance savor of the
vain of Gallatits, and crowned with stars like lightening, he stood upon an
altar of Saphyre. Before his fearful majesty, were a beuie of Nymphs,
seven in number, apparrelled in white, proffering with their sweet voices to
sing, and after transforming themselves into green trees like emeralds full of
azure flowers, and bowing themselves down with devotion to his power: Not that
they were all transformed into leaves, but the first into a tree, her feet to
roots, their arms and heads into branches, some more then other, but in a
show that they must follow all alike, as appeared by their heads.

Upon the other Anaglyph, I did behold a merry and pleasant maiesticall
personage, like a young fat boy, crowned with two folding serpents, one white,
and the other black, tied into a knot. He rested delightfullie under a
plentiful vine tree full of ripe grapes, and upon the top of the frame there
were little naked boys, climing up and sitting aloft gathering the ripe
clusters: others offering them in a basket to the God, who pleasantly received
them: other some lay fast a sleep upon the ground, being drunk with the sweet
juice of the grape. Others applying themselves to the work of mustulent
autumn: others singing and piping: all which expression was perfected by the
workman in precious stones, of such color as the natural liveliness of every
vain, leaf, flower, berrie, body, proportion, shape, and representation
required. And in this imagerie, although it was very small, yet there was no
defect to be found in the least part belonging thereunto, but perfectly to be
discerned.

Out of this former described vessel did spring up a green flourishing vine,
the twisting branches thereof full set with clusters of grapes, the tawny
berries of Indian Amethyst, and the leaves of green Silenitis of Persia: No^
subject to the change of the moon, delighted of Cupid. This tree shadowed the
chariot: At every corner of this triumphant chariot upon the plain where the
vessel stood, was placed a candlestick, of excellent workmanship, upon three
feet of red corrall, well liked of the ruder sort, resisting lightening and
tempests, favorable and preservative to the bearer: The like were not found
under the head of Gorgon of Persia, nor in the Ocean Erythreum. The steal of
o^e of the candlesticks wa^ of white corrall, beloved of Diana, of a convenient
length, with round knobs and ioints, in height two foot. Another was of most
fine stone Dionisias, having spots growing from a blackish to a pure red, the
same pounded smells sweetly. The third was of perfect Medea of the color of
dark gold, and having the smell of Nectar. The fourth of precious Nebritis
from a black growing to a white and green. Out of the hollowed steals
whereof, there ascended up a pyramidall flame of everlasting fire, continually
burning. The brightness of the works expressed through the reflection of the
lights, and the sparkling of the precious stones were such, as my eyes dazeled
to behold them.

About which heavenly triumph, with a marvelous and solemn pomp, infinite
troops of Nymphs, their fair and plentiful tresses falling loose over their
shoulders, some naked with aprons of goats skins and kids, others with
tymbrels and flutes, making a most pleasant noise, as in the dance called
Thiasus, in the triete^ie of Bacchus, with green leaffie sprigs and vine
branches, instrophyated about their heads and wastes, leaping and dancing
before the triumphs: immediately after the triumphs followed an old man upon
an ass, and after him was led a goat adorned for a sacrifice: And one that
followed after carrieng upon her head a fan, making an unmeasurable laughter,
and using furious and outrageous gestures. This was the order of these
Mimallo^s, Satirs, and servants to Bacchus, bawds, Tyades, Naiades and such as
followed after.

The Nymph does show to Poliph^lus the multitude of young Lovers; and their
Loves, what they were, and ^n what sort beloved.
IT is very hard for a man to accommodate his speech to apt terms, whereby
he may expreslie declare the great pomp, indefi^ent triumph, vncessaunt joy
and delightful iettings about these rare and unseen chariots, and being once
undertaken, it is as uneasy to leave off: besides the notable company of
young youths, and the increasing troops of innumerable fair and pleasant
Nymphs, more sharp witted, wise, modest, and discreet, then is ordinarily
seen in so tender years, with their beardles Lovers, scarce having downy
cheeks, pleasantly devising with them matters of Love. Many of them having
their torches burning, others pastophorall, some with ancient spoils upon the
ends of straight staves, and others with diverse sorts of Trophes upon lances,
curiously hanging* carried before the mystical triumphs, with shouting resounds
above in the air. Some with winde-instruments of diverse fashions and manner of
windings sagbuts and flutes. Others with heavenly voices singing with ineffable
delights, and exceeding solace, past man's reason to imagine: within them passed
about the glorious triumphs, turning upon the florulent ground, and green
sword, a place dedicated to the happy, without any stub or tree, but the
field was as a plain coequate medowe of sweet herbs and pleasant flowers,
of all sorts of colors, and sundry varieng fashions, yielding so fragrant a
smell as is possible to speak of, not burnt with the extreme heat of the
sun, but moderate, the ground moystened with sweet ryuers, the air pure and
clean, the days all alike, the earth continually green, the spring never
decaieng but renewing, the cool grass with variable flowers like a painting,
remaining always unhurt, with their deawie freshness, reserving and holding
their colors without interdict of time. There grew the four sorts of
Violets, Cowslops, Melilots, Rose Parsley or Passeflower, Blew bottles, Gyth,
Ladies seal, Vatrachium, Aquilegia, Lilly conually, Amaranth, Flower gentle,
Ideosmus, all sorts of sweet pinks, and small flowring herbs of odoriferous
fragrancie and smell, Roses of Persia, having the smell of musk and Amber, and
innumerable sorts of others without setting, but naturally growing in a
wonderful distribution, peeping out from their green leaves, and barbs very
delightful to behold.

In this place I might see goodly brave women as the Archadian Calisto the
daughter of Lycaon, with the unknown Diana. The Lesbian Antiopa daughter to
Nycteus, and mother to Amphion and Zeteus that built Thebes, with her satyr.
Issa the daughter of Machareus with her shepherd. Antichia the daughter of
Aecus and young Danae. Asterie the daughter to Caeus, and Alchmena with her
fained husband. Afterward I beheld the pleasant Aegina solacing her self with
the clear flood and divine fire. The daughter of Fullus and that of Menemphus,
with her counterfeit father, and that other of Diodes with her lap full of
flowers and a writhing serpent, and the fair young gyrle no more sorrowing for
the growing of her horns. Astiochia and Antigone the daughter of Laomedon
solaciously delighting her self in her storkish plumes, and Lurisile the first
inuentrix of wheels. Garamantide the dancing Nymph holding by her little
finger, and washing her delicate pretty feet from sweat in the river Bagrada.
After that I beheld a quail flying, and a faulcon pursuing her: Erigone having
her fair shining breast stickt full of sweet grapes, and the daughter of king
Chollus with her bull, Eriphile and her changed husband: The daughter of Alps
and the virgin Melantho with her dolphin, Phyllira the daughter of old Oceanus
with the father of Chiron. Next her Ceres with her head instrophyated with ripe
ears of corn embracing the scaly Hydra: And the fair Nymph Lara sorting
with Argiphon: and the sweet Futurna of the river Numicus.

And whilst I stood with excessive delight beholding only as an ignorant this
rare company and mystical triumphs, circumsept with these and such like
sorts, and so also the delicious fields, but that me thought it was a lovely
sight to behold, and so I should have continued: then the gracious Nymph
associating and leading me, seeing my simplicity and carelesnes, with a ready
countenance and sweet and pleasant words, without asking, she said thus unto
me: My Poliphilus, do thou see these? (showing me those of the old world)
these were beloved of Jupiter, and this, and this was such a one, and these
were in love with him, by this means showing unto me their high and mighty
lineage, and not knowing their names, she in great courtesy told me. Afterward
she showed me a great number of little virgins, under the government of three
sober and discreet matrones the leaders to so great delight: Adding thereunto
very pleasantly (changing her angellike countenance) My Poliphilus, thou shall
understand, that no earthly creature can enter in here without a burning torch
as thou see me, either with extreme love and great pains, or for the favor
and company of those three matrones. And from her heart fetting a deep sigh,
she said: This torch have I brought hither for thy sake, minding to put it out
in yonder temple.

These speeches pierced my heart, they were so delightful and desired, and so
much the more, because she called me her Poliphilus. Whereupon I assured my
self, that she was Polia, and from top to the toe I found an extreme
alteration into a supreme delight, my heart flying only to her. Which thoughts
were bewraied by my countenance, and whispering small sighs.

Which she cunningly perceiving, brake off this new accident with these words:
Oh how many be there which would most gladly behold these triumphs, and
therefore Poliphilus, address thy thoughts to other matters, and behold what
noble and worthy Nymphs show themselves deservedly consorted with their
amorous lovers, courteous and affable: who with sweet and pleasant notes in
measured verse, praise and commend one another without wearines, incessantly
celebrating their turns with excessive delight, and extolling the triumphs,
the air also full of the chirpings of diverse pretty birds, yielding a diffused
charm.

This verse consisted of Strophe, Aristophe, and Epodus.
About the first triumph among the reioising company, the nine Muses did sing,
with their leader the divine Luter Apollo.

After the triumph followed the fair Parthenopeian Leria, with a laurel
crown, accompanied with Melanthia, whose habites and voices represented the
pride of Greece, Homer.
whereupon the great Macedon rested his head: She bare a splendent lamp,
communicating the light thereof with her companion, then the rest more
excellent both in voice and song.

There the fair Nymph showed me the ancient Iphianassa, and after the old
father Himerinus his daughters and their drink, and one betwixt the two Theban
brothers: These with pleasant noises, sweet music and fine agilities, paste
on about the first triumph.

About the second triumph was the noble Nemesis with the Lesbian C^rina, Delia
and Neaera, with diverse others amorous Nymphs, making pleasant soundes upon
stringed instruments of yealow wood.

About the third triumph, the glorious Nymphs showed me Quintilia and Cynthea
Nauta, with others, in great solace, making sweet harmonies, and singing
pleasant verses: there also I beheld the virgin Violantilla with her Dove, and
the other sorrowing for her Sparrow.

About the fourth triumph, before it went the Lidian Cloe, Lide, Neobole,
sweet Phillis, and the fair Lyce Tyburts and Pyra, with their harps singing
and making a most pleasant noise. After this fourth triumph among the Maenades
and sacrificers to Bacchus, there followed an amorous damsel singing in the
commendation of the head of her lover Plaon, she desired homes. And after them
all she showed me two women, one of them apparelled in white, and the other in
green, which came hindermost singing together.

And thus they marched about in a most pleasant and delightful manner upon the
fresh green and flourishing plain: Some instrophiated with laurel, some with
myrtle, and others with other sorts of flowers and garlands, incessantly
without any wearines or intermission in a perfection of the felicity of this
world, mutually enjoying one another aspect and company.

The Nymph having at large declared unto Poliphilus the mystical triumphs and
extreme love, afterward she desired him to go on further, where also with
great delight he beheld innumerable other Nymphs, with their desired lovers* a
thousand sorts of pleasures solacing themselves upon the gr^^ne grass, fresh
shadows, and by the cool rivers and clear fountains. And how Poliphilus
there had with madness almost forgotten himself in the passions of desire, but
hope did asswag^ his fury, quieting himself in the beholding of the sweet
savor of the fair Nymph.
NOt only happy but above all other most happy were he, to whom it should be
granted continually by special favor to behold the glorious pomp, high
triumphs, beautiful places, sweet scituations, together with the goddesses,
half goddesses, fair Nymphs of incredible delight and pleasure, but
especially to be seconded and accompanied with so honorable a Nymph of so rare
and excellent beauty. And this I thought not to be the least and smallest
point of my felicity. Now having looked upon these fights, I remained a great
space recording of the same, being therewith beyond measure abundantly
contented.

Afterward, the fair and sweet damsel my guide said thus unto me;
Poliphilus, let us now go on a little further. And then immediately we tended
our walk toward the fresh fountains and shady rivers, compassing about the
flourshing fields with chrystalline currents and gracious streams.

In which clear water, grew the purple flowering son of the Nymph Liri^pe,
looking up from his tender stringes and leaves. And all the fair rivers were
full of other flowers sweetly growing among their green and fresh leaves. This
delightful place was of a spacious and large circuit, compassed about and
environed with wooddie mountains, of a moderate height of green laurel,
fruitful memerels, hearie and high pine trees, and within the clear
channels, with graueled banks, and in some places the bottom was fair soft
yealow sand, where the water ran swifte, and the three leaued driope gre^.

There were a great company of delicate fair Nymphs of tender age, with a
redolent flower of bashfulnes, and beyond all credit beautiful, with their
beardles lovers continually accompanied. Among which Nymphs, some very
plea^antly with wanton countenaunces in the clear streams showed themselves
sportefull and gamesome, having taken up finely their thin garments of silk
of diverse colors, and holding them in the bouts of their white arms, the
form of their round thighs were seen under the plytes, and their fair
legs were revealed to the naked knees, the current streams coming up so
high: it was a fight which would have prepared one to that which were unfit,
and if himself had been unable thereunto. And there where the water was most
still, turning down their fair faces of exceeding beauty, and bending their
bodies of rare proportion, as in a large goodly glass they might behold their
heavenly shapes, breaking off the same with the motion of their pretty feet,
making a noise with the contrast of the circulating water. Some solaciouslie
striving to go by the tame swimming swans, and sportingly casting water one at
another, with the hollownes of their palms: others standing without the water
upon the soft cool grass making up of nosegaies and garlands of sundry
sweet flowers, and giving the same to their lovers as tokens of their
favorable remembrance, not denieng their sweet kisses, and loving imbracings,
with the amorous regardes of their star-like eyes.

And some were set upon the green banks not ouergrown with reed and segs, but
finely beautified with sweet herbs and flowers, among the which the tender
Nymphs coming wet out of the water more clear then Axius in Mygdonia, under
the vmbragious trees, did sit sporting and devising one with another in
delightful imbracings, with their reuerencing lovers, not cruelly scorning and
rejecting them, but with a sociable love and benign affablenesse, disposing
themselves to the like show of true affection, their sweet gestures and
pleasant behauiours far more gracious to the eye, then flowing tears be to the
froward and unmerciful Cupid, the sweet fountains and moist dewes to the
green fields, and desired form to unfashioned matter.

Some did sing amorous sonnets, and verses of love, breathing out in the same
from their inflamed breasts, scalding sighs full of sweet accents, able to
enamorate hearts of stone: And to make smooth the ruggedness of the
vnpassageable mountain Caucasus, to stay whatsoever fury the harp of
Orpheus would provoke, and the foul and evil favored face of Medusa, to
make any horrible monster tame and tractable, and to stop the continual
provocation of the devouring Scylla. Some rested their heads in the chaste laps
of their fair loves, recounting the pleasant devises of Jupiter, and they
instrophyating their curled locks with sweet smelling flowers.

Others of them fained that they were forsaken, and seemed to fly and go away
from them, whom dearly they did affect, and then was there running one after
another with loud laughters, and effeminate criengs out, their fair tresses
spredding down over their snowie shoulders like threeds of gold, bound in
laces of green silk: Some loose after a Nymphish manner, others bound up in
attyres of gold set with pearl. Afterward coming near together, they would
stowpe down, and twiching up the sweet flowers with their fair and tender
fingers, fling the same in the faces of their pursuing lovers with great
pleasure and solace, maintaining their fained disgracings.

Others with great courtesy were putting of Rose leaves one after another into
their laced breasts, adding after them sweet kisses, some giving their lovers
(if ouer-bold) upon the cheeks with their harmles palms pretty ticks, making
them red like the wheels of Ph^ebus in a fair and clear morning: with other
new and unthought contentions, such as love could devise. They all being
pleasant, merry, and disposed to delight: Their gestures and motions girlish,
and of a virgineall simplicity, putting on sincere love without the offense of
honorable virtue: Free and exempt from the occursion of grief or emulation of
aduers fortune: Sitting under the shade of the weeping sister of the whited
Phaeton, and of the immortal Daphne and hairie pineapple with small and sharp
leaves, straight Cyprus, green Orange trees, and tall Cedars, and others most
excellent, abounding with green leaves, sweet flowers, and pleasant fruits
still flourishing in such sort as is inestimable, euenly disposed upon the
gracious banks, and orderly growing in a moderat distance upon thee grassie
ground, invested with green Vinca peruince or laurel. What heart is so cold and
chilling, that would not be stirred up to heat, manifestly beholding the
delightful duties of reciprocal love, such as I was persuaded would have
kindled Diana her self?

Whereupon I was bold to show that folly which tormented my inward spirits,
envying to see what others possessed, that was a continual delight in pleasure
and solace without any wearines in full cloying, and thus diverse times my heart
being set on fire by my eyes, and extreemely burning, my mind still fixed upon
delightful pleasures and their smacking kisses, and regarding with a curious
eye the abounding guerdons of the fethered god, me thought at that instant,
that I did behold the extreme perfection of pleasure. And by this means I
stood wavering and out of measure amazed, and as one which had droonke an
amorous potion, calling into remembrance the ointments of the mischeeuous
Circes, the forcible herbs of Medea, the hurtful songs of Byrrena, and the
deadly verses of Pamphile, I stood doubtful that my eyes had seen something
more than humane, and that a base, dishonorable, and frail body should not be
where immortal creatures did abide.

After that I was brought from these long and doubtful thoughts and
fantastical imaginations, and remembering all those marvelous divine shapes
and bodies which I had personally seen with mine eyes, I then knew that they
were not deceitful shadows, nor magical illusions, but that I had not
rightly conceived of them.

And now with earnest consideration among these beholding the most excellent.
Nymph fast by me, my eyes filled with amorous darts ceased not to wound my
passionate heart, by means whereof incontinently all my wandering thoughts were
stirred up, compact, and fixed upon her their desired object, recalling my
mortified soul afresh to be tormented in his first flames, which most cruelly
I suffered, in that I durst not be bold to ask if she were my desired Polia,
for she had put me in some doubt thereof before, and now fearing to offend her
with my being over bold, and ore troublesome with my rude and untilled tongue,
diverse times when my voice was breaking out betwixt my lips, upon that occasion
I suppressed the same. But what she should be, it was beyond my compass to
imagine, and I stood as suspicious thereof, as the deceived Socia with the
fained Atlantiades. Thus with diligent regards and cordial searches examining
her heavenly features invaded with a burning desire beyond measure, I said to
my self: Oh that I might be, if it were possible, a freema^ in such a place,
for no sorrow should grieve me, nor imminent danger should make me afraid:
although that froward fortune should oppose her self against me, I would
spend my life without any regard thereof, not refusing to undertake the
laborsome and great enterprise of the two gates showed to the son of
Amphitrio.

To spend the prime of my youth and pleasure of my years in the mortal
dangers of the merciles seas, and in the fearful places of Trinacria, with
the excessive travels and terrors of Ulysses, in the dark cave of the horrible
Polyphem, the son of Neptune, to be transformed in the company of Calyps^,
although I lost my life, or endured the most hard and long servitude of
Androdus, for all wearines is forgotten where love is vehement. To undertake
with the amorous Mi^alion and Ileus to run with Atalanta, or to com but in
such sort as the strong and mighty Hercules for his love Deianira, did with
the huge Achelous, so as I might atchieue so gracious a favor, and attain to
so high delight, as the remaining in these solacious places, and above all to
enjoy the precious love and inestimable good will of her, more fair without
comparison, then Cassiopeia, of better favor then Castiamira. Ah me, my life
and death is in her power! And if so be that I seem unworthy of her
fellowshippe and amorous comers, yet would God it might be granted me as a
special reward and privilege to look upon her: and then I said to my
self, oh Poliphilus, if these heavy and burthenous weights of amarous
conceits do oppress thee; the sweetenes of the fruit does allure thee
thereunto: and if the peremptory dangers strike thee into a terror, the hope
of the supportation and help of so fair a Nymph will animate thee to be
resolute. Thus my thought being diverse, I said, Oh God, if this be that desired
Polia which I see at this present, and whose precious impression without
intermission, I have still born in my burning and wounded heart, fro the first
years of my love until this present, I am contented with all sorrows, and
besides her, I desire no other request but only this, that she may be drawn to
my fervent love, that it may be with us alike, or that I may be at liberty, for
I am no longer able to dissemble my grief, or hide the extremity of my smart,
I die living, and living am as dead: I delight in that which is my grief: I go
mourning: I consume my self in the flame, and yet the flame does norish me, and
burning like gold in the strong cement, yet I find my self like cold ye. Ah woe
is me, that love should be more grievous unto me then the weight of Iuarime to
Typh^n. It disperseth me more, then the ravenous vulturs the glomerated bowels
of Tityus: It holds me in more, then the labirinth crooking: It tosseth me
more, then the northeast winds the calm seas: It teareth me worse then
Acteous dogs their flieng master: It troubles my spirits more then horrible
death does them who desire to live: It is more direful to my vexed heart, then
the crocodils bowels to Ichneumon. And so much the more is my grief, that with
all the wit I have, I know not to think in what part of the world I should
be, but straight before the sweet fire of this half goddess, which without
any corporal substance consumes me: her abundant and fair yealow hair, a
snare and net for my heart to be masked in: her large and phlegmatique forehead,
like white lillies, bynd me in as with a with: her pearcing regards take away
my life as sweet prouocations to afflict me: her roseall cheeks do exasperate
my desire, her ruddie lips continue the same, and her delicious breasts like
the winter snow upon the hyperboreall mountains, are the sharp spurs and
biting whip to my amorous passions: her lovely gestures and pleasant
countenance do draw my desire to an imaginatiue delight, heaping up my sorrow.
And to all these insulting martyrdoms and grievous vexations of that impious
and deceitful Cupid I lay open, mightily striving to bear them, and no way
able to resist them, but to suffer my self to be overcome: neither could I
shun the same, but remained still as one unawares lost in the Babylonian fen.

Oh Titius, thou can not persuade me that thy pain is equal with mine,
although that the vultures tear open thy breast, and taking out thy smoking
warm heart, do pluck it in pieces with their crooked beaks, and pinch the same
in their sharp tallents, eating up also the rest of thy flesh, until they
have ingorged themselves, and within a while after thou renewed again, they
begin afresh to pray upon thee. Thou have a time to be revived again, and made
sound as ever thou were: but two eyes without all pity or intermission have
wounded me, devour and consume me, leaving me no time of rest, or space to be
comforted.

And having had these discourses with my self, I began secretly to mourn and
weep, and desire a way that I might die, fetching deep sighs as if my heart
had torn in sunder with every one of them. And diverse times I had purposed
with a lamentable voice to desire her help, for that I was at the point of
death: but as one drowned and overwhelmed, I deemed that way to be vain, and
to no purpose, and therefore furiously, and as one of a raging spirit I thought
thus: Why do thou doubt, Poliphilus? Death for love is laudable, and
therefore my grievous and malignant fortune, my sorrowful accident and hard hap
in the love of so beautiful a Nymph, will be writ and reported when I shall
lie interred. The same will be sung in doleful tunes upon sweet instruments of
music, manifesting the force of hurtful love.

And thus continuing the folly of my thoughts, I said: It may be that this
Nymph, by all likelihoods, is some reverend goddess, and therefore my speeches
will be but as the crackling reeds of Archadia in the moist and fennie sides
of the river Labdone, shaken with the sharp east wind, with the boisterous
north, cloudy south and rainie south west wind. Besides this, the gods will be
severe reuengers of such an insolency, for the companions of Ulysses had been
preserved from drowning and shipwreck, if they had not stolen Apollos cattle
kept by Phaetusa and her sister Lamp^tia. Orion had not been slain by a
scorpion, if he had not attempted the cold and chaste Diana, and therefore if I
should use any indecencie against the honor of this Nymph in any sort, such
like revenge or worse would be used upon me. At last getting forth of these
changeable thoughts, I did greatly comfort my self in beholding and
contemplating the excellent proportion and sweet savor of this ingenuous and
most rare Nymph, containing in her al whatsoever that may provoke amorous
conceits and sweet love, giving from her fair eyes so gracious and favorable
regards, as thereby I somewhat tempered my troublesome and unbridled thoughts.
And my resounding sighs reflexed with a flattering hope (oh the amorous food
of lovers and sauce of salt tears) by these and no other rains I did manage my
vehement thoughts, and made them stop in a conceived hope, fixing mine eyes
with excessive delight upon her fair body and well disposed members, by all
which, my discontented desires were gently mitigated and redeemed from that
fury and amorous fire, which so near had bred the extremity of my passions.

The Nymph leads the inamored Poliphilus to other pleasant places, where he
beheld innumerable Nymphs solaci^^^^hem, and also the triumph of Vertum^^s and
P^m^na.
BY no means I was able to resist the violent force of Cup^ds artillery, and
therefore the elegant Nymph having amorously gotten an irreuocable dominion
over me a miserable lover, I was enforced to follow still after her moderate
steps, which led me into a spacious and la^ge plain, Larix, is a tree having
leaves like a pine, and good for building, it will neither rot, woornieare, nor
burn to coals.

Taeda, is a tree out of the which issues a liquor more thin than pitch.

Oreades, be country Nymphs. Lyndens or teile trees, in Latin Tiliae, they
bear a fruit as big as a bean, having within seeds like anyse seeds.

Dryades, be Nymphs of the woods.


the conterminate bound of the flowered green and sweet smelling vallie, where
also ended the adorned mountains and fruitful hills, shutting up the entrance
into this golden country, full of incredible delight with their ioining
together: covered over with green trees of a co^spicuous thicknes and distance,
as if they had been set by hand, as Yew trees, wild Pynes, unfruitful but
dropping Resin, tall pineapple, straight Fur, burning Pitch trees, the
spungie Larix, the aierie Teda beloved of the mountains, celebrated and
preserved for the festival Oreades. There both of us walked in the green and
flowering plain, she being my guide through the high cypres trees, the broad
leaued beech, cool shadie oaks full of maste, and other hornebeames, pricking
juniper, weak hasell, spalt ash, green laurel, and humbryferous esculies,
knottie plane trees and lyndens moving by the sweet breath of the pleasant
Zephirus, whistling through their tender branches, with a benign and favorable
impulsion.

All which green trees were not thickly twisted together, but of a convenient
distaunce one from another, and all of them so aptly distributed as to the eye
the sight thereof bred great delight.

This place was frequented with country Nymphs and Dryades, their small and
slender wastes being girded with a brayding of tender corules of sprigs,
leaves, and flowers, and upon their heads their rising up hairs, were
compassed about as with garlands. Amongst them were the horned fannes, and
lascivious sat^res, solemnising their faunall feasts, being assembled togi^^^r
out of diverse places, within this fertile and pleasant cuntrie: bearing in
their hands so tender green and strange boughs, as are not to be found in the
wood of the gods Feronia, Feronia a goddess of the woods.

Dabulam, a fertile place in Arabia. Scaeni^s, be a people in Arabia, that
dwell altogether in tents. Sauromatans, be people of Sa^matia, which is a large
cuntry, reaching f^o^ Germany and the ^iuer Vistula to Hycaenia, and is divided
into two parts Europea and Asiatica.

Lynx is a beast sported, but in shape like a wolph, being quick of sight.

Hamadryades were nymphs of the wood and Symenides Vertumnus the God of fruits.


when the inhabitants carry her image to the fire.

From thence we entered into a large square enclosure compassed about with
broad walks, straight from one corner to another, with a quick-set upon
either sides, in height one pace, of pricking juniper thick set together, and
mixed with box, compassing about the square green mead. In the rows of which
quick-set there were symmetrially planted the victorious palm trees, whose
branches were laden with fruit, appearing out of their husks, some black,
some crymosen, and many yealow, the like are not to be found in the land of
Egypt, not in Dabulam among the Arabian Scaenits, or in Hieraconta beyond the
Sauromatans. All which were intermedled with green Cytrons, Orenges,
Hippomelides, Pistack trees, Pomegranats, Meligoto^s, Dendromirts, Mespils, and
Sorbis, with diverse other fruitful trees.

In this place upon the green sword of the flowering mead, and under the
fresh and cool shadows, I might behold a great assembly met together of
strange people, and such as I had never before seen, f^ll of joys and
pastimes, but basely apparrelled, some in fauns skins, painted with white
spots, some in lynx skins, others in leopards: and many had fastened together
diverse broad leaves, instrophiating them with sundry flowers, therewithal
covering their nakedness, singing, leaping, and dancing with great applause.

These were the Nymphs Hamadryades, pleasantly compassing upon either sides
the flowered Vertumnus, having upon his head a garlande of roses, and his
gown lap full of fair flowers, loving the station of the woollie ram. He
sat in an ancient fashioned carre, drawn by four horned fauns or satyrs,
with his loving and fair wife Pomona, crowned with delicate fruits, her hair
hanging down over her shoulders, of a flaxen, color, and thus she sat
participating of her husbands pleasure and quiet, and at her feet lay a
vessel called Clepsydra. Clepsydra is sometime taken for a dial measuring
time by the running of water, but here for a pot to water a garden and young
sectlings in a nourcery for an orchyard.
In her right hand she held a copy full of flowers, fruits, and green leaves,
and in her left hand a branch of flowers, fruits and leaves.

Before the carre and the four drawing satyrs, there marched two fair Nymphs,
the one of them bare a troph^e with a praependant table, whereupon was written
this title, Integerrimam corporis valetudinem and stabile robur castasque
mensarum delitias, and beatam animi securitatem cultoribus me offero.

And the other bare a trophae of certain green sprigges bound together, and
among them diverse rural instruments fastened. These passed on thus after the
ancient manner, with great ceremonies, and much solemnity, compassing about a
great square stone like and altar, standing in the midst of this fair mead,
sufficiently moystened with current streams from beautiful fountains.

This square stone or altar was of pure white marble, curiously cut by a
cunning lapicidarie, upon every front whereof was a wonderful goodly
expression, of an elegant image, so exact, as the like elsewhere is hardly to
be found.

The first was a fair goddess, her treces flieng abroad, girded with roses
and other flowers, upon a thin upper garment covering her beautiful and
pleasant proportion. She held her right hand over an ancient vessel, in manner
of a chafingdish, called Chytropodus, sending forth a flame of fire, into the
which she did cast roses and flowers, and in the other hand she held a branch
of sweet myrtle, full of berries. By her side stood a little winged ^oy
smiling, with his bow and arro^^^. Over her head were two pigeons. And under
the foot of this figure was written

Florid^ very S. Upon the other side I beheld in an excellent caruing, the
representation of a damsel of a maidenly countenance, whose stately majesty
gave great commendation to the curious devise of the workman. She was crowned
with a garland of wheat ears, her hair flingering abroad, and her habyte
Nymphish. In her right hand she held a copy full of ripe grain, and in the
other hand three ears of corn, upon their strawie stalks. At her feet lay a
wheat sheaue bound up, and a little boy with gleanings of corn in either
hands. The subscription was this.

Flauae Messi S. Upon the third side was the likeness in a divine aspect naked
of a young boy, crowned with vine leaves, and of a wanton countenance, holding
in his left hand certain clusters of ripe grapes, and in the other, a copy
full of grapes which did hang over the mouth thereof. At his feet lay a
hayrie goat and this writing under.

Mustulento Autumno S. The last square did bear upon it a kingly image passing
well cut, his countenance displeasant and austere, in his left hand he held a
scepter up into the heavens, the air cloudie, troublesome and stormy, and
with the other hand reaching into the clouds full of hail. Behind him also
the air was rainie and tempestuous. He was covered with beasts skins, and upon
his feet he ^are sandals, where under was written,

Hiemi Aeoliae S. From thence the most fair and pleasant Nymph brought me
toward the sea side and sandy shore, where we came to an old decayed temple,
before the which upon the fre^^ and cool herbs, under sweet shadie trees we
sat down and rested our selves, my eyes very narrowly beholding, with an
insatiable desire, in one sole perfection and virgineall body, the
accumulation and assembly of all beauties; an object interdicting my eyes to
behold any gracious, that except, or of so great content.

Where refreshing in a secret joy with new budding conceits my burning heart,
and leaving off vulgar and common follies, Thessa^ie is a region of Greece,
having upon the one side Macedonia, and on the other Boeotia, reaching between
Thermopylae, and the river Pineus, even to the sea side, it is the garden of
Grecia. Heraclea, is the name of diverse fair cities, one in the confines of
Europe, another in Italy and in Pontus by the river Licus, also in Narbon by
Rodanus, also in Caria, Crete and Lydia, whereof the Lodestone takes his name.
Hesperides, were the 3. daughters of Atlas, Aegle, Arctusa and Hesperetusa, who
had an orchard of golden apples, kept by a dragon who^ Hercules slew and took
away the apples*
I began to consider of the intelligible effect of honest love, and withal of
the cleerenes of the skies, the sweet and mild air, the delightful site,
the pleasant country, the green grass decked with diversity of flowers, the
fair hills adorned with thick woods, the quiet time, fresh winds, and
fruitful place, beautifully enriched with diffluent streams, sliding down
the moist valleys betwixt the crooked hills in their grauelled channels, and
into the next seas with a continued course softly vnlading themselves.

A ground most healthful, the grass cool and sweet: and from the trees
resounded the sweet consents of small chirping birds. The floods and fields of
Thessalie must give place to this.

And there sitting thus together among the sweet flowers and redolent roses, I
fastened mine eyes upon this heavenly shape of so fair and rare a proportion,
whereunto my senses were so applied, drawn and addicted, that my heart was
overwhelmed with extreme delights, so as I remained senceles, and yet cast
into a curious desire to understand and know what should be the reason and
cause that the purple humiditie in the touch of her body, in the smoothnes of
her hand should be as white as pure milk: and by what means that nature had
bestowed in her fair body the fragrant sweetness of Arabia. And by what
industry in her starrie forehead pampynulated with threads of gold aptly
disposed, she had infixed the fairest part of the heavens, or the splendycant
Heraclea.

Afterward letting fall mine eyes toward her pretty feet, I beheld them
enclosed in red leather cut upon white, fastened upon the instep with buttons
of gold in loopes of blew silk. And from thence I returned upward my wanton
regard to her straight neck compassed about with a carkenet of orient pearl,
striving but not able to match with the whitenes of the sweet skin. From thence
descending down to her shining breast and delitious bosom, from whence grew
two round apples, such as Hercules never stole out of the garden of Hesperides.
Neither did ever Pomona behold the like to these two standing immovable in
her roseall breast, more white than hills of snow in the going down of the
sun. Betwixt the which there passed down a delicious vallie, wherein was the
delicate sepulcher of my wounded heart exceeding the famous Mausolea. A
sepulcher built by Artemisia in the honor of her husband Mausolus king of
Cania.


I then being content with a wounded heart full well understanding that mine
eyes had drawn it dying into all these elegant parts. Yet nevertheless I could
not so bridle and suppress my amorous inflamed sighs, or so closely cover
them, but that they would needs express my inward desire.

By means whereof she was changed from contagious love, and striking with her
stolen regards (envying the same) she turned it upon me, so as I perceived an
incensing fire pruriently diffusing it self through my inward parts and hollow
veins: and during the contemplate beholding of her most rare and excellent
beauty, a mellifluous delight and sweet solace constrained me thereunto. Thus
disordinately beaten with the importune spur of insatiable desire, I found my
self to be set upon with the mother of love, environed round about wi^h her
flamigerous son, and invaded with so fair a shape, that I was with these and
others so excellent circumstances brought into such an agony of mind and
sickness of body, and in such sort infeebled, that the least hair of her head
was a band forcible enough to hold me fast, and every rolled tramell a chain
and shackle to fetter me, being fed with the sweetness of her beauty, and
hooked with the pleasant baits of her amorous delights, that I was not able
with whatsoever cunning devise to resist the inuading heates and provoking
desires still coming upon me, that I determined rather to die than longer to
endure the same, or in this solitary place to offer her any dishonor.

Then again I was determined with humble requests and submissiue entreaties to
say thus:

Alas most delighted Polia, at this present to die by thee is a thing that I
desire, and my death if it were effected by these thy small, slender and fair
hands, the end thereof should be more tolerable, sweet and glorious unto me,
because my heart is compassed about with such tormenting flames, still more and
more cruelly increasing, and burning the same without pity or intermission, so
as by means thereof I am bereft of all rest.

And heerewithall intending to put in execution another determinate purpose,
behold my heart was tormented with more sharp flames, that me thought I was all
of a light fire^ Ah woe is me what were thou advised to do Poliphilus? Remember
the violence done to Deianira and the chaste Roman lady. Consider what followed
them for a reward, and diverse others.

Call to mind that mighty princes have been rejected of their inferiors, how
much more then a base and abject person, but tract of time gives place to them
which expect the bounty thereof. Time causes the fierce lions to be tame, and
whatsoever furious beast: the small ant by long travel lays up her winter
food in the hard tree, and shall not a divine shape lying hid in a humane
body take the impression of fervent love, and then holding the same, shake off
all annoyous and vexing passions, hoping to enjoy amorous fruits, desired
effects, and triumphing agonismes.

The Nymph Polia perceiving well the change of my color and blood coming in
more stranger sort than Tripolion or Teucrion, thrice a day changing the color
of his flowers, and my indeuoring to send out scalding sighs deeply set from
the bottom of my heart, she did temper and mitigate the same with her sweet
and friendly regards, pacifieng the rage of my oppressing passions, so as
notwithstanding my burning mind in these continual flames and sharp
prouocations of love, I was advised patiently to hope even with the bird of
Arabia in her sweet nest of small sprigs, kindled by the heat of the sun to
be renewed.

FINIS.

