THE TEARS OF LOVE: OR, CVPIDS Progress. TOGETHER WITH the complaint of the
sorrowful Shepherdess; Fair (but unfortunate) CANDIDA, deploring the death
of her Deare-Lou'd CORAVIN, A LATE LIVING (AND AN ever to be lamented)
Shepherd. In a (passionate) pastoral Elegy.

COMPOSED By THOMAS COLLINS.

Quot campo flores, tot sunt in amore dolores.
LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his
shop without Bishopsgate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE: AND rare accomplished Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH,
Vicountesse Hadington, wife to the Right Honorable and renowned, JOHN Lord
RAMSEY; Vicount Hadington.
T. C. wishes health, and happiness with the increase of much Honor.
Right Honorable:
IT has been both an old and an usual custom amongst those that have
clymed Pernassus Mount, and had community with the Muses, to dedicate their
endeauours to some Honorable and Art-affecting personages. Whose example I
thought it fit to follow in this my plaine-suted Pastorals dedication, which
presumption I (hope) will be held pardonable: By reason that every Penman of
the Muses, desires to have a worthy Maecenas, and never more need then now, in
this our Art-contemning age, wherein Poesy is unrespected, and almost
despised: because (by some such paltring Poets as Cherillus was) (...)

To those Readers that can and will conceive Reason.
MY Muse (of late) divinely did indite,
But (Poet-like) I now a Pastoral write:
I am a Libertine, and love to range:
His Music duls, whose tunes do never change.
Should I be tied to one vein, Momus would
Say, that I Would change my method, if I could:
Wherefore to shun his scandalous report,
I task my Muse in a fantastic sort;
And when I grow dull in divine conceit,
(To please my self with) I turn Poet straight.
And may this change of tunes, your ears content,
I Will think my studies, and my time well spent.
If not, (henceforth) e're I Will offend your ear,
What I shall write, I will conceal, or tear.
Yours (as you affect him,) T. C.

To my most esteemed friend Master THOMAS COLLINS.
FRom Newports bloody battle (sung by thee)
With Yaxley's death (the flower of Chiualry)
And from thy well-pen'd Publican, to be
Transported thus to fields of Arcady,
Shows that thy Muse is apt for all assayes,
And thou a man that meriteth renown.
Divine, Poetical, and Past'rall Lays,
Do all concur, thy Brows with Bays to crown.
Collins, live ever, in thy lines live ever,
Live ever honored by the Trumpe of Fame:
And let all those that in these Arts endeavor,
In their praiseworthy works, still praise thy name:
Who (in all Subjects) do so sweetly sing,
Envy her self to touch thee has no sting.
Io. B.

To his affected friend Master THOMAS COLLINS.
THy well writ Poem, Sweet composed lines,
Delightful subject, and right modest pen,
With just applause, even desertfull shines
In cleere-ey'd censure of best judging men,
Like to thy Shepherds flocks, as white as clean,
Partaking nothing, sordid or obsceane.
Thy Louers-Teares, show Lovers doleful fashion,
(As sable habit suits a mournful heart,)
A sprightly live has power to move compassion,
And such a lymmer to the life thou art,
Let Momus breath, vanish like pipe of smoke,
All wisemen know, Detractions credit's broke.
Samuel Rowlands.

THE TEARS OF LOVE: OR, CVPIDS Progress.
WHen bright faced Phoebus was in Cancers line,
And from his highest house did most hotly shine:
When Lucifer rose soonest in the morn,
And fair Aurora early'st did adorn
Th'Azurd sky with purple-colour'd blushes;
And (sore abashed) from Tythonis rushes,
Leaving his old, and all-abhorred bed,
To meet her younger Lover hastened:
Then rose I early (as sometimes I use)
To recreate my melancholy muse:
And forth I went, (not caring much which way,)
Toward the fields, where frolike Shepherds lay:
And as I walked ore those fertile playnes,
(Which then were scorched) I saw a sort of swains,
Each with his bag, his bottle and his hook,
Sit on a bancke-side near a Crystal brook,
Viewing the skaly fish skud in the deep;
The whilst their yaping dogs did tend their sheep,
Some Garlands made, and cast into the stream;
Others did angle for Roach, Dace and Breame;
Some Sonnets made, and to their Garlands ty'de,
Then prayed to Nayis for to let them slide,
With swift-sure pace upon the silent River,
Where their true loves sat, and them there deliver.
A pretty space (with much content) I stood,
To view these pastimes and the pleasant flood*
At length I left them, and walked longst the banck
(Over many a winding and short-turning crancke)
Close by the river as the Garlands swomme,
'Cause I would see what should of them become.
But lo, the Sun (which then grew somewhat hye)
Began to burn and parch exceedingly,
So that a while I was constrained to stay
Under a broad Beech spreading over my way,
Where Zephirus, with many a gentle blast,
Coold my hot face (with sweat and dust ore-cast.)
Then up I rose (though loath I was to go
From that sweet seat where I was shaded so:)
And on I went still by the rivers side,
Almost an hour, ere I the Garlands spide:
For Nayis (Lady of that lovely Lake)
Did so much pity on the Shepherds take,
That she compeld the silent sliding waves,
(Whose goodly path the glittering pebbles paues)
To glide apace, and not make any stays,
'Cause (she knows) Lovers connot brook delays.
I sighed and grieved, to think I had forsook them:
But (going fast) at length I ouertooke them;
And then I vowed, I would not lose their sight,
Until I see into whose hands they light.
Each step I took, I cast mine eyes upon them,
Being much delighted with the flowers were on them;
And viewing them, the more that I did view them,
The more mine eyes were eager to pursue them:
For therein were a sort of pretty flowers:
Sure they that made them, sought al Flora's bowers.
Roses there were of the most rarest kind,
Red, white and Damas^^ (to delight the mind)
Lillies and Daffadils stood on the top,
And Honny-dew upon the rest did drop.
Next stood Rose-mary mixed with gilded Bays,
Carnations, Pinckes, and Lauenders sweet sprayes,
Then Gilly-flowres (free from defective spots)
And Margerum, full fraught with True-loue knots.
Next Time and Mary-golds together stood,
Then Batchelours buttons (which maids hold so good)
Pancyes, and double Pagles, Sops in wine,
Sweet Honny-suckles, and blue Collembine;
And twenty more, whose names I cannot tell,
And yet (me thought) they pleased me wondrous well.
Thus whilst I gazed on these Garlands gay,
I saw how prettily the stream did play,
With th'Osier twigs that grew upon the banks,
Acting a sort of sundry wanton prancks.
Sometimes they would stoop, and slyly steal a kiss;
Sometimes skip up, as if they scorned that bliss;
Sometimes again (the fit being come upon them)
They Would iump into the stream, let her run on them:
Who (like most women having men in thrall,)
Insulted over them, and grew proud withal.
And when she would made them slaves unto her will,
She Would wend away, and let them weep their fill.
Lo here (thought I) these silly twigs may teach me,
To shun Loves snares, lest women's wiles o're-reach me:
For by these twigs I see (oh flinty hard!)
A doting Lover they do least regard:
When flattering wooers with fair speaking speed,
Whilst they are rejected that love dear indeed.
Narcissus-like, the poor twigs sought to kiss:
But their own shadows yet were drenched for this.
So he that seeks his goddess to embrace,
May have (like Ixion) but a Cloud in Chase:
And when he thinks fast in his arms to fold her,
Find her so ayery, that he cannot hold her.
And yet this lighter then a Shittle-Cocke,
Her dearest Lovers will delude and mock:
And ( Cyren-like) though she does them inchant,
What most they seek, they most of all shall want:
For some there are allure men to desire,
Then laugh to see them frying in loves fire,
(Like foolish flies in Candle flames that play.
Till they be scorched, and scarce can creep away)
But still the Garlands swomme, and on went I,
Till in the river (lo) I did espy
(Hard by a Groves side, which I then drew near)
A sort of goodly water-Nymphes appear,
Naked as the Graces upon Ida were,
Having no cou^ing but their comely hair,
Which dangled down their dainty bodies so,
That naught was seen that was not fit to show.
Nayis her self was foremost of this Crew,
On whom the rest did give attendance due;
Bathing she sat (like Dian) in the brook,
Whilst I, (as Acteon) upon her did look.
Soon was I spyde, yet did she bathe her still:
For oh (she knew) I did intend no ill:
And therefore no exceptions took at me,
Nor grudged that I, her and her Nymphs did see.
But now the river (which of late was proud)
Drawing near to her (me thought) lowly bowde,
And having done all reverence it could do her,
Humbly presented all the Garlands to her:
Which Nayis taking, to each Nymph gave one,
And charged them instantly to get them gone,
Along the stream, till they got past the Grove,
Where they should see each of these shepherds love,
And of these Garlands, there delivery make,
And see that each one did her True-loues take,
And then return, and tell how they accepted
These friendly favors, and whose was neglected.
Forthwith they went to do as she commands,
Holding the Garlands in their Iuory hands;
Whose shadows (through the splendour of the sun)
Did both on banks, and in the bottom run.
Whereat the fish (amazed) skud thence for fear:
But when they saw there were no mortals there,
They did retire, and seem for to adore them;
Then skud behind, then skip again before them.
Even as the Dolphins on the sea do dance
Before a storm: so did these fishes prance,
As thinking these were some celestial powers,
That could produce some soone-ensuing showers:
And therefore played thus prettily to sport them,
And all the way presumed to consort them.
But now being come unto their iourneys end,
These lovely Nymphs their looks to shore did bend
And there espyde a sort of most sweet creatures,
That passed comparison for comely features:
One was a combing of her golden hair,
Another dressed (yet did not seem so fair,
Though fair she was) sat singing of a ditty,
Which others praisd, and said it was very pretty.
Some with silk Ribands did knit true-loue knots,
Others sat making posies and fine spots
In hand-kerchers, some working flowrs in gloves,
And all for favors for to send their Loves.
One was commending of a comely swain,
Which she loved well, (and would be loved of feign)
Hight Pamelus, of person exquisite,
Fair, affable, and of an exc'lent wit:
Him she extold unto the Heavens above,
And held him worthy of a Princes love.
Another (sitting by) said, Corauin
Surpassed him, and all that ere has been.
Paris (quoth she) though he was Priams son,
And first fair Oenon, then Queen Helen won,
With comely Corauin might not compare,
For beauty, wit, and personage most rare.
But all this while, his dear love Candida,
(Fayrer then Aegypts Queen Cleopatra)
Nor smild, nor frowned, nor would she utter ought
Of her affections (whatsoere she thought)
That she did love him, she would have none to know;
Yet was she pleased to hear him praised so.
But now they spy'de the Nymphs upon the river,
Holding the Garlands ready to deliver,
Up now they start, and (as o're-ioyd thereat)
They laid their works by, and left off their chat,
And toward the Nymphs did speedily repair.
Hard it was for me to judge which was most fair,
Of them, or these; the Nymphs or mortal Creatures.
Both were so ex'lent for their outward features:
Each beheld other with a blushing face.
"Blushing does aye give beauty better grace.
Rare it was to see how their sweet cheeks were did.
But now being come unto the rivers side,
One foremost stepped a foot into the flood.
(So fond she was) she cared not where she stood
For to receive a favor from her Lover,
Who (like a flatt'rer) did but faintly houer:
Yet would he send her tokens now and then.
" Such slye dissembling 's in a sort of men.
" Till they (like Jason and false Demophon)
" Have got their wills: and then far-wel, they are gone.
She took the Garlands one by one, and read
To whom each was to be delivered.
One was directed unto faire-fac'd Phillis,
Another was to lovely Amarillis;
One to young Mopsa, mistress of his heart,
Whose looks (he said) did Poetry impart,
And Numbers true taught Dorus to rehearse,
Who til he knew her, scarce did know a verse.
One was to Celestina fair and bright:
And one to her that Gallatea hight:
And now to fairest Candida came one,
Who stood aloof, as if he looked for none.
Then came another, and another to her;
For almost every worthy Swain did woo her:
She had more Garlands, then half they had, sent her,
And Sonnets too: but that did not content her:
For she unwilling was for to receive them,
Nor did she care neglectfully to leave them,
Because she knew her Corauin never used
To send her ought that should be thus perus'de.
But lo, the Nymphs were loath she should forsake them;
And all the rest entreated her to take them,
Affirming that by reading over the lines,
She might (perchance) be pleased with some designs.
So them she took with seeming-gratefull heart.
The rest (rejoicing) do with her depart.
Back went the Nymphs, (as ea'rst they had in charge)
For to relate each circumstance at large,
To lou'ly Nayis, who thought long to hear,
After what sort these things accepted were.
But still stayed I, as one vnsatisfi'de
Of the Events, that after might betide:
And glad I was to faigne occasion too,
As thousands more (besides my self) would do,
Only to see those goodly Girls again,
In whom such rare perfections remain:
But most of all, her that is beauties Queen;
And o! (me thinks) can never enough be seen,
Fair Candida, the glory of them all,
Worthier then Venus of the golden ball,
Which fell from Heaven: for (oh!) she does excel
All those three fair ones betwixt whom it fell.
Perseus brave purchase, fair Andromeda,
Was never comparable to Candida;
Nor is there any like her can be nam'de:
For she is the fairest that ere nature fram'de:
Her hair is like unto fine threads of gold,
Her eyes like sparkling Diamonds to behold,
Her forehead high, her veins (like Saphires) blue,
Her blush vnborrow'd, all her beauty true,
Her cheeks like Roses, which by Lillies lie,
Her lips like Rubyes, teeth like Iuory,
Her nose is comely, and her neck is white,
Her chin is dimpled, (and that breeds delight)
Her breasts (like Snowy mounts) are fair and soft;
The Sun to touch them has descended often:
Her hands are little, and her fingers long,
Her middle slender, (I the rest much wrong)
Her leg is pretty, and her foot is small;
And by these few parts you may guess at all.
She wore a Chaplet of fine flowers and Roses.
(Beauty to beauty still her best discloses.)
Over natures ornament, her golden hair,
Which (as it was tressed) seemed exceeding fair.
About her neck (whiter than Snow or milk)
She wore a scarf of Sea-greene colored silk;
Her gown was pure wool, yet but plain (God wot)
Of purple color, and her Petticoate
Of watchet Kersie, and her Kirtle was
Of grasse-greene Chamblet, without guard or lace:
Her Iu'ry arms were clothed (with Lawn) so thin,
That through her sleeves a man might see her skin;
No amber bracelets on her wrists she wore,
Yet upon one wrist what she prized more,
Which was a silk point Corauin gave to her,
When as the kind Swain courteously did woo her.
Upon her legs she silke-soft buskins wore,
(Of Murry color) which she set by store,
And on her feet she did fine Sandalls wear,
Made of a pure Felt, or a Miniuere.
Thus was she decked; and well it did become her,
To be attired thus in the time of Summer:
For in a manner thus fair Daphne went,
And with like habit Dian was content.
But now b'ing come unto their former places,
These dainty damsells with delicious graces,
Each of them put her new-come Garland on,
Save Candida, who would be crowned with none.
And by the others being demanded why
She would wear none? She made this wise reply,
Say that I would (quoth she) wear one of these,
The sender, I (but not my self) should please:
For none of them that sent these Garlands to me
Until this instant, e're did seem to woe me:
And therefore, how is it possible to know,
Whether they love me, or but make a show
Of love to me, to see if I will take
That, which (perchance) the worst of you will forsake?
But put the case (as who can rightly tell?)
Each of these Swains did love me wondrous well:
How should I know which of them merits best,
To be beloved above all the rest?
Then being ignorant in each degree,
For to wear any, were a fault in me.
Then to her self she muttered secretly
(True Love is always full of jealousy:)
Since no one more then other merits Grace,
I should but wrong one that is not in place:
Then said (to please you since I must displease)
Upon my head I will put none of these.
Which words of hers made all the rest to muse,
That one so fair, such favors should refuse,
Sent her by chief'st of The Arcadian Swains;
And she (unkind) to quite them with disdaines.
" But still the fair (oh that it were not so)
" Respect their own wills, not another woe,
" And when they are offered well, cannot perceive,
" But take the worst (often) and the better leave.
Ah Love, thou strangely do affected stand,
And (like a God) wilt stoop to no command,
Nay prayers and tears can hardly penetrate
The hearts of some, they are so obdurate.
For as Love's powerful, so it is pitiless,
Afflicting many, but does few redress.
Why should the strong unto the weak be subject,
Or mighty 'r ones be to the meaner abject?
" But Love and Fortune are agreed with Fate,
" To wrack men's weal, and them excruciate;
" For, he that hopes by either of the two
" TO atttaine to happiness, may unhappily do.
But now these fair ones (for their more content)
Began to read the Sonnets that were sent:
Phillis first showed what her Amyntas wrote,
Who long had loved, but little reaped (God wot)
He pleads his love* long service and true faith,
Proff'ring them all and all that else he has
To lovely Phillis, whom he much commends,
And (so in passion) the poor Shepherd ends.
Then Amarillis showed Alexis lines,
Who pleads for pity, and tells how he pines.
Then Mopsa showed what her Dorus writ,
Who (like some Cockneyes) has more wealth then wit:
He brags that he sent far-fetch't strains unto her,
And (except he) no Swayne could quaintly woo her;
And that his lines (though all not worth a fly)
Were the only Quintesence of Poetry.
Then Celestina she began to show,
What Melebeus would on her bestow;
A thousand Lambkins snow-white, fat and fine,
I Will give thee (quoth he) so thou will be mine:
And more then that, I will maintain thee so,
As not a Shepherdess shall like thee go:
Then Galatea showed old Thirsis Sonnet,
Which made them all laugh that did look upon it:
For he did term her whiter then the Ieat,
And held her more worth then Agenors Neat.
Then Candida did will them look upon
A Sonnet, sent her by old Coridon,
Who praised her eyes to be of Currall hiew,
Her lips like Cristall: but it was not true,
Love had so blinded him he could not see.
Which were like Currall, which like Cristall be.
Then showed sh'another that Dametas sent;
Which they no sooner read, but straight she rent.
And then another of young Thenots sending:
This but not he (quoth some) is worth commending.
Yet surely this is not of his inditing:
For he is a wild-braine, has no skill in writing.
Some witty Swayne, (to express his love) has wrote it,
And now this mad-cap (by ill hap) has got it.
Then threw she forth some three or four more:
For (as I erst said) she had sent her store,
Which being read, bid whose would entertain them:
For she protested, that she did disdain them.
Now whilst they thus sat trifling time away,
Loves blind god, Cupid, got abroad to play,
VVith's bow and arrows from his mothers sight,
And to The Earth flew for his own delight,
Where (unawares) he met his mortal foe,
"(Minds set on mirth, are often encountered so.)
Envious death: to whom Loves god said thus,
It Is strange in one place to see both of us:
But since I have met thee (my old enemy)
Setting aside all former enmity,
Let Us make a truce, and for this night agree
To lodge together, and bed-fellowes be.
Meager-fac'd Death soon condiscended to it,
And was as willing as Loves god to do it:
Then did they both vow, that no mortal VVight
Should feel of Loves force, or of Deaths that night:
But as themselves disposed were to rest,
So they would do nothing others to molest.
Thus (like two travelers that walk together)
They took their Inn (Innes scarce well used by either:
" For lust (in Loves shape) often to Innes does come,
" And death (untimely) there destroys some:
" But Lou's too blame to be a Bawd to lust,
" And death's a Villain to betray men's trust)
And there they two were Iouiall awhile,
Love upon death, and death on Love did smile:
And first the one, then did the other boast
Their mighty Conquests made in every coast,
And laughed outright in their relating how,
Both rich and poor must at their pleasures bow:
For from the King that sits upon the Throne,
Unto the meanest and most wretched one,
Love made his brags none (past their Infancy)
The power of his Godhead could deny:
For with his arrows he had wounded all,
Made strong ones stoop, and stoutest minds most thrall;
Nor wise, nor foolish, Nobly borne nor base,
But first or last, Love has had all in chase,
And made them all for to confess, that he
Had as great power as in a God could be.
Then Death began: (quoth. he) Love brags too much
Before stern Death, whose strength and power is such,
That all the earth does tremble at my name:
For young and old, the lusty and the lame,
All stoop to death, who is impartial
And pitiless, not caring who does fall,
Nor how, nor when, nor in what sort I take them;
If once I strike, I ever conquered make them.
Whom Love does hit, in passions long may languish,
But whom I strike, I do set free from anguish.
Lou's but a child, and wanton tricks does use:
But Death is dauntlesse, and does none excuse.
Folly blinds Love, so that he cannot see,
But shoots at random, and lets some go free;
When some with often woundings are perplexed.
Whilst they laugh at them for whom they are vexed.
Oh partial Love, unjust and cruel too,
Thou do more harm, then ever Death did do!
Thou make men love those that do not affect them
And seek and sue to those that do reject them
Thou make the strong to stoop unto the weak;
The weak insult, and seek their hearts to break;
Thou do besot the wise with women's looks,
And work'st their bane with beauties baiting hooks;
Thou do the fool with wits conceit inspire,
And ( Phaeton-like) thou setst the world on fire.
Thou do deprive men of their sweetest sleep;
Thou murthrest mirth, and make the masker weep;
Into fools Paradise, thou bringst wretched ones:
Then sit'st and smil'st, to hear their sighs and groans:
And when they pule, aye me, what shall I do?
Cupid's glad of it: so's proud Venus too:
Then unto me the weake-made wood-cocks cry,
And say (sweet Death) come end my misery.
Death never does thus indirectly deal,
Nor through the eye into the heart does steal.
But like a Giant (though I seem not so)
I defy all, and do no favor show.
The young, as well as old, my name do fear;
Kings quake and tremble, when of me they hear;
I rid the world of those thou make despair;
I kill the rich* and I destroy the fair;
Beauty and gold (which all the world affects)
Death does disdain, and both as doung reiects,
And ever did so from the first beginning
Of my own birth, which was at Adams sinning.
Adam was first: and I the last shall be.
All were his offspring; all shall end in me.
But I (quoth Cupid) can do more then thou;
My Bow does make the very Gods to bow:
I made Alcides leave his Lions skin,
And (to gain I-o'ls love) to sit and spinne.
I made Apollo wear a shepherds weed,
To court fair Daphne (yet he could not speed.)
I made the God of war forsake the field,
And (as my vassal) to my mother yield:
Yea I made Jove to lay aside his shape,
And (amongst mortals) commit many a escape.
Is Love a child then, all-abhorred Death,
That can do nothing but stop mortals breath?
In this (vilde) world Death only does remain:
But Love in heaven lives where the gods do reign.
Then can thy power be compared to mine,
When thine is hell-bred, and mine most divine?
But whilst they two contended in this wise,
Death's sister, sleep, ceaz'd on their sight-lesse eyes:
And lo, by this, fair Venus missed her Son,
And to inquire him out to Vulcan run,
Who (with his Cyclops) was at work so hard,
That he nor Love, nor Loves god did regard:
And therefore told her, if she meant to find him,
She might go look him; for he did not mind him.
Then unto Mars the fair Queen made repair,
And asked him for her young son and heir:
Who by his godhead and his sword did swear,
He neither saw him, nor of him did hear:
But for thy sake (quoth he) I Will take some pains
To seek him out, and see where he remains.
Indeed I will: I will indeed (my Joy)
I Will do my best to help thee to thy boy,
Thy pretty little wagge, thy curld-pate boy,
That fills the world with weal or with annoy:
I would be loath my Love should lose her child:
For he is her best boy (though the wagge be wild.)
This said, he col'd, and clipped, and kissed her too,
And made an offer the other thing to do:
(For Mars with Venus seldom times did meet;
But he did dally with his dainty sweet,
Which made the limping god to chase and fret,
And seek to entrap them in an Iron net.)
But Venus (now) said, that should not be done
By Mars, nor any, till she found her son,
Nor would she smile, nor let him kiss her more,
But flung away, and would to Jove (she swore.)
" Mars sighed at this: (but vainly sighs are spent,
" When as a woman to her will is bent.)
Then mounts his chariot, and away goes he,
To search abroad where her young son should be.
His whirling wheels do rattle in the streets,
And breed amazement amongst all he meets:
To field he gets, and there commands his drum
Should strike t'enquire where Cupid was become.
Whilst Venus past heauens-Christall-pointed gates,
And to great Jove her grievous loss relates,
Who was exceeding wroth thereat, and swore
By Stix and Phlegeton and many more;
That heaven, and earth, and hell and all should rue
The loss of Loves Queen (if this tale were true)
Vowing to search their Centers every one:
And therewith (starting from his stately throne)
He called for Aeolus, and bid him send
Stiffe-blowing Boreas to the wide worlds end,
Charging him throw down Castles, Courts and Towers,
And search for Cupid in their secret bowers:
But if he could not find him quickly out,
Himself would throw his Thunderbolts about.
Away goes Aeolus and out Boreas flies,
But finds not Cupid, nor learnes where he lies:
Then back returns (with grief and shame) to Jove,
And tells how much, he (to no purpose) strove.
The god (being angry) sets the Crystal sky
Upon a burning fire instantly:
Whose lightning strangely terrified the Earth,
And (on a sudden) marred all mortals mirth;
Then took he Thunderbolts, and them he hurled
Into each corner of this cankered world,
Which struck astonishment in all creatures ears.
(Who does not tremble that Jove's Thunder hears?)
It made Romes Emp'ror hide his haughty head,
(Great Heliogabalus) underneath his bed.
It struck a King (that did it counterfeit)
Into a Salmon fish (all bloody yet)
It cleaves Clouds, rends Rocks and Trees asunder.
"Nothing's more dreadful then all dreaded Thunder.
This wakened Cupid (that with death did lie)
Who else (perhaps) had slept eternally.
" (For if the God^ should Love from Heaven exile,
" 'Twould sleep on earth, or dye in little while.)
Up did he start, and trust his trinckets on,
And in great haste did hurry to be gone:
But being blind (as oh, would Love were not)
Deaths quiver up in stead of's own he got,
And thence be trudges, leaving Death behind,
Who (when he rose) did Cupids quiver find,
Yet marked it not, but girts it on, and goes
Abroad the world, to fill the world with woes.
" For death on Earth (like Caesar in a field)
" Foes to their Foe, perforce does force to yield,
" And where he comes, tears they need not borrow:
" For he comes sild, but where he breeds sorrow.
Now Cupid (seeking how himself t'excuse)
Does bend his bow, and Deaths black Engines use,
Determining great store with Love to wound:
But whom he hitteth, straight-waies dead are found.
Lo, thus the blind boy (when he thought no ill)
(For want of eyes) did many a mortal kill:
And thus (ah thus) he murdered Corauin,
(The sweetest Swayne that ever yet has been.)
And thus fair Phillis he did make away
(Whom young Amyntas mourned for many a day*
And after tears and groans, and grievous cries,
Expressed his sorrows in sad Elegyes.)
And thus Laceno and a number mo,
Love killed outright: (it is shame he should do so)
Then up to Heaven the wanton wag did fly,
And told his mother (oh egregious lie!)
That he had wounded such and such with Love;
Which (to his foul shame) otherwise did prove.
Glad was fair Venus she had got her Son,
And much more glad to hear what he had done:
Yet notwithstanding she began to chide
For his departure; and would feign have cride:
But he so prettily did wantonize,
She could not weep, though tears stood in her eyes:
Which wiping thence, she smilde to see him play.
" Love often makes Sunshine in a show'rie day,
" And when unkindness does the heart annoy,
" Love does expel it, and proclaims joy.
But now (awhile) let us speak again of death.
Who seeks abroad to suffocate men's breath:
To Court, and city, and t'each country town,
He (like a Tygar) travels up and down,
And here and there throws forth a thrilling dart,
Intending's own, but acting Cupids part:
Yet lo, he keeps one custom he did use,
All suppliants prayers proudly to refuse:
For those that were oppressed with misery,
Th'enuious slave (though cride to) would pass by*
At length (remembering he did naught last night)
Strikes rich and poor, and does respect no wight:
But (oh) in stead of his own Ebon darts,
He with Loves arrows wounds their wretched hearts,
And makes some love that weary are of life,
(Their woes and troubles are so wondrous rife)
Who feeling Loves force grievously complain,
And to the powers divine do cry amain,
Ye gods (quoth they) must we with love be wounded,
Whose ioints are num'd, and joys (long since) confounded:
Hear us, oh heavens, and be propitious,
And oh ye gods, be you auspitious:
For death and fortune both injurious be,
And our woes will not, or else cannot see:
And therefore (oh) do you vouchsafe to hear us,
And let fell death no longer time forbear us:
For we are wronged, oppressed and pinched with grief,
And (but in you) have hope of no relief.
Jove hearing this, does straight commiserate
These wretched worldlings miserable state,
And by his messenger, swift Mercury,
Summons a Parliament of the Deity,
(With expedition) in the hie house of heaven,
And also charge warning should be given,
That all their plaints, that erst were mentioned,
Should at that Session be exhibited.
Away went Mercury, and perfourm'd his charge.
The gods appeared, men's griefs were heard at large;
And by the inferences of their bills,
(With the skarlet evidence of Cupids ils)
It did appear how idle Love had bin,
T'associate Death, and kill sweet Corauin;
Who was a Swain of all so dearly loved,
That for his death the gods were highly moved,
And sent for Cupid from his mothers side,
And him (in the open Court) did rate and chide.
Thou blind-eyd and besotting boy (quoth Jove.)
Make thou no difference 'twixt Death and Love?
Art thou a god, and wilt from heaven descend,
And on the earth consort a hellish Fiend,
And put his black darts and thy Bow together,
Then (like a vagrant) range, thou know notwhither?
And when thou have done a deal of villainy,
(T'excuse thy folly) telst us many a lie.
Think thou, the gods (by thee) will be deluded?
No: it were better thou were heaven excluded;
For with thy deeds thou daily do offend us.
But wherein is it, that thou can befriend us,
Unless it be in acting idle things,
Such as vain pleasure, but no profit brings?
And yet dare thou (fond fool) audaciously
Displease this Sinod of the Deity?
Love, I am vexed at this vild deed of thine.
"(All murther's hateful in our heavenly eyne.)
For Antidotes do thou rank poison give.
Daring to kill whom we desire should live?
But (since thou have offended in this sort)
We Will clip thy wings (boy) and we will keep thee short:
The son of Venus (though his mother love him)
Shall well perceive, Jove fears not to reprove him:
For why should men their sad oppressions paint,
And find no remedy where they make complaint?
" Are we not gods? (and gods should justice do)
" One fault vnpunish'd soon produces two.
Then let us now (great gods) make a decree*
How Cupid's fault may fitly'st punished be.
There stayed his speech: whilst Cupid (standing by)
To's accusation was bid make reply,
Who (childishly) his progress did recite,
And how he lay with ugly Death one night:
But for the rest he vowed it was unknown,
Whether he used Deaths engines or his own*
At this lame Vulcan laughed in his sleeue,
"(Some never laugh heart'ly, but when others grieve.)
To whom Apollo (with great wisdom) said,
Deride him not, nor do you him vp-brayd:
He Is your wives Son, and she will fit you for it,
If you abuse him here in any sort:
And for mine own part, be you sure (quoth he)
In blind boys matters I Will no medler be.
Saturn sat by, but (like a sullen god)
Spoke never a word, yet now and then did nod
At the others speech: especially when they
Rebuked Love, or did against Death inueigh.
Then Mars stood up (b'ing friend to Cupids mother)
And thus (with reu'rence) spoke before the other:
Ye mighty gods, this fact of his (we see)
Most heinous is: yet take thus much from me,
Since done on earth, and it is unfit Death should
Enter heaven gates our glory to behold,
It fittest is that Cupid should descend,
Where shame (for's guilt) upon him may attend,
And there endure the clamor and the cry
Of the murther'ds friends and those in misery:
And (as he is author of their endless woe,)
Sit, and condole them whom he injured so.
Which being done, let him go seek out Death,
And (changing's quiver) bid him stop the breath
Of those weak wights, whom he with Love did wound,
Or else (untimely) time shall him confound.
This Death may do: but those whom Love has slain
With Deaths dart, cannot be revived again:
For Love (in this) without commission went:
But whom death slaies, it is with the fates consent.
Death has authority for to destroy:
But Love should not kill, but procure men's joy;
And therefore Love was too too blame in this,
To use Deaths engines, and give bale for bliss.
" (Great faults deserve no favorable meed,)
Yet b'ing thus checked and punished for the deed,
Since (though a god) he is but a child (good sooth)
And (being blind) he sees not what he does;
At his return let our displeasures end:
For I Am persuaded heel no more offend.
To this, great Jove, and all the gods agreed,
And (being co^firmd) adiornd the court with speed.
Cupid departed, and to earth he goes,
To sit and hear the sorrows, sighs and woes
Of the sad Swains, for those whom he had slain;
But most for Corauin they did complain:
And every one of them exclaimed on Death,
Not thinking Cupid had reft him of breath,
Until the time that he was clad in clay,
Which (woe is me) was on Saint Peter's day;
A day of dread. Oh had it never bin,
T'intombe in clay the comely Corauin,
The comely Corauin (the more griefe's mine.)
In the earth (that day) the shepherds did inshrine,
Inshrine (aye me!) they did, and I must say,
When I name that, I name a weeping day,
A weeping day. Yea, so it was indeed:
For then heaven wept, and th'hearts of men did bleed,
Did bleed, it is true: their hearts did bleed, and they
Did naught but weep upon that woeful day,
That woeful day, the clouds of heaven distilled
A world of water, wherewith they were filled,
Were filled, yea filled, and so let fall away,
As if they would meant to have drowned the earth that day.
That day the Sun a sable weed did wear,
And with a black hood hid his golden hair;
That day the sky put on a mourning cloak,
And showed no vapors, but what seemed like smoke.
That day the earth was all as black as Iet,
Only with tears (wherewith 'twas ouer-wet.)
That day a sort of most sweet silver bells
Did nothing sound, but sad-tun'd doleful knells.
That day there was a world of weeping eyes.
" Sorrow's no niggard of sighs, tears, and cries.
That day each Shepherd wore a Cypress wreath
Upon his head, and all black Say beneath.
That day was Corauins sad funeral,
Which still 's lamented, and for ever shall.
A goodly troop did on his hearse attend,
And more had done, if they his death had kend:
For Candida never knew that he was dead,
Until she heard that he was buried:
And then (too soon) 'twas known, and she did go,
Whilst Cupid was there, that did breed her woe.
Lo, now my Muse is come to naught but mourning:
Her joys are past, and hopeless of returning.
Oh you that ever felt the force of Love,
Or know what powerful pass'ons it does move;
You that have wept, and sighed, and grieved and gron'd,
When (but your selves) none knew for what you mon'd:
You, you (oh, you) you that know love indeed,
You whose souls melt, whose very hearts do bleed,
At the remembrance of the sweet sweet name
Of sacred Love (the sovereign King of flame)
It Is you I call to, you that I implore;
If yet you have or sighs or tears in store,
Oh lend me them, or some of them at least.
" Much he has need of makes a liberal feast.
One Muse (unless inspired from above)
Can never express the passions of true love.
One man's too weak in judgment and in wit,
T'explane the force and the effects of it.
Oh help me then, help both my Muse and me,
That (by your aid) it may described be.
The little streams of water (small brooks give her)
Do quickly make a full-vein'd flowing River.
So every accent, every sigh or tear,
That you lend me, my work will helped vpreare.
" Hard is the heart that will no help extend;
" Especially (for Loves sake) to a friend.
Come then and aid me, and (in hope you will)
In Loves deep passion now I Will dip my quill.
Candida hearing of these heavy news,
Does sigh, sob, sownde, and all sad actions use.
Oh heavens (quoth she) why do I live thus long,
Or why has Death and Time done me this wrong*
Why have they got my Corauin away?
Why have they lapp'd his comely corpse in clay?
Why has heaven let that foul Fiend Death have power,
To crop the blossom of that scarse-bloom'd flower?
Why have the Fates so fair a Shepherd slain?
Why have they robbed me of so rare a Swain?
Why have they stolen the luster of my life?
Why got a hop'd-for husband from his wife?
Why dimd the Sun that shined upon me here,
And left me neither Love, nor friend, nor pheere?
Why (unsuspected) has time him betrayed?
Why made m'a widow, whilst I am a Maid?
Why has he reft me of all joys in one?
And why left me to wayle, now he is gone?
Oh what did move the gods to be so cruel,
As to deprive me of my dearest Jewel?
As to deprive me of my dearest Jewel,
And leave me like a fire without fuel?
Fire without fuel (soon) will fade and die:
And without Corauin even so must I:
Even so must I. Yea, (and great reason too)
For want of his life does my life undo.
What else had I wherein I took delight?
What joy had I, but only in his sight?
What comfort had I, but in Corauin?
What hearts content, but whereas he has bin?
What pleasure to me did this world extend?
What other solace, but that one sweet friend?
What did I love, or what did I hold dear,
But only him, my Love, my life, my pheere?
And is he gone? is he untimely slain
By Love? or Death? or by my own disdain?
Oh, which of us three has the Murderer bin?
Which of us was it that killed Corauin?
Love, was it thou? oh (if thou did it) speak:
For if Love killed him, grief my heart will break:
'Twill wound my soul even to the very death,
If Love has reft my deare-belou'd of breath.
I know he loved me, and that wondrous well:
And I loved him more dear then tongue can tell.
But (oh) 'twas long before that I could do it,
And much ado he had to bring me to it:
He su'de, he served, and often sought unto me,
By prayers, plaints, tears, and all that else might woo me:
But I relentlesse was, and slinty hard,
And his great griefs but little did regard.
I was too young to feel the force of Love:
Tears, plaints, nor prayers could me to pity move,
Then would he write, and as he wrote, he would weep;
Blood was his ink which he in tears would steep:
The pen showed pure love, and the paper zeal,
Wherewith the poor Swain did his plaints reveal:
Pity he pleaded for with his soul and heart,
And (with much weeping) prayed me ease his smart:
(For by the paper I might easily see,
That he did weep much, when he wrote to me.)
Love, thou art powerful, I confess it now,
Though of thy laws I did not late allow:
But if thy might to murder did extend,
Thou have wronged him, and also me his friend:
For I must think, if he by love was slain,
Though thy hand did it, 'twas through my disdain.
Disdain (said I?) yea, yea, I did disdain him,
Else I had pitty'd, when he first did plain him:
And therefore, Love, I must hold thee excused;
For Love not me, but I have Love abused.
Then let me never think, that Love did ill him,
But rather yield, that my disdain did kill him.
'Twas so indeed: in very deed 'twas so,
'Twas my own self, that wrought my self this woe:
For had I been kind (as I might have been)
Still had I kept my comely Corauin:
Still had I kept my comely Corauin,
Had I been kind (as oh, would I had been)
But (wretched) I would not be won to it then.
Ah (foolish Females) why should we wrong men?
Why should a selfe-will'd woman work his death,
That loves her dearer then his deare-lifes breath?
Why should we prize Virginity so hie,
That e're we will lose it, let our Lovers die?
When the one 's an Idol that 's but good in name,
And nothing else (how ere we prize the same)
The Other is the rarest frame on earth,
From whose fair being first our selves took birth:
But I Am unwise (as women aye have bin)
And have both wronged my self and Corauin,
Not only in this, but many other things,
Which now much sorrow by remembrance brings:
For had he sometimes proffered me a kiss,
(Why should a true friend such a favor miss?)
I Would frown, and say he was too peremptory.
Then he (poor soul) would straightway say I Am sorry:
If I offend you, I Will no more assay.
Yet (as one injured) I would fling away,
And scarce come near him of a good while after,
To make him grieve, whilst I grew fat with laughter:
But weighing (at length) how hainously he took
My sharp rebuke, I with a smiling look
Would comfort him, and say, Come, Corauin,
Too much unkindness for one kiss has bin;
To make amends with, take thee two or three;
Though I seemed coy, I Will not be so to thee:
And therefore come (sweetheart) and take inow.
" Mayds (though they are squeamish) lou't as well as you.
" What Is hardly gotten, men most highly deem:
" But what is soon purchased, slightly they esteem.
Then blame me not, although I seemed coy.
"Lovers (like babes) must beg for every toy,
And in th'obtaining think they are happy too,
By getting that which others cannot do.
But whither am I carried with this vein
Of my conceited (counterfeit) disdain;
Since to be coy, and something seeming nice,
Is not disdain? disdain 's as cold as Ice.
But my affection (like to coals of fire
In ashes wrapped up, lest they should aspire)
Was inly hot with feruency of zeal,
Though to my self I did the same conceal.
" Fire hid in ashes, hardly is containd,
" But love inuelloped, more hard restrained.
Then since I inwardly did hold him dear,
"And inward passions penetrate most near,
I must needs think my sorrow-tyred tongue
Has been over apt to do my own self wrong,
In saying, my disdain should work his woe,
Who was not loathed, but beloved so,
That I esteemd him dearer then my life,
And only hoped to have been his wife:
And well I might; for he deserved no less,
But to enjoy the brauest Shepherdess:
For oh, he had such worthy qualities,
And was so fair, well-fauour'd, and so wise,
That every Shepherdess did like and love him,
Although their beauties had no power to move him*
Only my self sweet Corauin affected;
The rest he loved not, nor their loves respected.
I know he loved me; and for ever will
Resolve my self, that he does love me still,
Loves me in death as dearly as in's life.
And oh, (me thinks) I hear him call me wife.
Wife was his word: Wife would he ever call me.
Oh, that no other title had befall me:
For then, ah then, (I need not tell ye how)
I Would bin as happy, as i am hapless now:
For now I Am neither Widow, Maid, nor Wife;
And yet all three: and so I Will end my life.
I Will end my life: oh, that it now were ended:
For then by Death I should be much befriended,
And with my Corauin should quickly be,
Whose hou'ring ghost now seems t'appeare to me,
And looks as grimly as if some were here,
That were the means to make away my Dear:
Or that his passage Caron has denied
To the Eliz'an fields (for Lovers purifide)
Until the world takes notice of his wrongs
By my complaint, (to whom it most belongs.)
If it be so, (sweet Corauin) be sure,
Thou shall not long thy wandering course endure.
I Will do thee all the right that I can do:
Which being done, I will come to thee too:
But yet (ah wretched and unhappy I)
Though die I would (as yet) I cannot die.
Those that would live, Death quickly takes away:
But those that would die, them he does delay.
Injurious Fates, why should your Factor Death
So forward be, to suffocate the breath
Of iocond Shepherds, and of Iou'all spirits,
And fly from them that wretchedness inherits?
But (oh) I now perceive wherefore he flies me,
And why (although entreated) he denies me
To end my days. Oh, it is because that he
Murdered my Corauin for loving me.
For if nor Love, nor my disdain did slay him,
Surely 'twas Death that did from hence convey him.
Death, yea 'twas Death, and none but Death did do it.
(Yet gods, nor men, never gave consent unto it)
Meager faced monster, most envious slave,
With Natures best gift why did fill a grave?
Thou vn-seene shadow, ghastly and most grim,
Why have thou filled a vasty vault with him,
With him that was Earths all-admired Creature,
And did surpass all Shepherds for sweet feature?
With him that graced the Arcadian Plains,
And was the glory of their goodly Swains:
With him that was the Mirror of all men
That e're was seen, or e're shall be again:
With him that was endued from above,
With all the gifts that gods and men do love:
With him whose youth was virtuously inclined,
And (as the Sun does lights) all Swains out-shin'd
With him that was beloved of all (save thee)
And therefore slain t'extract these tears from me.
Accursed Death, most cruel and unkind,
Having slain him, why leau'st thou me behind?
Why may not I (that am his only Wife)
Associate him as well in death as life?
Why should I live, and draw a loathed breath,
When my dear Love lies in the laws of Death?
We read of Women throw themselves in fire,
When as their loving husbands lives expire.
Portia took burning Coals and swallowed,
Hating to live, her husband being dead.
Cleopatra (for Love of Anthony)
With sting of Aspicks did most stoutly die.
And shall not I (although a Shepherdess)
Resolve like them, since in the like distress?
Shall I be timorous (and not imitate
The worthy'st women for a worthy mate?)
No: I Will not be divorced from my Dear:
Since he is gone, I Will not sit grieuing here.
Sweet Corauin, I Will come to thee 'ere night,
And give my life, to gain my Lovers sight.
But then (ah then) who shall thy death deplore?
These my laments do make thy loss seem more:
Therefore I Will live, and let the world to ken,
How much I prized thee more then other men,
Who although dead to others, yet (in me)
Thou shall live still, and still my True-loue be:
For so thou art (in deed, loh so thou art)
Thou only holdst possession of my heart,
Possession of my heart thou holdst in deed,
And shall for ever (none shall thee succeed.)
Then why should I imagine thou art slain?
And why inueygh against Love and Death (in vain?)
Come, Candida, it is folly thus to do:
Thou iniur'st them both, and thine own self too.
They did not kill sweet Corauin. Ah, no.
Some uncouth accident has bred this woe:
Some qualme o're's heart, or else some ecstasy,
Bred by conceit (begot by jealousy)
Of grief, might kill him, seeing many seek me,
Lest some of them (as well as he) might leeke me.
Yea sure 'twas so, so did he die (no doubt)
" No death's untimely, but time brings it out:
" Heaven will not have a murder to be hid,
" But first or last bewrayes the homicid.
But if grief killed him, it is in vain to weep:
"For 'twill kill all that do it long company keep.
Then Candida (awhile) lay tears aside,
And tell what loue-tricks did in's life betide:
Tell how he would sit, and pipe so prettily,
That all Swains joyed to hear his harmony:
Each Nymph and Shepherdess, that now remains
In any of these neighboring Groves or Plains,
From Fountains and from fields would flock with speed,
To hear him play upon his Oeten Reed:
And as they daily used for to do,
So would the Satyrs and the Dreiads too.
How often have I my milke-white flock forsook,
And slily stolen down to a silent brook,
My Corauins sweet Songs and Oads to hear,
When he (poor soul) thought little I was there?
Amongst the Reeds (oh wherefore did he hide him?)
At unawares I oftentimes have spyde him:
There would he sit, and sometimes sing and play,
And sometimes weep, and many woes bewray:
Sometimes his music did delight mine ear;
Sometimes I Would sigh his sad complaints to hear,
And to my self say (Lo) I can relieve him:
But I Will not do it, 'cause purposely I Will grieve him.
Tut, let him languish, pule, and pine awhile.
"Who sighs for love, makes his beloved smile:
For as the Adamant does Diamonds draw,
Or little Ieat extracts the longest straw:
Even so my beauty binds him to obey,
To seek to sue, and serve me every way.
" Fair women (always) specially the witty,
" Love to be loved, but love not to show pity,
Though faire-fac'd foolish ones that do not know,
How to esteem the beauties that they owe,
May (like a Puppy that is played withal)
As often as touched, be apt to take a fall*
But we that know what power our beauties have
Can at out Altars make them creep and crave,
And think they are happy too, and if they may
But get a kiss, for courting us all day:
For we do use to try, before we trust:
How should we else distinguish Love from lust?
" Men are deceitful, and will swear they love us,
" (Calling to record gods, and heaven above us)
" When they intend no love at all unto us,
" But only lust (wherewith they lay t'vndoe us)
" Seeking to undermine by subtle Arts,
" The weak made fortress of our feeble hearts*
" For what is it, wit, or Art, or gold can do,
" But they will use (if not abuse them too?)
" Only to gain their wicked wills of us,
" Whom they will soon cast off, if they conquer thus.
" Ah beauty, borne to multitudes of troubles,
" How many ways thy misery redoubles!
" Subject thou art unto suspicion still,
" And art condemned, though thou commit'st no ill:
" Fear and foul Ielouzie thy attendants be,
" Sickness and age do each hour threaten thee.
" Besides all this, men (both with gold and wit)
" Seek beauties ruin, and lay siedge to it.
" Nay more then thus, it does it self betray,
" And to our foes our weakness does bewray.
" No marvel then though fair ones feel much woe,
" When all these enemies assail them so.
But in this case I wrong my Corauin,
Who giltlesse was of such gregious sin:
For why, his love was most immaculate,
As free from folly, as 'twas far from hate:
For when upon his pipe he did sit playing,
Or his sad passions seriously bewraying,
He did desire his Candida might hear,
Both what his pastimes and his plainings were:
His heart and tongue concurring both in one,
Made him wish audience, when he was alone:
" For Lovers that do no dissembling use,
" Can make no faults, but what Love may excuse.
But flattring fellows that come cogging to us,
" (Surely they lou's not, that with slights do woe us)
" Their praise and proffers are like lime-twigs laid,
" Wherewith t'ensnare an vnsuspecting maid.
But Corauin did love unfeignedly;
Free were his thoughts from fraud and flattery:
For (with his tongue) his heart did speak to me,
"(Happy were mayds might all so wooed be.)
Nothing but pure thoughts which proceeded still
From true affection and entire good will,
Which made me love him, and often times go look,
"(Love teaches Lovers to search every nooke)
Whether he were in flowery field, or Grove,
Or to some fountain had his fair flock drove;
Where, if I found him, (as perhaps I did)
" (For Love may lie close, but not long be hid)
Like pretty Lambs we would sport and play together.
" VVooers are wags, or wantons, choose you whether.
Then though my Dear (to my great grief) be dead,
Yet let our meetings be remembered:
Mickle good pastime had we two alone,
And (oh) most pleasing, 'cause 'twas seen to none.
" Love takes no liking where strange eyes may see it:
" But where most secret, there it is still most sweet.
Oh, how the kisses and the kind embraces,
Which past betwixt us twain in private places,
Now (being remembered) rauisheth my sense,
And with my sorrows seems to dispense!
Bidding me leave my sad Laments awhile,
And with (then) amorous talk this time beguile*
Which (for my Loves sake) I am loath to do.
" But weak's our sex, and wandring-minded too.
" We (like the Moon) our minds must often change*
" All women vs't, and therefore it is not strange.
Then if one passion can expel another,
Love (for a while) Deaths sad designements smother,
Whilst I relate (in this lamenting time)
Our pretty pastimes in Love pleasant prime,
This is my lip (kind) Corauin would say,
When on my soft lip his sweet finger lay.
This is not Thenots, nor does Thirsis owe it:
But it is my lip; Love did on me bestow it.
Then would he kiss it, and (in kissing) cry*
Here Is Heaven on earth, and the only joy that I
Desire to have: for with a tutch of this,
Me thinks, I feel a taste of all true bliss.
Then would he kiss, and kiss it over again.
("Such sweets as those never satiateth men.)
And then (in passion) feeling what he spoke,
From his sweet tongue these sugared speeches broke:
If ever Balsamum did cure a wound,
If ever comforts did man's cares confound,
If ever excellence did breathe on earth;
Here (I protest) it first of all took birth:
For here I find the Fountain of delight,
By day to comfort, and content by night.
Here find I Nectar and Ambrosia too,
For which the gods strive (as we mortals do)
Here Is Hibla's honny, and Himettus dew,
Desired by all, but (ah) inioy'd by few:
Here is the sum of all my souls desire;
Here springs the fuel that inflames loves fire;
Here sweet Aromaticks and odours flow,
Rarer then ever did in Egypt grow;
Here is the place surpasses Helicon,
(Which all the Muses sport and play upon;)
Here sits the Graces on this (sacred) lip;
Here dance the Fayries, here they finely trip;
The Shag-hayr'd Satyrs, and the Dreiads all,
Here (only) keep their solemn Festival;
Here is the Latmus Phebe light upon,
To kiss her deare-lou'd young Endimion;
Here is the Crimson-colour'd Currall door,
Wherewith Love locks up his delicious store;
Here are enclosed Port-cullices of Pearl,
(Given by the gods t'adorne my dainty Girl)
Whiter then Ivory, and of far more worth,
Then all the pearls that Taprobane brings forth;
Here lies (entrenched) the organ of her heart,
Which never moves, but music does impart,
Sweeter then that which god Apollo played,
When he to win fair Daphnes love assayd.
Oh, how my soul is ravished, when I hear
That most mellifluous tongue sound in mine ear!
For then (me thinks) some sacred Angel sings,
Whose voice my senses in a slumber brings,
And all my cares and corrasiues expels,
By hearing her, whose harmony excels:
For Candida can tune her sweet tongue so,
That when she speaks, her words extirps my woe.
And here (ah here) besides what is recited,
Is one thing more wherewith I am delighted,
And that is her dulcet and delicious breath,
Able to sweeten the sour face of Death,
And purify the most infectious air:
What it perfumes, no poison can impair.
Odours and Incense (offered to the gods)
Are not so sweet, as her sweet breath (by ods:)
For when she speaks, the Sun seems to exhale,
And draw that vapor from this earthly vale,
Up to the clouds, which (sweetened there withal)
Shall henceforth none but honny drops let fall:
Which drops distilling from fair heaven to earth*
Shall give her glory that first gave them birth.
Thus would my deare-lou'd lou'ly Corauin
Sir and discourse, when we alone have bin.
Then would he claspe me in his comely arms,
Whose pleasant touches were as powerful charms,
To bind me with, more fast and firmer too*
Then chains of Ir'n or Adamant can do:
And b'ing impris'nd in that Ivory Gayle,
(From whence sweet kisses only were my bail)
He Would set him down upon the green-leau'd grass,
And (having me in's arms) would say, Sweet less,
Here we may sport us on these pleasant banks,
And use a thousand pretty wanton prancks;
Here we may sit, and clip, and coll, and kiss,
Dally, do what we will, taste all Loves bliss:
For here is no envious Ill-suspecting eye
Near to this place: we here in covert lie:
Time proffers here from foul reproach to free us:
For why, here is none (save heavenly power's) can see us.
" Lo, thus the place with th'opportunity
" Moves many a chaste mind to immodesty,
And brought my Corauin (there furtherance having)
For what is unfitting thus to fall a craving.
Sweet Candida (quoth he) thou know I love thee,
And for Loves first fruits now I mean to move thee:
Thou see the all-discrying light of day
Is almost fled, and vanished away,
And sable colored night (which all things couers)
Spreads her black Curtain to befriend kind Lovers.
Lo, all is whist, our flocks are close in fold;
And we alone: why should we not be bold?
It were a shame that I so long should woo thee,
And never offer Loves delights unto thee.
Then blame me not, though now I move that suit.
" (Maids should be marred, if men were ever mute.)
It is our part to make the proffer still:
But's your acceptance makes it good or ill.
Then be propitious (like the time and place)
"They Are happy lovers have kind loves in chase.
Come, Candida, thou know what I desire.
"No Sea's more boundles then Loves burning fire.
Dear Sweet, delay not; but let me possess
That which I seek: thou shall have never the less.
Then yield to me without resisting long.
" It Is vain for weak ones to contend with strong.
With that I sighed, and wept, and struggled too,
And thus cried out, (oh God,) what shall I do?
Shall I be injured by my only friend,
And will he rob me, that should me defend?
what faith's in men, when friends do traitors prove
And let their lusts gain sovereignty 'ore Love?
This said (quoth he) Why weep'st and wayl'st thou thus,
Since time and place seek both to pleasure us?
My Faith and Troth (thou know) are plight to thee,
That true and constant I will ever be.
What though we are not (as I wish we were)
Married together? let that be no bar:
For in the heavens, He that does sit most high,
Knows all our vow's, and knows I do not lie.
We two are linck'd (though not with Hymen's band)
With heart in heart, and also hand in hand;
And whilst in me remains a spark of life,
I will account sweet Candida my wife;
And at the instant I resign my breath,
I Will call thee so, and seal it with my death.
For thou art my wife, and there lives none but thee,
That any right or interest has in me.
(Sweet Candida) then why should thou resist me?
And having thus spoke twenty times he kissed me:
" For kissing's oil, which (cast upon loves fire)
" Does aggrauate and make it more aspire.
But words, vows, kisses (though too strong all three)
All wanted power to prevail with me:
For though these agents did all plead delight,
Yet still I dreaded, lest some danger might
Ensue thereof; besides the hideous shame
That might detect me, whereso're I came.
And therefore thus replide (Sweet Corauin)
Oh do not tice me for to taste that sin,
That odious sin, which (with my soul) I do
Hate, even as hell, and all hells torments too:
I yet am clear, my flesh is free from taint
Of filthy lust; then seek not thou to stain't,
But rather lend me thy keene-edged knife,
Wherewith to end this my unhappy life:
For I protest, ten thousand deaths I Will die,
E're lose mine honor, shipwreck chasttiy.
He hearing me thus resolutely bent,
First fetched a sigh, then prayed me be content*
And to appease my anger, fell to kissing*
" (Loves chief'st delight, when the other thing is missing.)
But whilst he kissed, I strived and struggled so,
We both grew breath-lesse, then he let me go.
Yet often we met there: But my Corauin
Never (after that) enticed me unto sin,
Nor any kindness would presume to crave,
More then my self thought good to let him have:
For since he held a glance to be a grace,
And kissing, favor in the highest place.
" Whereby we see, lewd suites must be controld,
" Or the hand of lust will soon make loves heart cold.
" Mayds must not let men have their minds of them,
" Chastity's precious like a Diadem,
" And hardly kept (as Crowns are kept by Kings.)
" So many seek for to subvert such things:
But leaving that, which (oh too well) is known.
"(For few there are that can defend their own)
Let me cease talking of it, and return
To where I left my dear Deares loss to mourn:
For ill it fits me, whom sad woe has ceaz'd,
To speak of ought wherewith I ear'st was pleased.
" Joys are no joys that do in sorrow end.
" Misery (most commonly) does come unkind:
" And when we think, we are in saf'st estate,
" Mischief stands neer'st the maine to ruinate:
For lo, when I beheld those happy days,
Which e'rst I spoke of, and I once might praise,
I little feared that (which now I find,
To quench my hopes in this unhappy kind.)
Grief (the only issue of unhappy creatures,
The bane of beauty, and best-formed features)
Should have brought me into the estate I Am now,
For to sit thus, and sigh and grieve with you,
For loss of Corauin, whom you loved dearly:
Yet only me his death concerns most nearly:
For he was mine, my best and chiefest part,
The only joy and comfort of my heart:
And therefore I have the most cause to mourn,
(Though your loves will not let me weep alone)
Yea it is I, and none but only I,
That for his death have cause to sit and cry,
To cry, complain, to sorrow, sigh, and moan,
Till like to woeful Niobe (now a stone)
I be transformed; from the form I bear,
And have no sense t'afford or feel a tear:
For Corauin, when he resigned his breath,
Gave me this gift, his death should be my death,
My death indeed: for (oh) why should I live,
To whom my Love this Legacy did give?
Why should I live, and sit lamenting here
Upon the earth, when heaven does hold my Dear?
It is unfit (since we two were as one)
That I should live, now my dear Love is gone.
Ah time, why art thou now so slowly paced,
That wont'st to flit more swift then th'hart that is chased?
Why in my sorrows do thou seem to leave me,
That of all joys so lately did bereave me?
For having done the worst that thou could do,
In killing him, why do not kill me too?
Why bring'st not Death (urged by this occasion)
On my lives kingdom to make stern invasion?
Have thou took al from me that thou could take,
Saving my self (that now is sorrows make?)
And leau'st thou me distressed (as in scorn)
To be times abject, that did time adorn?
For I was held the only Paragon
That e're the Arcadian Shepherds looked upon.
Made they not Odes and Sonnets every day,
Which to the world my beauty did bewray?
Who was it could pipe, and did not sound my praise,
(Whose name adorned all their Roundelayes.)
Was I not the only object of their eyes,
At whom they would (as at the Suns arise
The Saluadge people do) stand in a maze,
Worshipping that whereon their eyes did gaze?
What argument did any of them hold
So confident, (it could not be controld)
As of my beauty, person, and rare wit,
Which often made multitudes to muse at it?
Each Shepherdess enui'd my ex'lent parts,
As the only Adamant to attract men's hearts,
And said, that I was honored of each Swain,
As Cynthia is of all her starry train.
This time I had, and thus I was reputed.
But what I was, is now (by woe) confuted,
And with my woe, the wretchedness of time
Vpbraydeth me, as guilty of a crime,
For letting slip occasions that were offered.
And losing time, when love (in time) was proffered,
Telling me now (ah that no time could tell me)
What I forsook, and what has since befell me,
Saying I had (oh that I had so still)
A time, wherein I might have wrought my will.
I had a time wherein I lived content,
I had a time of sport and merriment,
I had a time, wherein I took delight,
I had a time, when time was worth the sight,
I had a time, wherein I might have bin
More kinder then I was to Corauin,
I had a time (e're time took him from me)
Which joyed my heart that happy time to see.
But now (ah now) that time's untimely past,
And where weal was, there wretchedness is pla'st.
Aye me, most miserable of all mayds alive!
More tyranny no Tyrant can contriue,
Then time has showed to take all did content me,
And now to mock, and with much grief torment me.
" But still it falls out (oh disasterous Fate!)
" That the most fair are most unfortunate:
" For as we are blessed with beauty from above,
" So we are accursed by being crossed in Love;
" Which makes the meanest, and most black of all,
" Despite our fayrenesse, and desire our fall,
" Glorying to see the ruin of our state:
" For whom men love most, them most women hate.
" It grieves our Sex to see a supreme fair,
" To live vnblemish'd, breathing in the air,
" And e're they shall vnscandalized live,
" (Most shameless) they will them shames liu'ry give.
But why against this huge-made monster, many,
Do I inueigh, that never was wronged by any?
Never wronged by any? yes, yes, and enuide,
If not (by some) too palpably belide.
But ah, I recke not what reports they make.
I Will suffer all for my sweet Lovers sake:
For if in Corauins behalf they speak,
They shall do well their wraths on me to wreake.
Too much blame cannot upon me be laid:
For I deserve the worst that can be said.
Just are the heavens in punishing me thus,
And yet I Am wronged. (Oh, who can right discuss?)
None but the gods my injuries do know:
Each mortal's ignorant how my griefs do grow.
Would I had never lived to have felt Loves force,
Envious Death then had not made divorce
So (unexpectedly) twixt him and me.
Thus to provoke my sorrows (as you see.)
Aye me, it is for Corauin that I
Now sigh, and grieve, and weep thus woefully.
Dead is my Dear. (Oh would he were not so)
Joy, heaven, thou have him (he did thither go)
On earth he could not, no, he could not stay.
Heaven got him hence (like Ganimed) away.
None but my dearest deare-lou'd Corauin,
Corauin (only) could Jove's favor win.
Up to the heavens the gods have got my Love:
Royally roab'd, he there attends on Jove.
Would I were with him, and coequally
In heaven established in eternity.
No doubt I shall: but (ah) I cannot yet.
"Angels seats are most difficult to get.
Retire then, thoughts: for (till my death's day) I
Cannot attain to immortality:
And dye I would not, till the world does know,
"(No flatt'rers tongue can true affection show)
Directly how my Corauin was lost.
Injurious Fates, how are we wretches crossed!
Death does deprive us of our Dearest friends;
And yet conceales the causes of their ends.
Are we so much despised of heavenly Powers,
Not what they gave us, we may keep as ours?
Did heaven not (once) give Corauin to me?
Can they revoke it, I not injured be?
Oh no, no, no, (I know) they cannot do it?
"Rob'ry's unjust whose're ads aid unto it.
And therefore heavens (I say) and gods are cruel,
Unjustly to deprive me of my Jewel.
If I do wrong you, (heavens and gods) I pray,
Now, now, (oh now) oh take me now away,
Take me away; yea, yea, so let it be.
And (whose're killed him) lay the guilt on me:
Say, my unkindness killed the flower of Swains,
(The comely'st Shepherd that e're kept these Plains)
Yet 'twas not I, my coyness, nor unkindness;
But it was this Boy-god, Love (misse-led my blindness*)
For (on my soul) I n'ere intended ought,
That wronged my Dear, in word, or deed, or thought.
But, Love, 'twas thou, 'twas thou, and none but thou.
That murther'dst him, and make me mourn here now:
'Twas thou that did bereave me of my joy,
And now do drench me in this dyre annoy:
'Twas thou that did my youths fair hopes delude,
And all my comforts cruelly exclude,
'Twas thou that did destroy my Dearest friend,
With whom my love, and dear'st delight did end:
'Twas thy hand gave my heart this cause of woe.
And made these eyes (like raging streams) or'eflow:
'Twas thou that made these Shepherds fall a weeping,
And leave their fair flocks (careless) without keeping*
'Twas thou did all whereof I do complain:
Thy cursed Bow my best-belou'd has slain,
And in that act thou have performed all ill,
" (For who can do a worser deed, then kill?)
Ah, Cupid, Cupid, thou have stained thy name:
Both heaven, and earth, are full of thy defame,
And more shall be: there staid, and sighed, and groaned.
(Such woeful wights are worthy to be moan'd.)
Then turned her self, and wistly looked about,
Till she spide me (that still paints passions out,)
Whom she desired, as e're I loved a Woman,
(Which powerful speech can be withstood by no man)
That I would write her wrongs, and woes at large.
At whose request I undertook this charge;
And thus replied: Thou subject of my verse,
If (silly) I, thy sorrows must rehearse,
Daine (thou Diuin'st of creatures) to infuse
A fluent spirit into my feeble muse,
That unborn Issues (in my work) may see,
What thy perfections could perform by me.
Thou art my Subject, and my Sweet Muse too,
From whom flows all, of all I wish to do.
Three days and nights I have already spent,
Of thy sad sorrows, for to see the event.
And ten times three more (willingly) I Will spend,
To make thy woes unto the wide-world kend.
Thanks she returned me, and requital vowed.
" True beauty (like true virtue) is not proud:
But him that merits, still it will affect,
Though witless Dowdies do all worth neglect.
Then unto Cupid turned her speech again.
" (Women are more impacient then men)
It Is thou (quoth she) that make me forlorn;
It Is thou that make me hold my life in scorn;
It Is thou that have of all contentment reft me,
And naught but woe and wretchedness now left me*
Ah woe is me, that ever I knew Love,
Since thereby I thus miserable prove:
Since thereby I thus miserable prove,
VVoe to the time that ever I knew Love.
Was it for this Dame Nature did her best,
To frame my face more fayrer then the rest?
Was it for this I did reject so many,
And (but that one) could love or like of any?
Was it for this, that I would go so trim,
To gain his love, then be beguild of him?
Was it for this, that I did trick my hair,
And sought all means to make me supreme fair?
Was it for this, that I so carelessly
Forsook my flocks, to keep him company?
Was it for this, that I took no delight
In any thing, but only in his sight?
Was it for this, nor wealth, nor wit could win
My flint-hard heart to let love lodge therein,
(Though many a sweet and worthy Swain did woo me)
Till he did come, whose death does quite undo me?
Ah Love (blind Love) how blindly do thou lead us,
And (like a false friend) badly do bestead us?
Is this the guerdon thou did promise me,
To pay with death my Loves long-look'd for fee?
Is this the comfort I did hope to have,
For Bride-grom's bed? my Bridegroom in his grave?
Oh eyes (henceforth) be you no longer eyes:
But (having seen these sad calamities)
Turn into riuolets of running tears,
And as small drops of rain the Marble wears:
So dig you channels, and indent deep creekes
In my (now) clowdy and discolored cheeks,
And let your lights (which e'rst did shine as clear,
As heavens bright lamps) no more to men appear:
But be you dim, nay, dark and shaded ever:
Keep your close Cells, and be disclosed never.
And thou my face, fair beauties late-lou'd field,
(Such as Arcadian Swaynes have seen but sil'd)
Never seem amiable in man's eye:
But let thy Roses and thy Lillies dye.
And now let wrinckles (mixed with morphew) grow,
Where their quaint colors made a curious show.
And you, my lips, (much praised by many a man)
Be (as you are now) ever pale and wan,
Riuell, chicke, pill; and let my sighs consume ye:
As odorous breath wont (balme-like) to perfume ye.
And thou, my skin, (the lou'ly lawny veil)
That keep'st my corpse within an Iuory Gayle,
Turn to a yellowish or Tawny hiew,
And be unpleasing to all peoples view.
And likewise you, my Saphire-colourd veins,
In whom my lives (yet purple) blood remains,
Wither, dry, cling together, and (henceforth)
Stop my bloods course, till it turn nothing worth.
And you my breasts (two Snowy appenynes)
More prized by many, then th'Indian mines,
With all the rest of my admired parts,
(Wherewith I conquered a world of hearts)
Waste and consume, fade, and fall quite away:
For life I loath, and now for death I stay:
For life I loath, and now for death I stay.
And (for my Loues-sake) now wish life decay.
Which said, the poor wretch (with much woe confounded)
Gave a great sigh; and having sighed, she swounded.
Whereat the Shepherds (which did weep before)
Now wrung their hands, and wayl'd, and wept much more,
And stood awhile amazed at this chance.
Then wrought they means to wake her from her trance:
One rubs her temples, and another, he
Does clap her cheeks, till crimson red they be:
Another wrings her Nose, until the blood
(Enraged) starts out, to see if he were wood:
One wrench'd her pretty fingers in his hand:
Another whooping in her ear, does stand.
Thus as they grieved, to see what did befall her:
So each of them endeuour'd to recall her,
And did at length: but faint she was, and weak,
And still she sighed (as sighs her heart should break)
Anon said thus, (but more she could not say)
Cupid killed Corauin: woe's me for aye!
Cupid killed Corauin: woe's me for aye!
For loss of him, thus makes my life decay;
And so sunk down unto the earth again.
The whilst the Shepherds did on Love complain
And cursed his Bow, his arrows, and his quiver,
And him the Wag, that was their woes contriuer.
Cupid at this, put finger in the eye,
And (whilst they chid him) wept most childishly;
Then babe-like said: (for Babes can do no other:)
How you have used me, I will tell my mother.
By this, fair Candida (whom all thought dead,
Till the kind Swains did eleuate her head)
Began to stir, and roll her radiant eyes.
(Beauty dwells there even when the body dies.)
And when sh'ad sucked breath from the solid air,
Away from thence the Shepherds did convey her.
With whom I Will leave her, till she do recover,
And learn to leave lamenting for her Lover.
Lo now, young Cupid, seeing all were gone,
(With many tears) her woeful state did moan,
And to himself (the silly god) did say,
Kind Coraum I cruelly did slay,
And was the Author of her woes, and cries
Not willingly, but through my want of eyes:
Yea, it was I, and none but only I,
That was the cause of her calamity:
And now it grieves me, (when it is too late,)
Love should (so lucklesly) gain Lovers hate,
And with his folly make the gods offended,
And mortals mourn thus: but the Scene b'ing ended,
In which my fact was punished with defame,
(To the impeachment of my honored name,)
I Will get me gone from the Arcadian Playnes,
And come no more amongst these mourning Swains,
Till Candida her Corauin forget,
And love another whom she knows not yet:
Which to effect, I Will leave expostulating,
And now go seek where Death's negotiating,
To do the wretched and weak worldlings wrong,
With the golden arrows that to Love belong;
Which I Will take from him, (as I Am charged to do;)
And give him's own, with all that longs thereto.
Therewith departs. But (oh) not far goes he,
"(A foes found sooner, then a friend can be.)
E're he met Death, who (like an envious slave)
Exclaimed on Love, and him ill speeches gave,
Saying, he was a couz'ning cheating mate,
" (Oh cruel Death, thou art full of cankered hate)
To take his Ebon Darts, and stead thereof,
Leave him Loves squilkers; whereat old folks scoff
The young make songs on, and the wise reject:
For (but with fondlings) Lou's in no respect:
And therefore (quoth he) I (in scorn) deliver
Thy babble Arrows, and thy boyish Quiver:
Here take them (Infant) and give me mine own,
Wherewith to heaven thou (like a fool) have flowne,
And there have done my engines so much grace,
As make show of them in that sacred place;
Whilst I have borne thine all about the world,
And at the bosoms of the basest hurld,
By which (of Death) this slight thy shafts have got;
They Will kill sometimes, though they by Love be shot,
Then shall I laugh at Lady Venus child,
To think how Death the Boy-god has beguild,
Making him help me fill vast Graves and Toombes,
That should make fertile barren women's wombes.
This said, changed Quiuers, and away went he,
Leaving young Cupid to complain to me,
Of's punishment for his rash oversight,
To steal from heaven, and stay on earth one night:
From whence the death of Corauin did spring,
Which all this woe unto the world did bring,
And shame to him; on whom fell Death did rail;
And Shepherds likewise (though it naught avail)
With bitter execrations did reject,
As if his godhead were of no respect;
And thus he said: I do perceive (quoth he)
Thou must the Penman of my Progress be:
Fair Candida has chose thee, and desired,
Not as a mercenarie (basely hyr'd)
But as a true friend, that compassionates
All Loyal Lovers lamentable states;
That thou would in some sad-tunde Elegy,
Tell how her Deare-lou'd Corauin did dye
By my o'resight, or rather want of sight:
(For Love would not kill Lovers, though he might)
How she laments, and how the Shepherds weep,
And what a sorrowing for one Swain they keep:
How gods (enraged) have punished my offense,
And mortals here (with too much insolence)
Exclaimed on me, and cursed me to my face.
(Why should a god endure so much disgrace?)
How Death abusd me, yet (all this while) I
Did naught but weep, and durst not make reply;
Because the gods thought fit I should be shent,
And (for m'offence) ordained this punishment.
But as th'would'st have my mother be thy friend,
So let this Story sparingly be pend.
Condemn not Love much (cause thou see he is blind)
As e're th'would'st favor of a female find:
But write of him as th'would'st have him to be
(In Venus Court) a friend, or foe to thee.
With that the Boy betook him to his wings,
(Love when he list, can soar above earthly things)
And up to heaven did make his towering flight.
I then returned these accidents to write;
Which (as you see) I have expressed here,
Though other Pastorals it comes not near.
Yet let the world vouchsafe me this report,
My will is good, although my wit comes short.
Sidney and Spencer, be you aye renoun'd:
No time has power your Pastorals to confound.
Drayton, and all the rest that wrote of yore,
Adorning time with your delicious store,
Be ever honored, and (till the end of times)
On Fames peart tongue be praised for your Rimes.
You worthy ones, oh, do not you disdain
My mournful Muse, that in this humble vain
Dares for to sing, considering these are days,
In which some Critics will the best dispraise:
But pardon me, should all be silent; then
Who should praise Virtue, or check Vice in men?
I know, fair Candida's complaint affords
Matter enough, had I but proper words,
To Express her griefs, whose woes, sighs, tears, and wrongs,
Might task all pens, and almost tire all tongues.
But I (alone) do of her sorrows sing,
Till better wits thereof be warbling:
For (su^e) the work deserves a worthy wit,
Though I (the weak'st) do first imblazon it.
Amyntas likewise told a sad-tun'd Tale,
For loss of's Phillis, (long since set to sale)
And for Laceno, and for all the rest,
Much sorrow by the Shepherds was expressed:
But I ore'slip it all, for her sweet sake,
For whom too much pains I can never take.
And now I will conclude her mournful song,
To whom, I Will sing a sweeter note e're long:
For whilst I live, I will tune all my Lays,
To comfort Candida, and in her praise.
FINIS.

