THE PENITENT PVBLICAN, HIS CONFESSION OF MOUTH. Contrition of heart. Unfeigned
Repentance. And fervent Prayer unto God, for Mercy and forgiveness.

AT LONDON, Printed for Arthur Johnson, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the white Horse, near the great North door of Paul's Church. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GRAVE, Virtuous, and Religious Lady, the Lady
Katherine Hastings, Countess of Huntington, T. C. wishes health, and
happiness, in this life, and in the life to come, Eternal felicity.
IT may seem somewhat strange unto your Ladyship, that I should thus presume
to publish this my poor and Penitent Publican, under your Honorable
protection: yet in regard of your Ladyships Integrity of heart unto God,
manifested by your most virtuous life, and zealous love unto true Religion. I
am animated to adventure him in the worlds view, being shadowed under the
shield of your sacred virtues, which (like the bright beams of Phoebus) may
Illustrate, and give a long life, to this my illiterate, and litle-worth
labor, which (wanting your favorable reflection) might without regard. For
(Madame) I am not ignorant, that Envy attends upon all good attempts: Ismael
will scoff, and mock at Isaac, even in Abraham's house, and Shemy will revile
David to his teeth, and therefore the godly in these days, may well say with
holy Job, my soul is cut off, though I live. Job the 10. and 1. verse. The
righteous as the prophet speaks, are most despised: for let Elisha, go up to
Bethel, and even the little children will call him Bald-pate: and so he that
labors to live uprightly, and to keep the true path, he is accounted precise,
and called a Puritan: the consideration whereof, makes many men that would be
fervent, to be fearful; and like Peter, to follow a far off, and rather to
deny him, that died for us; then to the face of his enemies, affirm that we
know him: such is the times impiety, and our infirmity, that we are easily
entreated to retire from any godly action, or good intention. And with Demas,
quickly drawn to abandon God, and embrace the world: yea even this vild and
vain world, which many excellent wise and worthy men, have most fitly compared
unto a sea of glass, of the which S. John speaks, Reuelat. the 4. and the 6.
verse, for it is both so slipperie and so uncertain; so full of troubles and
tempestious waves, one wallowing upon the neck of another, that it is high
time for us to say with the Disciples: Master save us, or else we perish:
Matthew. 8. and, the 25. verse, for so small is our faith, that we soon faint:
especially in Gods affairs.

Yet we seem unto men, as though we were both so constant and so confident
in God, that we might say with Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in
him. Job. the 13. and the 14. verse. But (alas) if we do behold but a little
persecution, lay hand upon our profession, for fear of the one, we are ready
to fly from the other. Forgetting the charge that Saint Paul gives unto
Timothy, Fight the good fight of Faith, and lay hold of Eternal life. Timot.
the 6. and the 12. verse: We are not only cold in love, but also careless in
Religion. For like the ready, (yet recanting) son, some say, they will come
into Christ's congregation, but come not: and others say, they will not come, yet
they do: but it is at the end of the day, before they will draw near; And
long does Wisdom cry in the streets, before she can call them together, to
go to the Tabernacle, and return to the Lord, who by his Prophet Ezekiell,
makes this proclamation: Ezekiel. the 18. and the 23. verse. Have I any desire
(says he) that the wicked should die? or shall he not live, if he return
from his own ways? And again, in the 31. verse of the same chapter, he
says, Cast away your trangressions, wherewith you have transgressed, and make
you a new heart, and anew spirit, for why will ye die, oh ye house of Israel?
Nay more, he promises by the same Prophet, in the 34. and the 16. verse, I
will seek that which was lost, and bring again, that which was driven away,
and build up that which was broken, and will strengthen the weak; whereby we
may see, that the Lord would have none to be lost, but with the penitent
Publican, to confess our sins, and to reform our selves, and according to
the counsel of Saint Peter, in his 2. chap. and 1. verse, laying aside all
maliciousnes, all guile, and dissimulation, all Envy, and evil speaking, as
newborn babes, let us desire the sincere milk of the word: that we may
grow thereby, from virtue to virtue, and from grace to grace, until we be
come perfect men in CHRIST JESUS; which we can never be, unless with the
Penitent Publican, we do truly humble our selves before the Almighty, and
unfeignedly crave mercy and remission.

The which, that we may the more be animated unto, I have here (though but in a
homely habit) set him, to be a pattern of true penitence, to all such persons,
as have any desire to imitate him, in prayer, and repentance: by whose example,
if any be incited (as I hope there shall) to confess their sins, and crave
pardon for the same; let them first give glory unto God, by whose holy aid I
did indite it, and then thanks unto your Honor, under whose protection I have
presumed to publish it, that it may thereby (as with a buckler) be defended
from the venomous tongues of the Envious.

And thus with my most humble and hearty prayers unto the Almighty, for your
Ladyships long life, and prosperity, I end, this 6. of Iulie. 1610.

Your Honors, most humbly devoted, Thomas Collins.

To the Reader, whosoever.
MVch to insert, and make too long a matter,
As an Apology for my Publican:
Were, as on fire-lesse Fuel to cast water,
And show my self a sence-besotted man.
Then as it is, accept it, or reject it,
For cringing Complements, I list not use:
I know the wise, and virtuous will affect it,
The rest, I care not, though they it refuse.
Pebbles, are fitter, then rich Pearls, for swine,
For both (alike) th'eyle trample in the mire:
The Gordian knot, is easier to untwine,
Then bring bad men, good matters to desire.
But you, (devout ones) of diuiner spirit,
Do you my labor, with my love inherit.
Yours ever, most unfeignedly, T. C.

THE PENITENT PVBLICAN.
ON bended knees, and with a broken heart,
Eyes cast on earth, hands beating of my breast:
I come to act a penitential part,
Before the almighty, who is pleased best
With sinful souls, when they are thus addressed:
In whose dread presence (caitiffe that I am)
Prepared thus (till now) I never came.
Knees ever bow, and standing bear no more,
Eyes ever weep, and nere be dry again:
Hands beat my breast, and make it ever sore,
Heart never cease, but sigh and sob amain:
Tongue, ever pray, and for my sins complain.
Till tears, blows, sighs, sobbs, prayers, and complaints,
Have freed my soul from all her foul attaints.
Humbling my self, may in Gods favor raise me,
Weeping for sin, may him to mercy move:
Beating my breast, most sorrowful displaies me,
Sighing, and sobbing, my hearts grief approve:
Playning, and praying, may procure Gods love.
His love is life, which causes me to crave it,
And steadfast faith, does tell me I shall have it.
Great wonder-worker, worthiest worthy one,
By whose assistance Henocke walked with God:
Thou that were Abraham's righteousness alone,
Thou that make men move mountains like a clod:
(Even h^apes of sin) from of their old abode,
Thou precious one, proceeding from above:
Soule-sauing faith (our evidence of Gods love.)
By which we do his promises embrace,
By which we apprehend Christ's righteousness:
By which we do, sin, death, and hell, deface:
By which we are assured of redress,
(If we repent and wail our wickedness)
By which our prayers are to God conuaid,
And without which, all suppliants are gainsaid.
Oh blessed faith, my fortress and my shield,
My only comfort in calamity:
Which do resolve me I shall win the field,
And overcome, Satan my arch-enemie,
I Will thank my God (for thee) continually:
Cause it is his grace, and goodness that I have thee,
(Which art a sign, he will in mercy save me.)
Thou that art God of gods, and King of kings,
Thou whom the Sun, the Moon, and Stars obey:
That fill'st the poor and hungry with good things,
And do the rich ones, empty send away:
My soul shall magnify thee day by day,
And all the powers that do remain in me,
Shall only praise, and ever pray to thee.
For thou have vowed (and that most solemnly)
As thou do live (which art the life of all)
Thou do not will those that do wickedly,
And into many grievous sins do fall,
Should die the death, but rather will'st they shall
Return and live, oh sweet, and gracious Lord,
Which to thy foes salvation do accord.
With Solomon, I now see all is vain,
Youth, beauty, strength, health, wealth, and honor too:
Long life, and all, that does on earth remain,
And all that man, with all of them can do:
Only thy word, which worldly wights does woe,
From earthly toys, to seek for heavenly treasure:
Is to be liked, and loved without measure.
Thou have ordained a time to gather stones,
And eke a time wherein to cast away:
A time likewise thou give us wretched ones,
To laugh and sing, a time to mourn and pray:
Most find the bad, few do the best assay.
But oh teach me (that long in sin have joyed)
To mourn and pray, sin may be now destroyed.
Even as a poppie that does hang the head,
Or like a Bull-rush beaten down with wind:
So I, sur-chargd with sin (more sad then lead)
Look carefully, but can no comfort find:
Yet faith, and hope, do both persuade my mind,
That thou (oh Lord) wilt mercy have on me,
If I repent, and rightly call to thee.
Thy holy prophets bid us seek thy face,
And that (I take it) is thy favor (Lord)
Thy loving kindness, mercy, and thy grace,
Which are revealed to us in thy word:
Oh them seek I, to me do thou accord.
And let me find them, for in them does rest
All that I want, to make me ever blessed.
Lord, I no presents, no oblations bring,
Only my self I offer unto thee:
A broken heart, is all my offering,
The which although it far unworthy be,
Yet Lord accept it, for behold and see,
In true devotion and in perfect zeal,
It prostrate here, for mercy does appeal.
I know right well thy Angels will rejoice,
And be full glad before thy majesty:
To see thee hear a sinful creatures voice,
And in thy mercy cure my malady.
Oh hear me then, and daine to purify
My impure soul, with thy pure spirit of grace,
For that is the mercy that I would embrace.
Like Naaman I am a Leaper Lord,
My soul, and body, both infected be
With filthy sin: yet if thou speak the word*
There will a wonder straight appear in me,
From all corruption I shall soon be free.
Yea and be cleaner then the Crystal glass,
And far more white, then snow on Salmon was.
Abanah cannot, nor yet Pharper cure me,
Nor all the waters in the world beside:
Only true faith does (by thy grace) assure me,
That if I take thy spirit for my guide,
And follow it, I shall be purifide.
For by the same, men are regenerate,
And from a bad, borne to a blessed state.
As David counsels, Lord I come to taste,
How sweet thou art, and how beyond compare
Thy loving kindness (which for aye shall last)
And more the^ mirh-sweet-smelling mercies are:
Oh pardon me, although thus much I dare,
It is no proud, nor yet presumptuous thought,
But it is thy grace, which this good work has wrought.
Which grace, were it not super-aboundant (Lord)*
My all-abounding sin would still keep back
Me from obeying of thy blessed word,
And in this action it would make me slack,
But thy good spirit supplieth what I lack.
And at this instant does enable me:
To come, to croutch, to cry, and call to thee.
For mercy Lord, for mercy Lord I pray thee,
For mercy Lord, I humbly do entreat thee:
I am a sinner, oh do not denay me:
Nor yet (in anger) either chide or threat me:
Although (I know) thou have just cause to beat me.
Yet mighty Lord (for thy great mercies sake)
Send mercy down, and some compassion take.
On me vilde wretch, and most unworthy man,
The very worst, that ever was created:
A silly soul, a sinful Publican,
In whom no grace, nor goodness is innated:
Nor ever yet was truly imitated,
Until this hour: in which thy spirit has
Taught me to pray, thus to appease thy wrath.
Thou that do ride upon the Cherubins,
Thou at whose presence all the mountains shake:
And hills do melt, oh pardon thou my sins,
And in thy vinyard me a labourer make:
Do so sweet Lord, and (for thy Christ his sake:)
Oh let me have the hire thou give to all,
Though it be evening ere to work I fall.
With the lost sheep, though I have gone astray,
And wandered through the wilderness of sin:
Lord let me not become a castaway,
But by repentance let me pardon win:
And once again (good father) take me in.
And from henceforth i will so obedient be,
That thou thy self shall take delight in me.
Look sovereign Lord, from thy celestial throne,
Ah look (I say) and with thy sacred eye,
See how my soul does sorrow: sigh, and moan,
And what cumpunction there is inwardly
In my poor heart, which of thy majesty,
Does hourly beg that thou would pardon me:
Which often have sinned gain'st sweet heaven and thee.
Which often have sinned gain'st sweet heaven and thee,
And therefore henceforth am unworthy far,
Thy son (oh Lord) entitled to be,
Or once bespoke of, where thy servants are:
Gain'st mercies gate my sins are such a bar,
That they keep back all heavenly benediction,
And yield me naught, but shame and sad affliction.
Lo, as a still, full fraught with leaves of Roses,
(Through force of fire, made underneath the same)
Lets fall (by drops) the moisture it incloses:
Even so mine eyes, for'ct by a fervent flame,
Of godly zeal (for so's the fires name)
Do shed forth tears (extracted by repentance)
From follies flowers, whereto my heart gave entrance.
I need not ask, why thou art sad my soul,
Or why thou art disquieted in me:
I have more cause to bid thee still condoule
Thy self for sin, which sore oppresses thee.
Oh mourn (I say) still sad, and heavy be,
Yet trust in God (who is thy comfort giver)
And (in good time) he will thee safe deliver.
As Moses said. Lord I am slow of speech,
No eloquence have I to plead my cause:
But with my soul, I humbly thee beseech,
(Wretch that I am) though I have broke thy laws:
Yet into judgment enter not, but pause.
And (since no flesh is righteous in thy sight)
Let my repentance, all my sins acquight.
I cannot boast (Lord) as this Braggart does,
This selfe-conceited and proud pharasie:
Simple I am, and love to say good sooth,
For oh, why should I either cogge or lie:
Knowing what harm my soul might have thereby?
Or wherefore seek, for to excuse my sin,
When by confession I may pardon win?
If so I join, contrition therewithal,
Or else confession small or naught avails:
It Is not enough that I for mercy call,
And show how much it is, my frail flesh fails
Of what it should do, but repentance bayleth
From death and hell: for God grants no remission,
But unto those that do use true contrition.
Therefore Lord grant, that I may often use it,
Cause David tells me, thou will not despise
A contrite heart, nor yet will thou refuse it,
If it come to thee in an humble wise,
Laying aside all sinful vanities,
With full intent for ever to refrain them,
And from thence-forth, nere use nor entertain them.
Humility, thou helper toward heaven,
Thou guide to grace, step to eternity:
Thou fruit of faith (which from above art given)
Thou that put'st Cammells through a needles eye,
(For all their bunches of iniquity)
Thou balm of bliss, thou gate to lasting glory,
Teach me repentance, make me truly sorry.
As once thou did the king of Niniuee,
When Jonas cried by the Lords command:
That he, and his, should all destroyed be,
And forty days their city should not stand,
Yet by thy means, Jehovah staid his hand:
And of the king, and people took such pity,
As their repentance moved him spare their city.
Oh could as many tears come from mine eyes,
As there are drops of water in the Sea,
I fear me all of them would scarce suffice,
To wash my soul, and filthy sins away:
Therefore oh Lord, to thee I humbly pray,
That thou (in mercy) would forgive the same,
And let me live, to laud and praise thy name.
All-seeing searcher of the heart and raines,
From whom no secret thing nor thought is hid:
By ought that heaven, or earth, or Sea contains,
Or any thing in them Inuellopid,
Thou that know all, that all men ever did,
Full well thou know, that unfeignedly
I pray to thee, without hypocrifie.
Wring hands, wayle face, cleave knees unto the ground,
Sigh soul, sob heart, nay split, for very grief:
Shake flesh, quake joints, in you no strength be found.
Cry voice, call tongue (my hearts atturnie chief)
Beat veins, bend sinews, humbly seek relief:
That so, with fear, and trembling thus, I may
Work out salvation, wash my sins away.
Look how a child, that has done naughtily,
With fear, does cry, and crave to escape the rod:
Even so my self, that have done wickedly,
And oftentimes offended thee sweet God,
By doing that thy holy laws forbod.
Now quake with fear, least I should punished be,
And cry, and crave, that thou would pardon me.
But see the nature of this Pharisie,
He stands, and brags, and boasts, what he has done,
Thinking therewith himself to justify,
But thou (oh Lord) do tell us by thy Son,
That by those works, he no reward has won:
And therefore bid'st our left hand should not know,
What deeds of mercy, with our right we show.
For when we have done even the best we can,
We are unprofitable servants all:
And Dauia says, the just, and righteous man,
Seven times a day, from God (by sin) does fall:
Then why should we (offenders cappitall)
Brag of our prayers, our fasts, and alms deeds,
When from our selves there is naught but sin proceeds?
For if sometimes to our poor brethren, we
Do any good: (as oh it is sildome when)
It is not of our selves, but Lord from thee,
Those good gifts come, and those good motions then:
We of our selves are miserable men,
Which never could so much as think good thought,
Then by our deeds, how can we merit ought?
Yet to do good (I know) it is commendable,
For so the Patryarks and Prophets did:
And Christ himself (then whom there is none more able)
Shows by examples, and by word does bid,
Our light should shine to others (not be hid)
Who seeing our good works might glorify,
Thy holy name (Lord) which do sit on hie.
Like leadn epipes, through which pure water runs,
Or like the quilles (called lacks) in virginalls:
Are all the sort of sinful Adams Sons,
Through whom much good unto the world befalls,
Yet they thereof are no originalls.
But thou (oh Lord) have them as means elected,
By which to work, what thou will have effected.
Then let the praise be only given to thee,
Let every tongue extol, and laud thy name:
Not unto us, not unto us, ought be,
But to thy self, which do deserve the same,
To thee all glory, and to us be shame.
For thou art he, from whom all good proceeds,
And we the workers of all wicked deeds.
As sweetest Rose, on thornle stalk does grow,
And purest Lawne is not without some spot:
So godliest men, have some defects (I know,
By holy David, Abraham and Lot)
None live on earth, can say he sins not:
Unless he lie, and so himself deprive,
Of that sweet mercy, which he might receive.
Could I rehearse all my bad deeds, and good,
And should I then compare them both together:
The one would seem, like to a spacious wood,
The Other like a light and little feather,
That Is blown about with every blast of weather.
My sins exceed, (like rivers ouerflowing)
But my good deeds, are scarcely worth the showing.
Then tongue be mute, and talk no more of merit,
For man does merit naught but death and hell:
Wherefore (good Lord) direct me with thy spirit,
Unto that place where perfect truth does dwell.
Oh bring me thither, and I shall be well,
I am a stranger, teach me thou the way
Unto that life, that never shall decay.
If thou conuart me, I shall be conuarted,
Or else (by sin) I shall be sure confounded:
For why there is no saving health imparted,
To ought that is, in earth or heaven bounded,
To salve my soul, which grievously is wounded.
Only thou can do it, therefore Lord I pray,
That thou would save, what sin does seek to slay.
The Saints blood-shedder persecuting Saul,
By grace (dear God, which does abound in thee)
Became a preaching and professing Paul:
Oh blessed deed, Lord do the like by me,
Open mine eyes, that I the truth may see.
And (with that chosen vessel) magnify
Thy mercy, might, and endless majesty.
Mary Magdalen had much evil in her,
Yet came to Christ (thy Son) and did confess
Her self to be a great and grievous sinner,
That long had lived in Laciuiousnes:
And lo, he let her touch his holiness,
And wash his feet (he washed away her sin
Displaced her evils, and put his graces in.)
But Mary did not with trickt trammels go,
With ourled locks, nor yet with broyder'd tresses:
When she unto Christ Jesus came, (ah no)
But with disheu'led hair (which grief expresses)
She came to him in midst of her distreses:
And kneeling down, she (with repentant tears)
First washed his feet, then wip'de them with her hears.
Thrice happy hears, that such an office had,
To wipe the feet of that most holy one:
And thrice blessed tears, oh well might she be glad,
That she (with them) might come and make her moan
To her dear Lord, and be restrained by none.
But suffered, wash, and wipe, and kiss his feet,
Which were not honey, but most heavenly sweet.
And humbly now (like Mary) Lord come I,
As sad, and sorry, as e're she could be:
And for my sins repenting heartily,
Yet though my tears I cannot power on thee:
As Christ to her (oh Lord) do thou to me.
Remit my sins, and ere I leave this place,
Expulse my evil, and fill me with thy grace.
For old in evil, but young in virtuous lore,
(I do confess) I am, more caitiffe I:
To shun the best, and set the bad before,
To fly from virtue, follow vanity:
And bring my soul into captivity,
Under th'arch enemy of all mankind,
Who will it aye, in chains of darkness bind.
In chains of darkness, and in dungeon deep,
Where stinging serpents, toads, and terror dwells:
Where hideous devils, and dreadful fiends do keep,
Where naught is heard, but horred cries and yells:
And where no tongue, of ought but torture tells.
There will he keep, and evermore torment me,
Unless (in time) I heartily repent me.
God Jeremy, with thee, I wish I had
A cottage placed in the wilderness:
Where I (unseen) that am exceeding sad,
Might sit and weep, and wail my wickedness:
Oh sighing soul, heart full of heaviness,
There you might mourn, and power out all your grief,
To God alone, in whom does rest relief.
Oh that my head were full of water now,
And that mine eyes, two flowing fountains were
Of trickling tears, oh then (to God I vow,
Who does behold me here, and every where)
Such hatred now unto all evil I bear,
That I would weep for that I have committed,
Both day, and night, until it were remitted.
As Hager mournde, and wept, because she was
From forth her master Abrams house exiled:
Even so my scule does mourn and cry alas,
Because she is with filthy sin defiled:
And (through her folly) has her self beguiled,
Of many good things, that she might have tasted,
In Gods own house (if she had thither hasted.)
But with th'adder I have stopped my ear,
And would not listen to the charmers voice:
Though wisely he has charmed both here, and there,
Yet shameless sin (wherein I did rejoice)
Kept me from hearing his harmonious noise,
For fear his words should have allured me,
To fly from vice, and virtue follow thee.
Thus like to water powered on the ground,
Which none (but God) can gather up again:
I am (by sin) ensnared, taken, bound,
And ever must in misery remain,
Unless thou Lord acquight me of that pain.
Oh take me up, and with thy holy hands,
Daine to untie sins trebble-twisted bands.
For Lord in sin my mother me conceived,
And brought me forth in foul iniquity:
Since when the world has often me deceived,
Yea and the flesh has labored mightily,
So has the devil (and that most cunningly)
To wound my soul, and to confound it too,
Which Lord I pray thee, let them never do.
A bruised reed, Christ says he will not break,
Nor will he set the smoking flax on fire:
The sorrowing soul, that scarce (for sobs) can speak,
He Will not reject, nor yet will he in Ire
Punish our faults, if pardon we desire.
The sick, the sore, the lame, the halt, the blind,
Come all to Christ, and all shall comfort find.
For lo, he tells us that he did not come
To call the righteous, but the sinful sort
Unto repentance, and amongst that some,
I of my self may, (to my shame) report,
I am the chiefest, yet being sorry for it,
Most humbly now sweet Lord I come to crave,
That on my poor soul, thou would pity have.
Even for thy sons sake, who instructs me
To fly from sin, and seek to thee for grace:
For his sake Lord, let me prevail with thee;
To look with mercy, on my mourning face,
Where tears (for sin) do trickle down apace.
Behold them Lord, and be compassionate,
Else wretched I, am in a woeful state.
My righteousness is like a ragge, polluted,
Needs must my sins then, vilde and ugly be:
For if my purest be with puddle suited,
Most odious is the impure that is in me.
For best being bad, the worst (in their degree)
Must of necessity be extreme ill,
Beyond compare, and passing humane skill.
Yet though my sins be crimson colored,
Thou Lord can make them white as any snow:
And though (in grain) they be like scarlet red,
(Died, oh too deep) Yet neretheles (I know)
Thou can make them as pure as wool in show.
From all corruption thou can set me free,
For nothing is impossible to thee.
Oh thou Almighty, maker of mankind,
In whom all grace and goodness does consist:
That do the waters in a garment blind,
And hold'st the wind within thy wondrous fist:
Thou that in heaven, and earth, do what thou list,
Bow down thine ear, (Lord) and Auspicious be
To my poor soul, which humbly sues to thee.
That thou would please to pardon my offenses,
Which (as the stars) are infinite in number:
Ah woe is me, that ever evil pretenses,
Entered my heart, that Inner room to cumber
With wicked motions, whilst good thoughts did slumber,
And not so much as dreamed of dangernie,
Till I was wounded by mine enemy.
That murtherous minded, all-assaulting sin,
Who with his venomed teeth has bit me so:
That all my flesh is putrifide within,
And I (like Job.) from top unto the toe,
Am full of soars, and know not where to go.
For ease, or help, but only Lord to thee,
Who (if thou will) can cure and comfort me.
Souls Balsamum, and hearts holie-water,
Sweet Smelling Sacrifice of the inward man:
Thou purest Incense powered on th'hye Altar,
Thou, key unto the heavenly Canaan;
Prayer (I mean) which to The Almighty can
Have free access, always to plead our case,
That Mercy may, us in her arms embrace.
Oh thou more worthy, and more worth then gold,
Then gold of Ophyr, or the Onix stone:
Thou whom the Lord delights to behold,
Thou that (like to Eliahs fiery Throne)
Conuey'st to heaven. Thou blessed, and powerful one,
Plead thou my cause, and oh my suit nere cease,
Until (from GOD) thou getst me full release.
Of all my sins, and of the punishment
Which for the same I ought to undergo:
And for m'assurance, and my souls content,
Oh get me thou, his Seal of grace to show;
That for what is past, I do him nothing owe;
But love and thanks, (which till my dying day)
My heart, and soul, shall never cease to pay.
As from the hand, Diomedes did wound,
A dulcid humor, Homer.
daintilie distilled:
So from the heart, where sin did once abound,
Pricked by Repentance, (wherewith sin is killed)
Sweet motions issue (by Gods grace instilled)
Which (like as Arons ointment did descend)
Unto each member straight-wayes do extend.
Teaching the tongue, what words it ought to use,
Teaching the eyes, what things they ought to view:
Teaching the ears, what sounds they should refuse,
Teaching the hands, what things they should eschew;
Teaching the feet, the perfect paths and true,
That lead to life. Thus (like a King) the heart
Does rule, direct, and order every part.
Blessed are those, that walk not sinners way,
Nor take delight to sit in scorners chair:
But cursed I, not once but every day,
Unto those odious places did repair;
For oh, (to me) they seemed exceeding fair.
Gainefull and good. But now I see right well,
He that retires not, shall arrive in hell.
Did thou not love us Lord exceedingly,
Thou would not have given thy laws unto us:
Nor bid thy Prophets in our ears to cry,
What mighty favors thou did mean to do us;
Much less have sent thy blessed Son, to woo us.
Which break thy laws, thy Prophets do mis use,
And Christ thy Son, each day and hour abuse.
Yet does he pray for us his enemies,
And at thy right hand Intercession make:
That thou would pardon our iniquities,
Even for his death, and painful Passions sake;
Oh blessed be he, that did such pity take
On sinful souls, that he himself would give,
To die for us, that we with him might live.
Great was that love, great was that mercy Lord,
And far more great, then ever man expected:
Until thy self did blaze that blessed word,
That though thou had mankind (for sin) rejected,
Yet thou (in mercy) had a means selected,
Whereby again, we should restored be,
And be adopted sons and heirs to thee.
Mine eyes have seen that sweet salvation,
Though fully (yet) I have not him embraced:
But now that Christ, that consolation,
Shall in my heart, for evermore be placed,
That so my sins (like clouds by Phoebus chased)
May vanish hence. And I (with Simeon) say,
Lord now in peace, let me depart away.
Thou that art more then most delitious,
Thou that for sweetness, do all sweets exceed:
Thou whom the Angels hold most precious,
Thou upon whom the souls of men do feed,
Thou that most pure and perfect art indeed.
Thou word of Truth, by which all things were made,
Thou, which shall stand, when heaven and earth shall fade.
Be thou to me a Lantern and a Light,
Be thou my Rock, and Castle of defense:
Be thou my sword, against foul sin to fight,
That I may put the devil from his pretense,
And by thy power expel him quite from hence.
That so my self (poor Byrd insnarde) may say,
The Net is broke, and I escaped away.
It Is mercy Lord, for which I thus implore thee,
It Is only mercy, that I humbly crave:
Because thy law says, if I come before thee,
Except thy goodness (which no end can have)
Send mercy forth, my sin-sicke soul to save:
I shall by justice, be condemned to die
A living death, that lasts eternally.
Like to a mastlesse ship upon the Sea,
Tossed too and fro, by force of forward winds:
That every hour looks to be cast away,
Yet lo (at length) she happy harbor finds:
Such is my soul, when sin so beats, and blindes,
So toils, and turmoyles, that hell seems to have her,
Yet faith steps forth, and says Gods grace will save her.
And by that grace I boldned am to beg,
And in submissiue manner Lord to pray thee:
Thy grace may break that Cockatrices egg,
Which serpent breeding sin (that would betray me)
Has in my paths on purpose laid to slay me.
If I come neer't (as by defect of nature
I cannot shun that soule-consuming creature.)
Unless thy grace (which all-sufficient is)
Vouchsafe to lead me in the ways of truth:
Which hitherto have always gone amiss,
Led by my folly and fantastic youth:
Of which repentance only now ensuthe,
For that is the fruit often, if we look into it,
And happie's he, that has the grace to do it.
For look how spices, when they are pounded small,
Do in our nostrills smell more excellent:
Then those that never broken were at all;
Even so a sinner when his heart is rent,
With the remembrance of his life fore-spent.
His prayers are, more pleasing unto God,
Then their's that never were beaten with his rod.
For whom he loves, them he does correct,
And thereby brings them to obey his will:
But as for them whom he does not respect,
He lets them: follow their own fancy still,
And headlong run into all kind of ill.
As I did Lord, till thou did open mine eyes,
And let my soul see her infirmities.
Great is thy goodness I must needs confess,
To give me grace, (that grace-lesse ever was)
To see, and wail my sin, and wickedness,
Which blessed deed, had thou not brought to pass,
My soul, and body, both of them (alas)
Should have bin damned in the pit of hell,
Which (by thy grace) now hope in heaven to dwell.
For now i will break off sin by righteousness,
I Will overcome lust, by using chastity:
By abstinence, i will punish greedines,
And foul intemperance, by sobriety:
Euict injustice, by integrity.
Evil affections, and ungodly motions,
I Will purge by prayer, and hearts pure devotions.
I Will banish plasphemie, by blessed words,
By patience, I my anger will o'rethrowe:
Boundless desire, by what content affords,
Base Avarice, by bounty, i will bring low.
By zeal, I will hypocrisy o'reflowe.
Fraud and deceit, good dealing shall expel,
And where vice did, there now shall virtue dwell.
By following truth, my errors i will subdue,
By deeds of mercy, i will kill cruelty:
I Will plant sweet pity, where oppression grew.
I Will put out pride, and place humility,
By doing right, i will beat down injury.
Distrust by confidence, hearted by love,
And thus by good, I will my evils remove.
Each night with David, I will wash my bed,
With trickly tears, distilling from mine eyes:
Each day with Daniell (by Gods spirit led)
I Will kneel, and pray, in spite of enemies,
Both day, and night, (with Job) in humble wise.
My soul shall fast, that tears, fasts, prayers may,
Appease Gods wrath, and wash my sins away.
I Will mourn in sack cloth, like the Nineuites,
Upon my head, i will dust, and ashes strowe:
Like Iosuah, the cursed Cananites,
(I mean those sins, that seek my overthrow)
I Will beat down, kill, and make to coutch full low,
That soul, and body, may in safety stand,
And peaceably possess the promised Land.
As from the eater (Sampson said) came meat,
And from the strong one sweetness did proceed:
Even so from sin, (which vulter-like does eat)
This hunnie-suckle happily does breed:
Even godly sorrow whereon I do feeed,
That I may purge out (with this earbe of grace)
Those filthy things that would my soul deface.
Under sins burden I do lie and groan,
For I am weary of my wickedness:
Therefore oh Lord, to thee I make my moan,
Oh hear me thou, and help me in distress:
And let not sin, nor Satan's subtilnes,
Subvert my soul, nor bring her unto shame,
Because she hopes, and trusts in thy name.
With the proud Pharisie should I excuse
My guilty conscience: say my self were just,
I should my savior and my soul abuse:
And tread the merits of Christ's death in dust,
Whereby (alone) both I, and all men must
Be iustifi'd, and purged from our sin,
(Upon repentance) or else die therein.
Which were most fearful, who dare venture on it?
What wretch is that, would unrepentant die?
My heart does tremble for to think upon it,
Oh mortal man, confess thy misery:
And eke repent thee, and that speedily.
For he that hides his sin within his breast,
He is the man, whom God does most detest.
And wherein is it, we offend not all?
What man is that which does not do amiss?
Nay more, what member, but to sin does fall?
The heart to that, the head, and hand, to this.
Thus every part, with sin defiled is,
I know it (too well,) and needs I must express it,
For it would confound me, should I not confess it.
Mine ears have sinned, by hearing profane things,
Mine eyes have sinned, by viewing vanity:
My tongue has sinned, by telling of leazings:
My heart has sinned, by thinking wickedly,
My hands have sinned, by doing injury.
Wherefore to free my soul from future fears,
I Will punish all, hands, heart, tongue, eyes, and ears.
Mine eyes (for sin) shall weep continually,
Mine ears attend to nothing but thy word:
My tongue shall speak Truth, and that magnify,
My heart shall (aye) to all good things accord,
My hands shall labor for to please the Lord.
And thus those parts, wherewith I did offend,
Shall each of them their several faults amend.
Because thou Lord, amendment do require,
Of every man, as well as to repent:
Amendment is the thing thou do desire,
And without that, thou will not be content;
But still we stand in dread of punishment.
Wherefore I am resolved (by thy grace)
Both to repent, and to amend apace.
Repentance, and amendment are two twins,
Somewhat resembling Esau and his brother:
Repentance first, with shame sets forth our sins,
Upon whose heel, hangs the more happy other,
I mean amendment (which all faults does smother.)
The first of these, God little does regard,
Without the last, and that he will reward.
Wherefore I Will imitate Zacheus now,
And straight restore what I have leaudly got:
Yea, four for one, I freely will allow,
The rest I do unto the poor allot,
For gold and silver, now I love you not.
Cause you are Cankers, that corrupt the heart,
Kill men with care, and bring their souls to smart.
With th'vnrighteous Mammon, I Will make friends,
That when my day to be dissolved does come:
Their prayers, (to whom my bounty here extends)
May me receive into Eternal room.
Thrice blessed Treasure, that does there intombe,
Your owners souls; but oh more blessed they,
That save themselves, by casting you away.
I Will give Earths fruits, that I may heavenly have,
I will forgive, that I may be forgiven:
I will not turn away from them that crave,
But give to six; and also unto seven,
Knowing full well, I shall be paid in heaven,
With great advantage, Christ himself does say it,
And he that speaks it, will most surely pay't.
As the sweet savors of the male Palm tree,
The female quickens, and does fruitful make:
By breathing on it, so Lord, grace in thee,
Freely extended (for thy mercies sake)
All backwardnes, and barrenness will take
From me, in whom, sin (yet too closely lurks)
And make me fresh, and fruitful in good works.
For Faith without works, is like to that tree,
That cursed Fig Tree, which when Christ did spy:
Flourish with leaves, he there looked fruit should be,
And went unto it, but when he drew nie;
And found none there, he cursed it by and by.
Therefore of Faith, it is vain to make a show,
Unless good works, upon that tree does grow.
Then Faith, spread forth, and ever fruitful be,
Hope, keep thy hold, distrust, and fear defy:
Love, be thou strong, let nothing conquer thee.
Zeal, be thou fervent, flee hypocrisy.
And (among the rest) most blessed Charity,
Do thy endeavor, and be slack in naught,
And you shall see my souls desire wrought.
Thus doing well, I shall have good reward,
But doing ill, sin lies at my door:
And from thy presence, I shall be debarred,
Wherefore (sweet Lord) oh set thy fear before
My wandering eyes; and oh, for evermore,
Do thou my ways, so order and direct,
That shunning evil, I may good things effect.
Thy promise is, (and thereon I rely)
What time so ere a sinner does repent
From thy remembrance, his iniquity
Thou will blot out, and he shall not be shent
For ought is past, if truly he lament.
And from the bottom of his heart intend,
To leave all leaudnes, and his life amend.
With which intention, now oh Lord come I,
Heartily sorry for my former sin:
Believing in thy promise steadfastly,
That for what is past, I shall thy pardon win;
And therewithal, get grace for to begin.
A better life, directed by thy spirit,
Which none but thy dear servants do inherit.
And this new life, resolved on by me,
As to begin, so likewise to persevere:
I crave thy aid, Lord let thy spirit be
My guarde, my guide, and my directer ever;
And oh let nothing in this vain world sever,
My heart from thee, but let it be inclinde,
For evermore, according to thy mind.
Poor Lazer I, Lord at thy mercies gate,
Will lie and beg, until the hour I die:
And not a word, but mercy will relate,
Mercy shall be my song continually;
For mercy, mercy, will I ever cry.
Until thy mercy (like the Suns bright rays)
On sinful me, her sacred beams displayes.
Christ Jesus bids me ask, and I shall have,
He bids me seek, and says that I shall find:
He bids me knock, and though I have bin slave
To beastly sin, yet (says he) thou art kind,
And wilt set open according to my mind.
Then now behold (as Christ does counsel me)
I ask, seek, knock, for mercy Lord to thee.
Amphions harp did nere sound half so sweet,
As would the voice of mercy in mine ear,
Which like the spouse when she her dear does greet:
Opening unto him, in a loue-sicke fear,
To see his deaw'd head, and his dropping hear.
From whose fair hands, mirh falls upon the bar,
So sweet sounds mercy, such her savors are.
Kind spouse, to open the door of thy own heart,
(In darkesome night) to let in Christ thy love:
But blessed mercy acts a better part,
Opening to men, the gates of heaven above,
(Through which who enters, kings for ever prove)
Kind spouse, kind Christ, that to his spouse does go,
And most blessed mercy, that sau'ft sinners so.
King Hezekiab turned him to the wall,
And wept full sore, when he heard death drew near:
And mourning so, he did for mercy call,
Unto whose days thou addedst fifteen year,
Lord now again, let the like grace appear.
And unto me (that dying am to sin)
Add a new life, to laud and praise thee in.
For in the pit, there is none does give thee praise,
None thank thee there, nor speak good of thy name:
They only curse, and ban: and cry always
Woe to those sins, wherewith they wrought their shame,
And brought their souls, into that burning flame.
From whence, sweet Lord, for aye deliver me,
That mong'st thy saints, I may sing praise to thee.
Eliah being hungry, he did pray,
And lo, both Ravens, and Angels, brought him food:
Daniell, when in the Lions den he lay,
He praide, and lo, those cruel creatures stood,
Like lambs by him, and would not suck his blood.
But rather sought by dalliance to delight him,
Then with grim looks, sharp teeth, or claws to fright him.
As was Eliah, I am hungry, Lord,
My soul, is almost starved, for want of food:
Oh send me succor by thy sacred word,
And for thy mercies sake, be thou so good,
And beat down sin, that monsterous man of blood.
Which would into the claws of Satan throw me,
From whom sweet Lord, a safe deliverance show me.
Good Sydrach, Mysach, and Abednego,
When they into the fiery Oven were thrown:
Thy praid to thee, and thou preseru'dst them so,
As on the earth, the like was never known:
For not a hair, or garment they did own.
Was either burnt, or scorched in the flame,
Such was thy might, and mercy in the same.
They to the golden Idol would not kneel,
Because they loved, and only honored thee:
But I am worthy hells hot fire to feel,
Cause I have yielded to all evils that be:
Yet mighty Lord, be not aueng'd on me.
Nor let my sins induce thee unto Ire,
But (for Christ's sake) defend me from that fire.
When Jonas, in the belly of the whale,
And in the midst of the maine Ocean:
To thee, did from that depth of danger call,
(Misery makes men full of true devotion)
For mercy Lord, for mercy made he motion.
And gracious thou (which have all grace in store)
Did make that whale to set himself on shore.
Like Jonas, I have often gone astray,
And troad those paths, wherewith thou art displeased:
The world, the flesh, and Satan showed the way,
Ah woe is me, they all at once have ceazed
Upon my sick soul, which is sore diseased.
And with sins poison so much putrifide,
That naught can cure it, but Christ crucifide.
Of whose dear blood (sweet Lord) let me partake,
And then though sin (which long has reigned in me)
Labor to throw me down into the lake,
Whereas the devil (that dreadful whale) shall be,
Gaping to get me, yet I shall go free.
For spite of all power, sin, and Satan have,
One drop thereof, my sinful soul will save.
I Will now put on the Armor of my God,
The helmet of salvation i will take:
My feet shall be with preparation shod,
Of righteousness I will my breast plate make:
Sword of the spirit which make sin to shake.
I Will gird thee on, and most courageously,
Use thee against my spiritual enemy.
Thou many-headed-monsterous Hydra sin,
That can not be by mortal man subdued:
Unless Gods spirit do us aid therein,
For why thy strength, is sundry wales renewed:
And to thy power there is such supplies accru'd.
That if Gods mercy were not great unto us,
Thou would for ever, utterly undo us.
Oh thou more cruel, then was murdering Caine,
That slew his brother Abell in the field:
For whom thou killest, them thou kill'st again,
And plai'st the tyrant over them that yield:
Laboring and laughing to see hell fire filde,
With souls, and bodies, of those silly wretches,
Which thou do conquer with thy cunning fetches.
Thou that do use those that yield to thee so,
And them likewise, whom thou do overcome:
Making no difference twixt friend and foe,
But bring'st them all to undergo one doom,
And putst them all into one tortering room,
Who would not hare thee, with his heart and soul,
And use all means thy malice to control?
Who would not shun thee, more then any snake?
Who vould not fly from thee with all his might?
To eschew thee, whoo'd any pains forsake?
Who would not pray to God both day and night,
That his good spirit, would aid us in the fight?
Against so foul a monster as thou art,
Which seek'st the souls of all men to subuart.
And thou deceitful, and bewitching world,
Thou most false-harted, flattering Crokadile:
About whose bosom there is nothing hurlde,
But that which does our purest parts defile;
Even vain delights, (which Satan does compile)
And on thy face, (the mart of all delusion)
Does set to work our shame, and sad confusion.
Thou common couz'ner of thy kindest friends,
That (Iudas-like) do with a kiss betray:
For unto whom thy favors most extends,
He is the man, whose soul thou seek'st to slay,
With heaps of gold, thou hinder'st graces way.
And with a fair show, of soone-fading pleasure,
Thou do deprive men, of heavens peerlesse Treasure.
Thou tempting whore, which do entice to sin,
With feigned smiles, and with thy flattering looks:
Thou painted Idol, putrifide within,
Though with sweet hunnie, thou do bayte thy hooks,
Most blessed are they that keep out of thy crookes.
And use thee so, as if they vs'de thee not,
Least (by thy means) damnation be their lot.
And thou frail flesh, fraught with infirmities,
Though thou art subject to a sort of woes:
Yet to thy self, thou coyn'st calamities,
And on thy soul, sad burdens do impose,
By filthy lusts, from foule-desire that flows.
By which (alas) both body, soul, and all,
For evermore, thou to the Devil make thrall.
Who (like a roaring Lion) runs about,
Subtillie seeking whom he may devour:
And of salvation would make all men doubt,
By telling them, even in their lives last hour;
(Unless Faith stiffly then withstand his power)
That GOD is so just, and so bent against sin,
Prayer, and repentance, can no pardon win.
Hear heaven, and earth, and all ye powers in both,
Hear me (I say) and help me instantly:
For to subdue this Serpent old that go'th,
Upon his belly, creeping cunningly;
And eats the dust of our iniquity.
Which is, to him, more pleasant food (by far)
Then all the dainties, that on earth there are.
Sweet Bread of life, oh let me eat of thee*
That I may never hunger any more:
Water of life, that can not prized be,
Which Christ, the Way, the Truth, the heavenly door,
Is Fountain of, oh thee, I long for sore.
As David did, for that true Type of thee,
Even Bethlem's water, fetched by Worthies three.
But silly soul, ah whom have I to send,
Unto that Rock, that Spring, that holy Well:
Only true Faith, which will to heaven ascend,
In spite of all th'angrie powers of hell;
Then Faith go thou, beat down my foes, pell-mell,
And fetch me drink, from that most blessed River,
Whereby (from death) I may my soul deliver.
River (said I?) true, through the world it runs,
Rock, did I term it? true, it is strong and hard:
Yet it yields comfort to all Adams sons,
Which of Gods grace, are not (by sin) debarred;
Unto a Spring, it may be well compar'de.
A River, Rock, a Spring, a most pure Well,
Is CHRIST, our Lord, with whom I long to dwell.
Behold Lord, I, that hitherto have bin,
Only addicted unto vanity:
And day by day, have heaped sin on sin,
And (as t'wer water) drunk iniquity
With greediness; behold I say, even I
Am now, become a conuertite in heart,
Which erst did play, none but th'vngodlies part.
For like the will servant, which within the ground,
Did hide the Talent, that he should have used:
And to his Maislers profit made redound,
Even so have I, (O Lord) thy gifts abused;
And many times, most blessed means refused.
For to put forth thy Talent lent to me,
So as it might, return with gain to thee.
Nay worse then so, Lord, I have wasted much,
Of what (I must confess) I have received:
For which, remorce my conscience now does tutch,
And grieves me sore, that I have so deceived,
My Lord and Master, and my self deprived
Of many good things, I might have enjoyed,
If what thou gave me, had bin well employed.
Yet am I bold (most humbly) to desire,
Thou would not mark, what I have done amiss:
Nor yet correct me when thou art in Ire,
Or in displeasure, punish that, or this;
For why thy wrath like burning Aetna is.
None can abide it, therefore do not show it,
Nor yet let any that repent them, know it.
But let thy mercy, which is far more sweet*
Then Hibla's honey, or Himettus deawe:
Daine with thy Justice in the way to meet,
And let her to repentant sinners show;
(Of which I fear me, there are oh too few)
That though thy Justice be severe to all,
Mercy shall save them, that for mercy call.
For as on black-lead, Diamonds show most bright,
Rich pearls most rare, when on base things they lie:
And stars shine clearest in the darksome night,
Even so sweet mercy (issuing from on hie)
When it vouchsafes to light on such as I.
Does then show clearest, rarest, and most worth,
And most of all, does set thy glory forth.
David did mercy crave, and nothing more,
In all his troubles, and adversities:
Cause mercy paies sins debt, and cleares the score,
Leaving no sign of our iniquities,
To fear our souls, or to offend our eyes.
Wherefore, with him, I will for mercy crave,
That of my sins, I may remission have.
Mercy's the sum, and substance of my suit,
Mercy's the mark, at which I aim by prayer:
Mercy's souls Manna, heavens sacred fruit,
Mercy's the Idea of the only fair,
Mercy's Gods seat, his hie, and holy chair.
Mercy's the Loadstone, that to life does draw,
Mercy's the Gospel, that fulfills the law.
Mercy's the object of the Angels love,
Mercy's the Arc, does in sins deluge save:
Mercy's the martirs Oliue-bringing dove,
Mercy's the means that men salvation have,
Mercy's the most good, that a man can crave.
Mercy's the salve that cures sins ugly sores,
Mercy's the porter of heavens precious doors.
Mercy moved Christ, to come, and die, for man,
Mercy moves man to deeds of Charity:
Mercy may save me (sinful Publican)
Mercy the Saints pray for continually,
Mercy does pardon man's iniquity.
Mercy's most royal, bred, and horn in heaven,
Mercy's Gods gift, the best that e're was given.
Oh thou more sweeter then the sweetest honey,
Thou odoriferous, and most excellent:
Whom kings must beg, but cannot buy with money,
Thou admirable, rich, and Orient
Ambassador: from the Almighty sent,
To publish peace, and Joy, and love, to all,
Which do repent, and to amendment fall.
Even peace of conscience (oh happy news)
Joy of the holy Ghost (oh blessed saying)
The love of God (which graciously accrues)
All three, sweet comforts, of Gods own conuaying,
Into man's heart (the private place of praying)
Through thy hand mercy, which each moment brings,
To sinful man, such sweet, and sacred things.
Oh let my soul, which thirsts after thee,
(Even as the heart does for the water brook)
Drink of thy sweets, and so refreshed be,
That I no longer may fear deaths fell look,
Nor yet th'opening of my conscience book.
But freed from both, may say courageously,
Death, where is thy sting, hell, where is thy victory?
Remember not my foul offenses, Lord,
Nor the offenses of my fathers old:
But to my prayer, graciously accord,
And let thy mercies (which are manifold)
Into thy favor (oh most happy hold)
Bring my poor soul, and there establish it,
Amongst thy saints, whose Joys are infinite.
With that sweet-sounding simball of thy praise,
Organ of excellence, in Israel:
That every day, did sing delitious lays,
In praise of thee, that only do excel,
Whose words, and works, did please thee wondrous well.
With him (oh Lord) this one thing I require,
And with my soul, most humbly do desire.
That I may dwell within thy Tabernacle,
In which thy self art present evermore:
Because it is thy Angels receptakle,
Full fraught with pleasure, yea and plenty store,
Oh there had I (Lord) rather keep a door,
Then in the tents of thee ungodly sort,
My dwelling have, in pomp: and princely port.
Jerusalem, peace be within thy walls,
And in thy palaces let plenty be:
For blessed is he, whom thy sweet sovereign calls,
And does confirm free denizen in thee,
Where such joys are, as the eye did neuersee,
The Ear never heard, nor can man's heart conceive it,
Most blessed, and happy they that shall receive it.
Oh thou that art, of that great city, King,
Thou life, thou light, and glory of the same:
Thou in whose honor, quires of Angels sing,
Thou that art great, and excellent in fame,
Thou only good one (holy is thy name)
Though I be sinful, yet (sweet Lord) in pity,
Make my soul free of that most sacred city.
As thou art holy, hear my prayer Lord,
As thou art good, and gracious, pity me:
As thou art true, and faithful of thy word,
Forgive my sins (though infinite they be)
And let me live, to laud, and honor thee.
To whom be given, all glory, power, and praise,
Even to the end, of neuer-ending days.
FINIS.

