THE ATTESTATION OF THE Most Excellent, and Most Illustrious Lord, DON CARLOS
COLOMA, Ambassador Extraordinary for Spain.

OF THE DECLARATION made unto him, by the Lay Catholics of England: Concerning
the Authority challenged over them, by the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of
Chalcedon.

WITH THE ANSWER OF A Catholic Lay Gentleman, to the Judgment of a Divine,
upon the Letter of the Lay Catholics, to the said Lord Bishop of Chalcedon.

Superiorum permissu. M. DC. XXXI.

The Approbation of the famous Preacher and Divine, and most ancient amongst
the Doctors of Divinity of Sorbone now living.
Seeing the ground of this whole Controversy among the English Catholics is
therein placed, that the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon seems to
challeng more unto himself, then is granted by the faculties given him by the
Sea Apostolic: from whence it comes, that out of the diverse opinions and
judgments, which are with heat framed by many, there arise debats in this
present time both dangerous and hurtful: To the appeasing and quieting
whereof, no remedy seems more to the purpose, then to make fully known to
all, the true sense and feeling of the Catholics, and that his Holiness do
more clearly lay open his mind concerning the faculties granted to the said
Right Reverend Lord Bishop. To both which this present Declaration of the
English Catholics is most necessary: therefore I judge it worthy to be
published in print, that it may be perused of all. Dated at Tornay the 29. of
April 1631.

John Boucher Sorbone Doctor in Divinity, Chanon and Archdeacon in Tornay, and
Censor of Books.

THE DECLARATION OF THE Lay Catholics of England, concerning the Authority
challenged over them, by the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of CHALCEDON.
WE Lay Catholics of the realm of England, have understood from sundry
parts of the Christian world, that a foul aspersion is cast upon our honor
and reputation, for that we are judged to frame a less reverend conceit of
Episcopal Authothority, and jurisdiction, and not to render it that Obediecne,
which may be thought fit. The only cause of this, is taken from thence, that we
refuse to submit our selves to that power and Authority which the Right
Reverend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon has long since pretended* as due unto his
place; and to the which (as we are assured upon strong motives) he still lays
claim, taking it as granted him from the Sea Apostolic. This pretended
Authority of his, has been maintained by sundry Treatises, as well written, as
printed, which warrant his Ordinariship, and assure him of as much power, as is
granted to other Ordinaries, in what Catholic Diocese soever, and warn us
that the same Obedience is to be performed toward him on our part. Moreover we
are told, that hitherto we were not a Church, as long as we wanted a particular
Bishop; but a flock without a Pastor, an Army without a General, a Ship
without a Pilot, a spiritual kingdom without a spiritual king, a family
without the good man of the house; in a word, no true, or perfect Christians.
And although, as soon as we had returned an answer to a Letter sent us from
my Lord Bishop, presently diverse scandalous wrytings (which his Lordship never
sought to suppress, nor seemed to dislike of) were spread abroad, and we
therein traduced with no small disparagement to our reputation, and prejudice to
our cause, especially in the opinion of the unlearned; yet we chose rather to
forgo our proper, and private interest, then by standing out with vehemence
for our own right, either affoard unto others a subject of scandal, or give
way to the danger of an ensuing Schism. Wherefore in silence we left the
decyding of this matter to those, who by their Highest power in the Church of
God, were as well his Lordships, as our Superiors. But seeing there have not
wanted many both at home and abroad who in a matter nothing belonging to them,
and who could not so much as pretend any Authority over us, have
notwithstanding usurped the freedom of giving judgment in our cause, with
great damage to our fame and honor, which we endeare above our lives; we have
thought good to declare and avouch entierly, and faithfully before God and man
these ensuing points.

First, we sincerely belie^e and profess that Episcopal Authority in the
Catholic Church was ordained by God, and, as it beseems good Catholics, we
honor it with all reverence; and daily beg with our best wishes, that the
divine Goodness will once be pleased to send a time, in which that authority,
which is truly given, and which we account full necessary in the Catholic
Church, may safely be established amongst us, and we without increase of
persecution, acknowledge it, and as humbly submit our selves unto it, as they
do, who live in countries not liable to laws enacted against Religion, of
which kind very many, and those severe and capital, be here with us in force.
Which favor, if we could but obtain of his divine Majesty, truly we should
esteem our selves thrice-happy.

Furthermore we declare openly, that for as much as belongs to the Right
Reverend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, we honor and reverence him in all duty, and
take him to be a true Catholic Bishop, sent hither by the sea Apostolic to
administer the Sacrament of Confirmation, and as we think, to govern that
part of the Clergy, which is committed to his charge; but not to be our
Ordinary, either after an ordinary or extraordinary manner, because we in no
case believe, that any such thing has bin hitherto declared by the sea
Apostolic, seeing that the times, into which we are fallen, do no ways
permit us to obey such Authority, without endangering the loss of our goods,
and such a loss, as cannot be recovered. Neither do we only think, that the
Sea Apostolic has not as yet, bestowed any such office, power, or authority
upon the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon; but moreover we rest assured,
that it is not the intention of his Holiness to grant it him herafter, until
those times return, which may promise, that this power will rather serve to
support Religion, then to overthrow it; and until it may be lawful for us to
embrace it freely, without so many, and so great difficulties and dangers,
which as things now stand, is altogether impossible, for sundry and weighty
Reasons alleged by us in the Letter aforme^tioned in the beginning of this
co^trouersy to my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon; which for that the Reader should
not peradventure light on, or we be enforced, often to repeat the same thing,
we thought good to set down in this place a Copy thereof, together with a
certain Declaration made, and presented to my Lord de Chasteau-neuf his
Excellency, at that time the most Christian Kings Ambassador Extraordinary in
England, before whom many Catholics and some of chief dignity and esteem
amongst us, acknowledged the same for their own. So as the judicious and
impartial Reader will easily perceive the state of our cause, which was the
thing we aimed at, by adjoining this Declaration.

In the mean time, seeing for diverse respects we have not the freedom to
present our selves in person, and humbly to lay down our own Cause before his
Holiness; we beseech those Catholics who are like to find freer access unto
him, and who shall light upon these wrytings, to be intercessours for us unto
his Holiness, that he will vouchsafe to express his mind, and give sentence of
this controversy, which we now have with the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of
Chalcedon, to the end, all occasions of further scandal and dissension may be
entierly cut off, and quyte removed; as we hope they will, if his Holiness will
be pleased to give it in such a manner, as his resolution may be publickely
diuulged, and openly made known to all. For if it be only expressed in
private, each party may either affirm or deny what they think good; so that
the strife begun will rather take increase by that means, then be any whit
extinguished, as experience has clearly taught us hitherto.

Moreover, we most earnestly crau^, that in our behalf they will humbly
beseech his Holiness, not to resolve of any thing in this business, whereby our
King^ most Excellent Maiestyes indignation, may be provoked against us, or we
brought yet further into his displeasure. Lastly, we entreat them not to
censure or condemn these our proceedings, with disparagment to our honor and
esteem, seeing we have always yet been ready, as the whole world may witness,
to lay down, with all humility, our very lives and fortunes, whenever a just
cause, for the defense of our faith, shall require it.

REASONS GIVEN to Monsieur de Chasteau-neuf Ambassador Extraordinary of the
most Christian King, to show that the Authority of a Catholic Ordinary here
in England, is incompatible with this time and place.
FIrst we profess in the sight of God, that from our hearts we reverence
Episcopal Authority, Initio Aug. 1627.
as knowing it to be Gods institution, and that we unfeignedly wish the times
were such as we might submit our selves theru^to: and whatsoever has been said
of us to the contrary, is very slanderous.

In the next place, we do with all reverence and humility declare, that
according to the laws and state of this Kingdom as now they are, we conceive
that the authority and jurisdiction of an Ordinary is not only inconvenient,
and unuseful, but impossible to be executed, and so dangerous to be obeyed,
nay even acknowledged, as that we cannot be obliged thereunto. And we do verily
believe and that upon many and weighty reasons, whatsoever has been affirmed to
the contrary that his Holiness has had no intention to oblige us unto it, nor
will, after information how things stand here.

There are here many Statutes of the Kingdom in force, which make it highly
penal in some cases with loss of goods and liberty, and in others of life, to
acknowledge any other Authority or Judicature, then such as by the same statuts
are authorized, which though we are obliged not to regard, when there is
question of any doctrine of faith; yet when a man shall run hazard of utter
ruin, for admitting and acknowledging of external jurisdiction and authority
which imports not faith, but practice of things not necessary but according
to time and place we conceive that we cannot be obliged to embrace it.

If it be said, that it is Capital for a man to receive a Catholic Priest
into his house, and that yet many receive them with all the hazard, and that
therefore we might as well receive an Ordinary into our houses, acknowledging
his Authority. The answer will make it appear, that the objection proves
nothing against us. For first it is certain, that even for the reason of being
so Capital, and that there are so many lamentable examples among us, not only
of friends who have discovered and betrayed other friends for receiving
Priests, either for interest, licentiousness of life, revenge, frailty, or for
some other passion; but of Servants, who have betrayed their Masters, Nephews,
Uncles, Grandchildren and children their Parents, Daughters their very Mothers,
yea and even Priests themselves sometimes, who have fallen and betrayed
Catholics; we neither are nor can by any humane authority be obliged to take
Priests into our houses. Many of us indeed do it out of devotion and zeal, for
the comfort of our souls, by celebrating Mass and receiving the most
necessary and daily Sacraments, and many of us also do it not. But howsoever,
we think it a very ill consequence to infer, that therefore a man is, or may
be obliged with the hazard of his estate of life to acknowledge or submit to
the Authority of an Ordinary, for the practice of some things without which we
yet find by experience, and Gods grace, we have always subsisted in these sad
times, because forsooth out of voluntary devotion and zeal, many of us are
content, to run the highest hazards in receiving of Priests, for the so
necessary and daily exercise of our Religion, through want whereof we also find
by experience of Saxony and Denmark, and many other countries in Germany,
Religion has in effect wholly failed.

Besides, a Priest who is a Person of our own election, being first authorized
as fit and capable by the Sea Apostolic, may have entrance into our houses,
and exercise his function, in a much more private and safe manner then it is
possible for an Ordinary to do, especially when he will carry himself as
Ordinary. For in that case, besides servants there must be always Officers,
parties and witnesses, who do not all, and ever vow so much as discretion, or
yet to continue constant in the Catholic faith. And for our parts the dangers
being such as they are, it will be impossible to secure us in this point, where
sometimes it happens that an indiscreet word uttered even without ill meaning
may turn to our loss of goods and life.

Besides, if we could abstract from the danger of offending the State, it is to
be considered, that our Marriages and Testaments, and the like are made liable
here to those Ecclesiastical Courts and Tribunals which are settled by the
laws of this Kingdom, and are executed by certain Chancellours, and
Commissaries for that purpose, who may often oblige and sentence us in the
affirmative, whereas a Catholic Ordinary, or Judge would perhaps do it in the
negative, and so we should be tossed between two ^ockes.

Again, if a Catholic Ordinary should p^onounce any sentence, at which the
party might be grieved, which must needs occur sometimes; his final remedy
would be an appeal to Rome* which yet it would be Capital for him to make,
besides the charge of prosecuting such a suite, and the impossibility for the
most part of us, so much as to send, or write to a place so distant, and so
contradicted by the State here, for the bringing of such a suite to an end.
And to show both the inconveniences and impossibilities of executing the power
of a Catholic Ordinary in such a time and place as this, we think it very
considerable to reflect upon many Catholic Bishops, who suruiued the Reign
of Queen Marie of happy memory, and lived here many years in Queen
Elizabeth's time, after the change of Religion, and yet there is no memory that
any of them did ever practice any power of Ordinary, within his own Diocese
in foro externo contentiose, which yet it is clear he had, and whereof he
could not be deprived without personal demerit: and if having this Authority
they were so far from excuting it, it is morally certain, that if they had not
had it, they would never have sought it in these times.

And thus much, to avoid greater length, for the showing, that the authority
of a Catholic Ordinary in this time and place is impossible, either to be
imposed or obeyed, and extremely inconvenient withal, even if it were
possible. To which this only word may also be added, that even in the most clear
cases, and which might appear to be most easy, and might be carried in the
most private manner, as namely when any Catholic shall lead a scandalous life,
or that men shall dissent from their wives, or the like, we leave it to
consideration, whether as the laws stand here, a Catholic Ordinary, as an
Ecclesiastical Judge can now discreetly think it fit to reduce this man by
any compulsory way* least thereby he may be made worse. But we hear some of
the Lord Bishop of Chalcedons Officers say, that although he be Ordinary, and
have the authority and jurisdiction belonging to that quality, yet he will not
exercise the same.

To this we answer, first, that if the authority be not to be executed, no
reason can be given why it should be granted, when so many reasons are to be
f^lt, why it must be so inconvenient and impossible. Secondly, we conceive it
not enough to say it shall not be executed, because if it be exta^t, the state
is put into iealosy thereby, as appears by the last Proclamatio^s against the
Lord Bishop: and it will disdain this answer at our hands; We acknowledge
such an Authority, but the Ordinary who has it, gives his word that he will
not execute the same. Thirdly the statutes of the Kingdom fall ^o penaly as has
been said not upon such only as submit themselves to the execution of the said
Authority, but upon such also as acknowledge the same.

Fourthly, the Catholic Ordinary may resolve this day not to execute his
Authority, yet may to morrow think fit to do it, with evident danger to us of
the Laity, whereof it must be intended, that we our selves can judge best, as
whom it concerns most. Fifthly, this kind of Authority is not to be
acknowledged, or so much as secretly admitted, though upon promise to forbear
the practice, because the State is ever wont upon any new Bull, or the declaring
of any new authority, or any occasion like this to question Catholics who
shall come before the^, with great rigor, how far they approve of the conte^ts
of such a Bull, or con^ent to any such Authority. Many have formerly been
entrapped and greatly prejudiced, upon such occasions; and so may probably be
hereafter upon this: and if it should be denied and forsworn, which all men
who may be examined will not easily do, if indeed they approve such a thing;
yet will not that denial or oath be any way auailable where proof may be made
to the contrary. Besides that, if this Authority should be conceived to be here
on foot, the Protestant Bishops would be much more active in persecution of
Catholics, as finding their particular interest to be more immediately touched
by this, the^ by any other thing forbidden by the laws of the Kingdom: and we
palpably find by experience, that upon their knowledge that there is a Catholic
Bishop here* who calls himself Ordinary of this Kingdom, the Pursuiuants
are authorized to be much more busy, and upon pretense of searching for the
Bishop, to search many houses, and to take many Priests, after whom otherwise
they had not looked.

These few Considerations we have chosen out of many which occur familiarly
unto us, but which for breuities sake we have omitted that so your Excellency
may be briefly informed of this affayre; beseeching you, to procure our peace
and safety, by keeping such an inconvenience still from us, as it would be, for
us to acknowledge the authority of an Ordinary in this time and place, and
under these Laws; and that you will be pleased to consider the Letter of the
lay Catholics, which was presented by way of answer to the former Letter of
the Lord Bishop of Chalcedon to them; which answer we understand to have been
delivered to your Excellency since your coming hither, and we auow that the
said answer is the sense of us, and in effect of as many of the worthy and
eminent men of our Communion as we know; and that the three persons who first
delivered it for the said Lord Bishop, to a chief person of his Body, are men
very remarkable for piety, prudence, constancy in the Catholic faith, Birth,
Estate, and Reputation here, with all good men we mean, although they be but
even morally good of both religions; and that they are no such kind of people,
as very passionately and injuriously they have been traduced to be; and the
same we are informed has been manifested to your Excellency since your
arrival, by persons of the greatest rank of our religion here in England.

We leave this point also unto your Excellency to judge off, whether those
Catholics, if any such there be, who think it fit, to admit of the Authority of
an Ordinary in this Kingdom, as things now stand, may be compared with us,
either for degree, quality, or number, who think the contrary. Nay we are sure,
that though some, when peradventure they be asked, whether they will acknowledge
the Bishop of Chalcedon for their Pastor, or Ordinary, or the like, will
answer, they will; either because they have nothing to loose, or because the
state of the Question is not rightly propounded unto the^, or else not
explicated, what that power of Ordinary may co^teyne in it self, or what
penaltyes may thereupon ensue: Yet among those who understand the matter, and
are men judicious, and withal of means, there will hardly be one found, who
will not think as we do.

A COPY OF THE LAY Catholics Letter, sent to my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon,
whereof mention is made in the former Declaration.
Right Reverend Father in God.
WE have seen a Letter of your Lordships of the 16. of October, Anno 1627.
directed to the Lay Catholics of this Nation: so much thereof as does not
imediatly co^cern our selves, we shall endeavor to lay asi de; but for as much
as there is other matter which imports our persons and posterity, with all
that which can be dear unto us in this world, we shall most humbly declare,
what sense we have, and what judgment we are enforced to make thereof. Your
Lordships letter consists of four points, whereof we conceive the second
principally to concern us, which is of your Authority as Ordinary, delivered
by you unto us in these words: As for the Authority, wherewith I demanded it;
that is as great, as any Ordinary has, or can have to demand the same of
Regulars, or Diocese. 2. And makes me a Judge in prima instantia. 3. And
thereby makes me as true and absolute an Ordinary in England as other Ordinaries
are in their Diocese. 4. By my Brief it is clear that I am delegated by his
Holiness to an universality of causes belonging to Ordinaries. 5. And have been
styled by the Cardinals de propaganda side, Ordinarius Angliae and Scotiae.
These passages with the whole scope of the second part of your Lordships
letter, argue your Lordship to assume your Authority over the Lay Catholics,
to be as great in England and Scotland, as any Ordinaries exercised here in
Catholic times, and now is exercised in Cath. Countries. The extent of this
assumed Authority concerning the Laity, we shall humbly crave leave to lay open
to your Lordship. First, an Ordinary has power of questioning and proouing of
Wills. Secondly, of granting administratio^s. Thirdly, of deciding of
Controversies of Tithes. Fourthly, of Co^tracts, Marriages, Divorces, Alimony,
Bastardy. And fifthly of slanders, with many others: in all which causes,
examinations are to be taken upon oath, and sentences and censures will follow.
Now controversies of this nature have mixture with temporal Authority,
concerning our temporal Fortunes, and have been by our temporal Laws and
Statutes so assisted, altered, and directed both in the time of our Cath. and
Protestant Princes, as has seemed convenient to the Church and state of these
Kingdoms from time to time. All which are so already settled, as innovation is
most dangerous, as being contrary both to diverse ancient and modern laws.
Now, since the erecting of a tribunal about the administering and course of
justice either distinct, and much more if it be contrary to our laws, is an
offense of high Treason, and that all they who submit and conform themselves
thereunto may be drawn within the compass thereof, or of misprision of
Treason, or Praemunire at least, if they have any little priuity or participation
thereof. Besides that, the execution of the Authority of this new Tribunal in
so many cases as will daily arise, allows no possibility of secresy, and will
provoke the present government to an exact search after it, and suppression
thereof. It may therefore easily appear to your Lordship, how dangerous it is
for the Layty to submit, and conform it self thereunto, and unsafe even to
have been so long silent to your Lordship, by whom it has been so claymed,
and published. Moreover, the inconveniences must be great which were to follow
out of the contrariety of such sentences, as would often happen between your
Lordships Courts, and the Courts of this Kingdom. These dangers are so
known, and by us have been so maturely considered, that they admit no further
question thereof. And if they had been so understood abroad (together with the
consideration of our long sufferings, and present estate of miseryes) we
presume no such Authority would have been imposed upon us. Neither can we be
persuaded, that there is a necessity of conforming our selves thereunto, as to
a matter of Faith; or yet we can be obliged, to loose our estates and ruin our
posterities where the necessity of faith does not oblige us. We also most
humbly beseech your Lordship to believe, that this which we here do represent
unto you, is the sense of the Laity, and we desire that it may be made known
both here and abroad, from which we cannot recede for the reasons formerly
expressed. To the rest of your Lordships Letter, not so directly concerning the
general estate of the Lay Cath.s but rather the Regulars, we humbly beseech
your Lord.P that we may not be called into more interest and prejudice thereby,
the^ we were in the time of your Lordships Predecessor, and that these
differences may be carried with such charity, sweetness, candor, and without
noise, as may advance that union, wherein your Lordships desires and ours are to
meet, for the greater good of our Country. And thus we must humbly take our
leaves of your Lordship.

Your Lordships most obseruant, The Lay Cath. of England.

A LIKE DECLARATION MADE BY the said Lay Catholics of England, to the most
Excellent, and most Illustrious Lord, the L. Marquis de Fo^tany, Ambassador to
his most Christian Majesty, and other Ordinary Ambassadors of Catholic Princes
in England.
CONCERNING The said Authority of Ordinary, pretended by the Right Reverend
Lord Bishop of Chalcedon.
Having understood these days past, by the testimony of sundry witnesses of
credit that a grievous slander is laid upon us the lay Catholics of England,
both at home and beyond sea, as if we did not respect, and reverence Episcopal
Authority and Jurisdiction, as it behooves good Catholics, and this upon no
other ground, as we are well assured, then that we refused to acknowledge the
pretended authority, and jurisdiction of my Lord of Chalcedon over us; we
thought it a part of our duty, both to God and our selves, to declare, as well
how deeply we resent the slander, as what is our judgment concerning the
questions now in co^trouersy between us and my Lord of Chalcedon: which
feeling, and judgment of ours, we summarily represented before, to the most
Excellent Lord Marquis de Fontany Ordinary Ambassador, for the most Christian
King, in this Court; and now very lately also we opened the same more at large
to the most Excellent Lord Don Carlos Coloma extraordinary Ambassador for the
Catholic King in the same Court, who having before hastened his departure out
of this kingdom, and being now hourly to depart we were forced to dispatch
this matter in his presence without delay. And now we desire to advertise the
courteous reader, that we have thought good to make the same Declaration fully
and distinctly to the said most Excellent Lord Marquis de Fontany Ambassador
Ordinary for the most Christian King, and to the other Ambassadors and Agents
of Catholic Princes reside^t in this Court. Whereupon some of highest Rank in
the name of many others, delivered to the said Ambassadors, and Agents, a Copy
both of the Letter above printed, in the which we answered my Lord of
Chalcedo^s Letter unto us, and of a certain writing also here printed, which
about some two years past, many of prime Nobility had presented to the most
Excellent Lord de Chasteau-neuf, then Extraordinary Ambassador for the most
Christian King in this court, professing themselves Authors thereof. To the end
that by these means it may be made known, as well to the Ambassadors
themselves, as by them to the whole world, how great a wrong, we conceive to
have bin done to our Christian reputation, by the spreading of these false
reports. And also what our opinion and judgment now at this present is, of the
questions in controversy between us and my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, touching
the pretended Authority and jurisdiction challenged by his Lordship over us;
which that it might the more plainly appear, we judged it not only expedient,
but also necessary, to declare our minds, by this way and course, that we have
taken.

THE ATTESTATION.
I JOHN Mallery Gentleman, do witness and testify, that I was present at London,
in the House of the most Excellent, and most Illustrious Lord, Don Carlos
Coloma, extraordinary Ambassador for the King of Spain, the 3. day of March
1631. stylo nouo; when as sundry Catholic Noblemen, and others of quality,
there present, did produce written in latin, the Declaration, Reasons, and
Letter here above set down. All which, being distinctly pronounced in
presence of the foresaid Ambassador, and all and every thing therein expressed
(for as much as belongs to the Co^trouersy concerning the pretended Authority
of the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, over the Lay Catholics of
England) the foresaid Gentlemen and Noblemen declaredfully and perfectly, to
conteyne the sense and meaning not only of themselves there present, but in
effect, of all others whom they knew; and namely of many Earls, Vicounts,
Barons, and other men of Quality whom they named unto the said Ambassador.
And they declared themselves to notify unto him the mind and sense of them all
to be fully expressed in the said Declaration, Reasons and Letter, and that
they had received full power and Authority from them so to do. And the
Ambassador himself did then openly profess to have understood the same
things, from many of those Lay Catholics, whom they had named; nor did he
doubt at all, of the truth of the whole matter; which he took upon him, as
they requested, to make public.

John Mallery.

THE above named John Mallery, Gentleman of the English Nation, appearing
personally before the Mayor, Magistrates, and Griffiers of the City, and
Territory of Saint Winocks-Berge in the West-County of Flanders, did upon Oath,
affirm the things aforesaid, and in testimony thereof in our presence
subscribed and signed the same. In Witness whereof, we appointed the Seal used
in Causes of our foresaid City and Territory, to be set unto this present
Writing, and to be subscribed by the Griffier our Notary. This 15. day of March
1631.

Locus Sigilli. Joannes Hardunius.

THE ATTESTATION
Of the most Excellent, and most Illustrious Lord, Don Carlos Coloma.
D. Carlos Coloma Knight of the Military Order of S. James, Commendador of
Montyelo and Ossa, of the Counsel of State, and War to his Sacred Catholic
Majesty, Captain General of his Armies in the Low Countries etc.

We do witness and testify, whilst, of late, we resided, as Ambassador
Extraordinary in the Court of the Renowned King of Great Britain, the forsaid
Declaration to have been exhibited unto us in our House at London, the 3. day of
March of this present year 1631. by many lay Catholics of chief ra^ke in
their Country, and the same to have been approved and confirmed by diverse
English Noblemen, by word of mouth, as well in their own, as in the Name of
others; in which respect we ratify the Attestation of M. John Mallery an
English Gentleman, added unto the end of the said Declaration, being in like
manner also authentically confirmed by the Magistrate of S. Winocks-Berge: and
in witness of the truth of all and every the premises, as they were done, we
have heereunto put our hand, and seal.

Given at Bruxells the 2. day of April, in the year of our Lord 1631. Don
Carlos Coloma.
Locus Sigilli* By Command of my most Excellent Lord. Fran. Schelen.

Printed at Bruxells, by the widow of Hubert Antony, sworn Printer, at the
sign of the Golden Eagle, near to the Palace. M. DC. XXXI.

THE ANSWER OF A CATHOLIC LAY GENTLEMAN,

To the Judgment of a Divine, upon the Letter of the Lay Catholics, to my
Lord Bishop of Chalcedon.

By L. B.

Anno M. DC. XXXI.



THE PREFACE to the Reader.
GENTLE READER*
Lighting of late upon a little written Treatise entitled, The Judgment of a
Divine upon the 3. Gentlemen's Letter to my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, I took
and read it, thinking to find somewhat more then Ordinary in it. For having
heard much talk of that matter (being now in every man's mouth) and seen also
something written, but not to much purpose; now finding a Book, with the Title
of a Divine, I presumed he would say something more then others had done. But
when I came to read him, I found him, but like other men of his own side; and
particulerly so like the Lay Gentleman, T. M. his Judgment upon the same
Letter, that I began to think it might be the very same man; the style,
discourse, and as I may say, spirit, wherewith both are written, being the same.

And that because then, that seeming to be but some Lay Gentleman's doing, men
made small account of it, not vouchsafing it so much as one word of answer;
Now the same party would speak a little louder to be heard, writing over the
same somewhat more dilatedly, and inserting a little Latin in some places, and
taking upon him the person of a Divine, for the substance of both, is the same;
and accusing worthy Catholic Gentlemen of Passion, Temerity, Pretense of
danger, Partiality to Regulars, want of respect to Episcopal Authority, and
the like: and all this uttered with so little reason and truth on the one side,
and so much gall and bitterness on the other as that I could not but be sorry,
and ashamed to see such a thing with the Title of a Divine.

For if such manner of writing ill be seem any Christian man, how much worse a
Divine, who is to be a light of the world, teaching men sobriety, and temper,
by word and example, having truth and reason with him, in what he says and
writes; and delivering it in such sort, as the manner may not betray the
matter, by showing any distempered affection. For even that will much derogate
from his writing, though what he writes should otherwise be true. For every
man knows what a mist Passion is wont to cast before men's eyes, and how hard
it is for a passionate man to speak truth, and nothing but truth. And this is
so much more dangerous, where it concerns the credit and reputation of other
men: which how nice a point it is, and how soon, and how grievously a man may
offend in it, no Divine can be ignorant; and especially, when the party
discovers but so much of himself as may gain himself credit, and thereby
give more force to the slander, or imputation (as the writer does, stiling
himself Divine;) and on the other side so concealing his particular person,
that the parties grieved know not of whom to complain, nor where to have
remedy.

And whereas it was to be expected of a Divine, that he should handle the
matter substantially and solidly, I found no such thing here, but even the
very main Question for the most part mistated. For the Controversy being of
the Authority of Ordinary, as Ordinary, how it may stand with the safety of
Catholics in these times, and under these laws; the writer flies from it to
Episcopal Authority in general, Obedience to lawful Pastors, Government of
the Church, and the like; whereof no man makes any doubt. Or if he happen a
little to touch the point, he does but touch it, and so slenderly, that any man
may see he has not much confidence in his cause, but seeks rather to carry
it by the Title, then reason of a Divine.

Wherefore finding my self every way deceived of my expectation, both for the
matter and manner; and considering on the one side the harm, which even the
bare Name, or Title of a Divine might do, among many that look not far into
things, and the wrong that it might do to those three worthy Persons, and
zealous Catholics in particular, against whom this writing is chiefly
intended, and to the cause of Catholics in general; I thought best to make
some answer to it, though I be both least fit of a thousand, and that this
course of writing be for the most part disallowed by wise men, as being a thing
that does minister more matter of dissension, and keeps those things longer
on foot, which were better buried.

For some answer must be sometimes made, least such men think they have won
the field: and indeed the silence of the one side, seems to have made the
other take more heart, and to speak, and to write more freely, because perhaps
they think men will still be as temperate of their pens, as they have been,
and are still, of their tongues. But they must think that this extreme heat of
writing will force men somewhat to alter their course: hoping that the
necessity of a just defense may plead their excuse, and that the end of this
War will be Peace, which is my desire also, and intention in this my Answer:
which the God of Peace vouchsafe to grant us. And so I come to the matter:
which as the Divine divides into five Sections; the first showing the Letter
to proceed from passion; the 2. from Temerity; the 3. the motives to be humane
and worldly; the 4. that the temporal dangers are merely pretended; the 5.
that their cause of public disauowing the Bishops Authority, is pretended and
feigned: so shall I endeavor in so many Sections, to show all the Contrary.

The Anwsere to the Judgment of a Divine, upon the three Gentlemen's Letter, to
my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon.
THOUGH in answering of these papers I must be feign to let pass many greater
matters then the Title, yet it presenting it self in the first place, I cannot
omit to note two things in it. The one is the word Judgment, which does sound
somewhat authoritatiuely, insinuating, as if the writer were a Judge or
Superior; for to such only it properly belongs to give judgment: whereby
though perhaps he would gain himself and his writing credit, so to further my
Lord Bishops cause, which he handles; yet he is best to look he do him not
more harm. For by making himself a man of such Authority, he may make it to
be thought, that he is my Lord Bishop himself, or some one of his officers,
but only that men presume more of the discretion of such Officers, and much
more of my Lord Bishop himself, the^ that they would write, or ever suffer such
a thing to be written with their priuity. Wherefore though he take upon him to
give judgment yet I will take him not to be a man of judgment: I mean, that
has any further Authority, then his knowledge of Divinity will affoard him,
and so I shall in this answer speak to him as to a Divine, not as a Judge.
The other thing of the Title, is, that he calls the Letter of the Lay
Catholics, the Letter of the 3. Gentlemen, who undertook the delivery of it.
Whereas it is well known that most Catholics of worth in, and about London at
the time of the delivery of it, were privy to it, and that these 3. were but
chosen out of a great number, as men most fit in all respects to undertake the
delivery of it; whereof I shall have occasion to say more hereafter in this
answer. Only this I say here, because hereupon as he calls it the 3.
Gentlemen's Letter, I mean to call it more truly, the lay Catholics Letter.

SECT. 1. That this Letter, did not proceed from passion.
THE Deuines first Section, is wholly to prove this Letter to proceed from
passion. Wherein a man might ask him, what passion? But because I will not
stumble him to much at first, nor intend so much to urge him as answer, I let
that pass. His first reason is, because these Ge^tlemen take no notice (as he
says) of any thing but that which disliketh them: to wit, my Lord Bishops
Ordinaryship, and exacting approbation of Regulars* there being diverse other
things that in the Deuines judgment imported them more: as the validity of
their Co^fessions, which concerned their souls good; the Bishops care of not
increasing their temporal troubles, which co^cerned their fortunes* and the
preserving the Bishops honor and Authority, which concerned the common good of
our English Church. This is the substance of the first paragraph, wherein he
taxes these Gentlemen as if they had only a mind to quarrel with my Lord
Bishop; for so he says in the marginall note. But how false this is, may
easily appear, if a man consider how many things there were in that Letter
very subject to exception; which, a man that had been disposed to pick
quarrels, might have made matter of; and among others that bitter imputation of
practicing and libelling, wherewith his Lordship charge Catholics in
general in his common Letter 16. October 1627. Which though no man could but
resent, yet every man forbear to speak of, because it was impertinent to that
end, which they set before them in writing this Letter: which end of theirs, if
it had been, as this Divine imagines, this had been the first thing in the
whole Letter to take hold of: and this is the very reason why they meddled not
with those other matters, wherewith this Divine would feign have had them
trouble themselves. Besides that, there be other reasons, which a man might
easily bring: as for that of the validity of Confessions, that they saw not any
colorable reason of doubt; yet they prayed his Lordshippe (in whose power it
was with a word speaking, or rather not speaking a word) not to bring them into
further trouble, then they had been in his Predecessors time and before. And
for their te^porall state, they saw well enough, all my Lords advise would
nothing avail them, so long as he had the authority he challenged. Besides
that, in their te^porall matters they can better advise themselves, then any
man else can; that being their own element. And lastly, for the not believing
evil speeches against the Bishop, they saw it was a needles thing to mention
it, being a known point of Christian duty, not to hear any man ill spoken of,
much less a Bishop, if they should chance to meet with any such discourse,
which they never do, they and their friends abhorring such way of proceeding.

The second proof of passion is, because the Bishop offering further
satisfaction concerning his Authority to any man that would ask it, these
Gentlemen did not ask it. It is true indeed; having seen my Lord Bishops
public claim of that Authority, it was no time for the^ to go, and ask a
private gloss or Declaration, which would little avail them, when such a
Letter should be brought against them. But let this Divine ask my L. Bishop,
Whether he were never desired to make it known, what Authority he had? I am
sure his Lordship will not deny but he was many times: but he never would, til
he declared it in this public manner. If my Lord then meant to give them
sufficient satisfaction in private, why did he not do it in private, while me^
did desire it, and while there was time? Besides, suppose my Lord would have
written a Letter, he might have forborne to speak so plainly of his
Ordinaryship, only inuiting those that desired to know his Authority to come
privately unto him. And for that which this Divine says, that my Lord could not
inform them sufficiently of his Authority in so short a Letter, I se not what
reason there is for it. I dare say his Letter is 5. times at least as long as
his Patents, or Breue, and Instructions, the sight whereof would have served
the turn without all this writing and doing. Which being so easy a matter, and
that yet his Lordship would not do it, they might well despair of further
satisfaction.

The third proof of passion is, that as this Divine says, this Letter
stretches my Lord Bishops words upon the Tenter-hookes, or rather adds unto
them, in saying, that the particular passages cyted and the whole scope of the
second part of the Letter, argue his Lordship to assume his Authority over the
lay Catholics, to be as great in England and Scotland, as any Ordinary
exercised here in England in Catholic times: Whereas my Lord Bishop never
spoke of Authority over lay Catholics in Scotland; but only to prove himself
Ordinary, brought the Inscription of Letters from some Cardinals thus Ordinario
Angliae and Scotiae. In which the Divine complains of two Additions, the one
that the Letter says, my Lord challenges Authority over the laity of
Scotland; the other that it says my Lord challenges as much Authority here in
England, as Ordinaries have had in Catholyke times. But first, the Letter
neither stretches, nor adds to my Lords words; but only makes a manifest
and immediate inference upon, or out of the^. For it says, his Lordship words
argue him to assume etc. Which plainly shows that they do not charge his
Lordship with saying so in express terms, but saying, that out of which, as
antecedent, the conclusion is manifestly gathered. Now there is great
difference between an inference and an Addition, as every body knows.
Secondly, if the Divine would have answered, and not cauelled, he should have
showed the Conclusion not to be well and truly deduced out of his Lordships
antecedent, and then he had said somewhat to the purpose. But that he cannot
do. For if my L. Bishop out of the Inscription Ordinario Angliae do prove
himself Ordinary, and out of this infer, himself to have authority over Lay
Catholics of England, why may he not do the like of the words Ordinario
Scotiae, which Title his Lordship uses continually, and jointly with the word
Angliae thus, Ordinarius Angliae and Scotiae? Thirdly his Lordships pate^ts
make no difference between the faithful of England and Scotland. Wherefore if
he challenge authority over the one, he may do it over the other.

For the other Addition, as this Divine says, or Inference, as in truth it is,
of assuming the same Authority, which Ordinaries have exercised here in
Catholic times, what can the Divine say to it? Is it not truly and evidently
inferred? My Lord Bishop says the Pope makes him as absolute Ordinary in
England, as other Ordinaries in their Diocesses; and this Divine, acknowledges
him, to have as much as any Ordinary has, or can have in his Diocese. But our
Ordinaryes here in Catholic times were no more, but as other Ordinaries in
their Diocesses, nor had more then any Ordinary has, or may have in his
Diocese: Ergo, my Lord Bishop (supposing these his Lordships premises) has
the same Authority, that Catholic Ordinaries have had here in England in
Catholic times: Or by the challenging that Authority of other Ordinaries, or
what they have, or may have, he challenges the same that Ordinaries have had
in Catholic times. What fault is there in this Argument? Why then does this
Divine ^ryfle thus? As if these two were not all one; The Authority which an
Ordinary has, or may have in his Diocese; and which an Ordinary had in times
past here in England? Had our Bishops more here, then an Ordinary may have
elsewhere? Did he perhaps think, that no man would ever vouchsafe to answer,
or perhaps read this paper* Where is now the passion in stretching, and adding
of words? But because it may moreover appear, that this inference of the
Authority, which Ordinaries had heretofore, did not proceed from passion, I
will ad a reason why mention was made of our Ordinaries of former times in
England; which is this: That they, who wrote the Letter, came better to be
acquaynted with what belongs to the Authority of Ordinary, and how far it
extends it self, by that which Ordinaryes were wont to do here in England,
and which for the most part they do still in the same Courts here established,
then what Ordinaries do abroad, which we here, are not so well acquainted
withal.

And from hence comes the answer to another objected Addition, in that this
Letter says, that such controversies, as were spoken of immediately before in
the Letter, have mixture with temporal Authority, and concern temporal
fortunes, and receive also temper from our temporal laws etc. This the Divine
according to his former manner of speech, calls an Addition to his Lordships
words; who, he says, said nothing of temporal fortunes, nor Authority of
temporal Princes. As for the word (Addition) it suteth yet far less in this
place, then before. True it is, the Bishop did not speak of temporal fortunes
and laws; but he spoke of that, which has necessary connection with them:
which is his Ordinaryship. Which connection, though the Bishop perhaps did not
so seriously reflect upon, as a thing, that might hinder the exte^t of his
power; yet Laymen, whom it concerned, could not but look about them, to see
themselves hooked in, upon a suddayne, by Title of an Ordinary, which brings
after it all this, that is mentioned in the Lay men's Letter, and which with all
respect, they represent to the consideration of my Lo. Bishop, of whose love
toward them* they were so well persuaded, that they did not doubt, but upon
the very first representation of the inconueniencyes, perplexityes, and
dangers, which that Authority did bring with it, his Lordship would presently
desist from further claim of it. Howsoever these dangers to them, were a very
sufficient enforcement to disclaim from it as they did. Now where is this
Inference forced? Does not my Lord Bishop say absolutely, he is Ordinary, or
has as much power, as any Authority may have in his Diocese? May not others
then say, what the power of such an Ordinary is? and what inconvenience may
come to themselves by it in some particular circumstances? What force or
strayning is here? Oh, my Lord Bishop (will the Divine say) spoke only of his
Authority, to urge approbation of Regulars. True; that is the occasion indeed.
But does not his Lordship by that occasion, challenge the absolute and full
power which an Ordinary has, or may have? Does not all that he brings, prove
his Ordinaryship absolute without limitation of cause, or persons, if his
proofs were good? Might not Laymen plainly say; my Lord meant more of them,
whom he took to be his proper subjects, ^hen of them, who were exempt? And if
his Lordship had meant only to claim Authority over Regulars, in the matter of
approbation, he might have answered plainly and precisely, restrainyng all to
them. But I shall have occasion to speak more of this by and by.

The 4. argument of passion is, that they deny my Lord Bishop all Authority,
not only temporal* but spiritual; and under pretense of their temporal
Fortunes, they would be Oues sine Pastore. If I would be captious with this
Divine, I could ask him, where this Letter denies my Lord Bishop to be
Ordinary; or where it speaks of his Lordships te^porall Authority? But I will
not press him further in that. But for his spiritual Authority, or rather the
power in fore interno (for indeed all the power of a Bishop, as he is a Bishop,
is spiritual, speaking properly) where do they deny it?

Or if they do not speak of it, having no occasion, and it being from the
purpose, does it follow that they deny it? He may have that, though he be no
Ordinary, nor have power in foro externo. How then does the denial of the
former infer the denial of the latter? Is not here stretching of words, or
forcing inferences? And much more in that, as this Divine says, we would be
Oues sine Pastore. Have we been Oues sine Pastore now above. 60. years,
wherein we have had no Bishop? Nay, have we not so much more had a Pastor, as we
have more immediately been governed by the Pastor of Pastors, receiving
immediate influence from the sea Apostolic? But more of this anon.

The 5. Argument of passion is, because they omit the principal point, which
the Bishop handles: which was his full Authority to exact approbation of
Regulars, and take hold of the secondary, which was his Ordinaryship. And near
the Divine co^plaineth, they took no notice whether he had satisfied them or
no. Well, what passion was it for Catholics to leave that, that concerned
them not so immediately, though it were the principal point, and touch that,
which concerned them more, though it were but secondarily intended? To what end
should they take notice of satisfaction in a thing, in which they needed none,
as making no doubt of it? For, suppose there had been any little shadow of
probability of my Lord Bishops pretense, yet so many good and learned men, as
there were here, of Regulars, nay and of all moderate and learned of the
secular Clergy, affirming the contrary, and even my Lord Bishop not ventring,
to say to the contrary, at least to some persons, but that Confessions made to
Regulars were good; what doubt could any prudent man make, of the validity of
his Confessions? The Authority of any one or two learned men, being sufficient
for a wise man to lay aside all scruple of that kind: what needed therefore all
that ado? And the rather because it was a matter of learning, they would not
trouble themselves further, then to desire his Lordship not to put them to
further trouble then his predecessor, or himself had hitherto put them unto:
in which they show, though not in express terms, how they were satisfied with
his Lordships Letter in that point, especially laying his Authority of Ordinary
for ground of that claim: what passion then is here? But now, if a man would
stand upon it, it might perhaps be proved that my Lord did intend no less
principally to declare his Ordinaryship, and by this occasion to make open
challenge of his Authority in that kind. For what else does the greatest part
of his Letter pretend? Why does he write so largely to the layty of a matter,
which does not so properly belong unto them, but only to put needless scruples
into their heads? And with all to make some answer to the Laity, who not long
before had been very instant to know his Authority more precisely, though his
Lordship could not be met withal, to have their demands delivered to
himself? But because these are conjectures, I will not stand upon them: only
this I may say, if his Lordships intent had not been to claim that Authority,
he might presently have disclaymed it, and there had been an end.

The sixth Argument of notorious passion (our Divine says) is this, that they
incense the State against the Bishop, by saying that the execution of the
Authority of this new Tribunal, will provoke the present Gouernmeut unto an
exact search after it, and suppression thereof; and so brings a clause of
Bulla Coenae to prove them excommunicated therefore, and asks, why else this
Letter was showed to the King? This is a strange point of Divinity, that a man
shall incur excommunication, for representing unto the Bishop, the danger
which by clayming such Authority he brings upon himself, and other men. This
is a thing allowable by the laws of God and man: and how then does it deserve
excommunication? Is this to provoke the state to persecute? No surely: but to
move the Bishop not to provoke the State against himself and others: and as
for publishing the Letter, and causing it to be showed to the King, if it were
so, this Deuines intelligence is better then mine. Howsoever* it was no more
then needed, for men to declare themselves somewhat in a more public manner,
that Authority being so publicly claymed, which would bring so many dangers
upon them. And some great Officers have been known to say since, that it was
time for Catholics to do as they did; for that otherwise they might have
smarted for it. Wherein then does passion notoriously appear in this matter,
unless it be that this Divine will have all to proceed from passion which
lyketh him not. And so having cleared this Letter of passion, I might ask this
Divine, what temper he was in, when be called this grave, substantial and
humble Letter, no answer, but a public defy of the Bishops Authority? What
is there in the whole Letter that has even a shadow of defiance? Does not the
whole manner and phrase import as much respect and humility, as such matter can
possibly affoard? Can defyance stand with humility and respect? Why then should
this Divine call it a defye? What Law gives him this liberty? Let him look
home a little and see whether he be not liable in what he accuses others. I
leave it to himself to consider, for I will not so take upon me to play the
Judge. And here is an end of the 1. Section of passion, I pray God there be an
end of that passion on the Deuines part.

SECT. 2. That the lay Catholics Letter is free from Temerity.
THE first point of Temerity alleged by this Divine is, because they being
Lay and private men do take upon them to judge publicly, and to condemn
their Pastor: which is as much as by fact to justify, and even far to surpass
the Oath of Supremacy, which gives power to the Prince to judge of
Ecclesiastical persons: and here private and Lay men take the same upon them,
in saying the Bishop assumeth Authority over Lay Catholics, which he
interprets usurping; and so brings a place out of S. Ambrose to show that
Laymen, even Emperors must not Judge. Here you see the Divine waxes warm in
his Judgment seat: but let him be careful he do not condemn men without
cause. For his Divinity may teach him, that, that is a dangerous thing. Well;
let us see where is this grievous crime, worse then the Oath of supremacy? For
private men to judge a Bishop, it is true, it is a heinous matter, but yet by
this Deuines leave, far short of taking such an Oath, which is the denial of a
man's faith. And therefore this I suppose was but to show a little of his
Rhetorike. But for all that, he must not let his Rhetorike go before his
Divinity. Let us the^ see wherein do they judge? because they say he assumeth
this Authority: which, says this Divine, is as much as to usurp Authority.
But if his Charity had stretched so far, he might have found out a more benign
interpretation, considering with himself, the difficulty of finding a fit word
for this place. For the question being, of his Lordships Authority, they could
not use any such word, as might importe, that in their judgments his Lordship
had it. For that were in a sort to acknowledge it, contrary to the purpose of
their Letter; besides, they had no ground, but his Lordships own word to
think that he had it. In which case they might say that he assumeth it, as
well as to say his Lordship says he has it: for that would imply, that they
did not build upon his Lordships word, which would have been as ill taken: and
to say, he did take it upon him, would have been worse taken, as being nearer
to usurpation. Thirdly they could not presume him to have the Authority. For
though he were Ordinary, he must show his Letters of his Consecration, or
Confirmation, as the Canons require. Or if perchance his Lordship should
pretend difficulties, that he durst not bring in such things, and that he may
as well be believed as Priests that come in here without written testimonies,
yet there might some means, or other be found out and used, to give men some
probability of assurance. But much more being a Delegate, as it is certain he
is* For both Canon and civil laws require that a man in that case show his
Authority in writing. For it is an axiom that Iurisdictio delegata non
praes(...)ur, sed probatur. Now if they cannot presume such Authority, his
Lordship may well be said to assume it. This supposed, it is not certain, that
he has any Authority over them, and consequently whether he be a Pastor or
no, and an uncertain Pastor in this case, is as if he were no Pastor. How then
do they judge their Pastor? Besides, what judging is this, to say he takes
such Authority upon him? They do not say that he has it, or has it not, but
suppose they think he has it not; the worst that any man can make of it, is
to say, they do not believe he has it. Is this then such a crime as to be
compared with the Oath of Supremacy, especially since they had many reasons to
induce them not to believe it? Is it not great temerity then in our Divine,
thus rashly to condemn honest well meaning men, of such a crime without cause?

2. The second point of temerity is to teach their Pastor, what Authority he
must not have; in saying that all things are so settled, as innovation might
breed danger, being contrary to diverse ancient and modern laws; since the
erecting of a Tribunal distinct, or contrary to our laws is Treason, or
Praemunire at least, if they have any priuity or participation etc. Here the
Divine asks whether it be the part of lay men to tell a Bishop, he must have
no Authority contrary to a settled course of state, for matters of Episcopal
jurisdiction; and he asks whether this be not to tell him, that he must not
have authority to preach, co^firm reconcile etc. And whether innovation in
religion is not as dangerous? with a great deal more of that kind. But then he
says withal, that those ancient laws of a new Tribunal are not understood
of a Catholic Episcopal tribunal, but of a Legatiue, and that therefore the
chalenging of this tribunal is no innouatio^ but a restitution of ancient
Episcopal jurisdiction etc.

To all which I answer; that first this Divine takes it for granted that my
Lord Bishop is our Pastor, certain and absolute; but of that I say nothing til
anon, and so I let him use his own language in that. But I must tell him
here, he takes to much liberty to call the humble advise of lay Catholics,
or declaration of their own ease, Teaching: which is nothing but to make them
odious, as if they took upon them with Authority to teach his Lordship;
whereas in the very beginning they humbly crave leave to declare their minds,
and so continue throughout the whole letter. This is not good dealing for any
honest man, much less a Divine: for it cannot come from a good meaning. But we
must bear with a hundred such things as these, at this Deuins hand. Secondly
whereas he infers a paritate Rationis, that the Bishop must not preach,
confirm, reconcile etc. because these are against the settled course of state,
he is mistaken. The reason is not a like, for these are neither against our
ancient laws, neither do, or can hinder the ordinary Courts of Justice here,
and withal these things are more necessary for saving of souls, for
establishment and preservation of Catholic Religion the^ a Bishops court,
which as things stand, will rather hinder then help. Now for our ancient laws
which our Divine says are not against a Catholic Episcopal tribunal (not
according to the meaning of the Lawmakers, howsoever it may be against the
sound of the words) I say first, that as times stand, it is enough to be
against the letter of the Law: and our Protestant Judges and men in Authority
who think themselves fittest to be interpreters of the Law, will have great
advantage against us, if they shall be able by the very words of the ancient
laws to bring us with in compass of Treason, or Praemunire. And if now by
word, and writing they publish to the world that we die not for Religion, but
for Treason, although we suffer but by the laws made in this time of
Protestancy, how much more colourably would they think to do it, when we shall
suffer by the ancient Laws, made and practiced in Catholic times, and not
disallowed, or contradicted by the Sea Apostolic? And it may be this very
thing, if it had been so known to his Holiness, as the Catholics Letter says
well (for it is no disparagement for any man to say, that he does not know all
particular Laws, and Ordinances of all Countries) it is most probable his
Holiness would never have put the Catholics into any the least occasion of
such offense: especially being a thing wholly needless at this time. Secondly,
a man may perhaps also say it is against the meaning of the law in some sort.
For though it were never the meaning of our Catholic Ancestors, to hinder
the lawful exercise of Ordinary Ecclesiastical power, yet their end was, as
this Divine confesses, to restrain the exercise of extraordinary power, or
Legatiue, by reason of the disturbance, which it did many times cause in the
usual courts of Justice of this kingdom. Why then may not a man say, they
mean of such power as my Lord Bishop would have here, considering the present
state of things? For, here be now usual Ecclesiastical courts of Ordinaries or
Bishops: but they are Protestant Bishops, say you* I grant it, but yet in
their Courts they retain the same form of justice in great part, the same
kinds of causes they had aunciently; and though it be true that they have not
true Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as being Branches cut of from the root which
is the Sea Apostolic, yet they exercise it de facto, by the Kings authority,
so as all, both Protestants and Catholics must be subject unto them, so much
as concerns the outward government, or forum externum. Now my Lord Bishops
Authority in this case (suppose it Ordinary for the present for disputatio^s
sake) is of no less hinderance, or disturbance to the Ordinary Courts, and
course of Justice, then was Legatiue in ancient times; nay more: for the
Legatiue court was a Superior court and therefore did not meddle in Ordinary and
daily matters, but in some particular cases and events.

Whereas my Lord Bishops Court, if he were Ordinary, would answer ex aequo, as
I may say and directly to the Ordinary spiritual Courts here, and might
challenge the hearing and determining of all causes, as due to it self,
excluding the other, as usurper. In which respect I think, that as this Divine
says the lawmakers never intended to hinder the restitution of Catholic
Episcopal jurisdiction, so I am of opinion with him thus far, though they
would not hinder it when time should be for it, so yet that in such time, and
circumstances as now we are in, and so long as it were not in their power to
hinder, but that Protestants should b^are the sway as they do, they would never
have lyked the restitution of it, in such manner as his Lordship desires. To
which though I am the rather induced by considering how the Catholic Bishops,
who in Queen Maryes time exercised their Authority, and kept their courts,
upon the suppression of Religion and their Authority, and the substitution of
others in their place, forbear the exercise thereof, as hurtful rather then any
way useful; nay even impossible. Thirdly, not to stand guessing what would
have been the mind of the Lawmakers in this particular case, suppose my Lord
of Chalcedon were Ordinary here; to come to the true plain meaning of the Law,
which this our Divine acknowledges, to wit, that by it is forbidden the
exercise of a legatiue tribunal; I say, this law precisely and directly
touches his Lordships Court, which he would erect. For though be not a legate
a latere, yet he is a Delegate of the Sea Apostolic, and his power is of the
same kind with Legatiue, though inferior unto it. And this is manifest by the
words of his own Letter, saying, he is Ordinarius, not Ordinario modo, but
extraordinario modo, as Legates, Nuncio's, and the like, though he be not yet so
truly Ordinary as any of them, whose power is expressed in the Canon Law, his
Lordships power being wholly out of the Common Course. Therefore the law is much
more against it then against the power of a Legate. Secondly, the very manner
of conferring the Authority, by special Commission, does manifestly show him
to be a Delegate: for that is proper to Delegation. Thirdly he has his
Jurisdiction ad beneplacitum; which is essential to Delegation. But what need
I stand further proving so manifest a thing, when as both his commission has
the express word Delegamus, and his Holiness his Nuncio of Paris in a Letter
under his own hand, speaking of my Lord Bishop of Chalcedons Breue, says,
Delegationis suae Breue sufficienter ostendit etc. and by word of mouth, he did
not only tell diverse that will justify it, that my Lord was not Ordinary, but
proved also by the Cannons, that he could not be Ordinary. His Lordships Power
then being rather Legatiue then Ordinary, and even not that legatiue, which is
expressed in iure, and whose power in that respect is called Ordinary, because
it is belonging to the office of a legate by law, it is plain that the ancient
Law does properly touch his Lordships power and Tribunal. For suppose when
England was Catholic, a man had come in hither, (all the Bishoprics being
full) with such a special title and commission, and chalenging such Authority
here as his Lordship now does, what would other Bishops say? In what Ordinary
Tribunal should he sit? Must he not erect himself a new one? Nay suppose his
Lordship should have been Bishop of Canterbury, and one come in as he does
Bishop of Chalcedon, by special Commission, would not his Lordship think that
man to offend against this ancient law in such a case? And whosoever should
acknowledge or submit himself to such Authority, liable to the penalty there
appointed? Certainly he would. And why not then in this case? You will say now
there be no Catholic Ordinaries, as the^ there would be. What then, say I
again? Does that alter my Lord of Chalcedons Authority? Does not that remain
the same in it self still without change, whatsoever the others be? Is not
their change merely accidental to his Authority? For he is still Bishop of
Chalcedon, and has the same commission. If then that would be against that
law, now it is. What temerity is it then in Catholics, to advertise my Lord of
Chalcedon, what danger he brings upon himself, and others, by erecting this
new Tribunal, which they may truly call Innovation, as being a thing without
President in our nation, and contrary to our ancient Laws, and therefore no
restitution of Ordinary Episcopal jurisdiction, as the Divine would have it:
though suppose it were truly and properly restitutio^ of Ordinary Episcopal
jurisdiction, and consequently, not against the ancient Laws, yet would it be
against the modern, which threaten so many and so great dangers, that a man
may very well without note of temerity declare them, and use what means they can
to avoid them. I could here note how some friends of this Divine, I mean some
of the Appellants in Clement the VIII. his time, urged these ancient laws
against the Authority of the Archpriest, then appointed by that Pope, though
that were no external jurisdiction nor over the Laity; how much more then may
they be urged against my Lord Bishop of Chalcedons which he prete^ds? But I say
no more of it.

3. The 3. point of Temerity wherewith this Divine charge Catholics is, in
that they censure the sea Apostolic, as he says, and 2. most wise Popes, by
saying, that if these their dangers, together with their long sufferinges, and
present state of miseries had been considered abroad, they presume no such
Authority would have been imposed upon them: as if, says he, the sea
Apostolic had not considered the dangers which might come to Lay Catholics
by Episcopal Authority. And then he asks why they did not give, the Sea
Apostolic to understand these dangers, all that time that the Clergy stood
suing for a Bishop, the Jesuits opposing it? Or all the time that the Bishop
has been here, wherein, as the Divine says, he has ever professed himself
Ordinary? Whereupon he concludes that it is not the rear of danger to
themselves, but their passionatenesse to Regulars, who stood in danger of
Approbation, that moves the^ to this. This is the Deuines discourse, and a
very good and likely one it is, forsooth, because the Catholics say* that if
their dangers had been considered (to use the Deuines words) abroad, they
presume they should not have had such Authority imposed upon them* Therefore
they ce^sure the sea Apostolic. This man is so much in giving judgment, and
censuring, that all that any man else says, seems to him to be censuring.
What is there here any way condemning the Sea Apostolic? Nay rather, do not
Catholics, in this, show the great confidence they have of the love and
tenderness, that the Sea Apostolic bears toward them? Which induces them
to think, that if their case had been fully made known, it would no way do a
thing, so prejudicial unto them: where it is to be noted, that besides the
Deuines ordinary liberty of terming things as he lists to conceive the^, and
wresting words to a worse sense, here he corrupts the text, the better to
ground his accusation of Temerity. For in those copies that I have seen of this
Letter, there was not the word [Considered] but the word [Vnderstood] which is
no way subject to exception. But notwithstanding, suppose the Deuines copy had
the word [Considered] which yet a man may doubt of, none else having so, it may
very well carry the same sense. Which supposed, what Temerity, or what Censure
is it, to say, if the Pope did understand our case etc. May not the Pope be
ignorant of many particular laws or Statutes of a Kingdom so remote in place,
and so different in manners and language, and especially in this time of
Protestancy, as this Kingdom is? He being a man, and having none but humane
means to know things, he cannot know our affair; by himself but by
information of others: and it seems they have been such men as were more
careful to prosecute their own ends, then seek our good, and therefore would
make no more known of our case then might stand with their pretenses: and now
that we come to speak for our selves, and to make known our own case, for
saying, that if it had been so understood abroad, we are calumniated, as if we
did temerariously ce^sure the Sea Apostolic: What dealing is this? But
because this Divine does thus grievously accuse Catholics for Temerity in
censuring the Sea Apostolic, I would willingly ask him a question in his
ear, whether he do know a man in the world, that has been often heard to say,
before there was a Bishop, that the Pope was bound under pain of mortal sin
to let the English Clergy have a Bishop, and consequently it evidently
follows, that in the same Deuines judgment, in not granting one, he did sin
mortally. If he do not know such a man, I can tell him who he is; and vouch for
my self, one of the Clergy it self, and a man of chief Authority under my
Lord Bishop, and of great credit with him for his forwardnes and zeal in the
cause. Now whether this be not censuring, let any man judge? For, what greater
censure can there be then to condemn the chief Pastor of Gods Church of a
mortal sin* And of a mortal sin, nor so much in matter of fact, which
might depend of information, and so be somewhat excusable, but in matter of
Judgment, or error in a Doctrinal point, which cannot be excused* as whether
the law of God require the having a Bishop, or not, here in England* at this
time? Which the Pope denies* this De(...) affirms: and not only affirms,
but condemns the Pope of a mortal (...)e, for not being of his mind. These
(...)tlemen used a modest word ((...); they used also a conditional
(...)anner of speaking, which were sufficient to mollify the word, suppose it
had been a little harsh. They impute no crime, they show assurance of love and
tenderness, and of great wisdom and maturity in counsel; and yet this is
censuring. And whereas he accuses Catholics also for Censuring two most wise
Popes, of doing what they understood not, I might answer him likewise that he
condemns all the Popes that went before these two; for the space of
threescore years, to wit Ten most grave and wise Popes, who for many and very
weighty reasons would never be drawn to have a Bishop here, as times stood.
And the two last yielded to the having of a Bishop, not out of any Scruple of
conscience, or fear of transgressing the Divine precept, but out of other
motives. Nay it is most like, that they would have held the same course, that
so many of their Predecessors did hold, but that they were persuaded by some,
that the times were altered: so that it might better be now then heertofore:
which can be no fault of the Popes, but of such as care not what they say to
compass their own ends: and so used such underhand dealing, as that things
were wrought, without any knowledge, or consent of those whom it might here
concern. For what did Catholics here in England, know what others were
working at Rome? And though they should hear something of a Bishop, they might
well think the Sea Apostolic, knowing somewhat in general the different state
of this Kingdom, from others at this time, would not send hither a Bishop,
with like Authority as in other places, as indeed we find since this
controversy began, it was never the meaning of his Holiness, though this
Divine would make us believe otherwise. They might likewise think that no man of
those that did sue for a Bishop, would so far pass the bounds of reason, as
to desire a thing so impossible as is a Bishop here in England, with the same
power that Bishops are of elsewhere, and have been formerly in England: but
that they would be content at the furthest with a Bishop, who might Confirm,
bless Holy Oils, and govern his Clergy, without challenging a further
jurisdiction in foro externo, which would not any way prove useful, but many
ways harmefull.

As for the Jesuits Opposition, I will not say much, but leave them to speak
for themselves, as I doubt not but they can very sufficiently, in this
business, as they have done heertofore in other occasions, though in this they
need not say much for themselves; for any man may see, by the Deuines manner of
speaking, how well he wishes them, and consequently how little, or no credit is
to be given to what he says of them. Yet for this matter in particular
although I never had fee to speak for them, eue^ out of the love I bear to
Innocence, I will tell a thing of mine own knowledge, which as it has made me
believe, all that such men say of the Jesuits, to be false, so it may well do
others: and it is this. I knew a Priest, now a Blessed Martyr in heaven, who
long had a mind to enter amongst them, and by false suggestions of some, he was
with held for many years. And at the last, when being still more vehemently
moved by Gods holy spirit to prosecute his good desires, a great man of the
Clergy, who shall be namelesse in this place, to dehort him, told him the
Jesuits made a vow, or an oath (I know not now well whether) to oppose the
having of a Bishop, which though it cooled the good man's desire for the present,
yet when he informed himself better, and found that false, he believed all the
other fables that were told him to be false, as indeed afterward he also
found them. So, I having seen better proof for clearing of the Jesuits in
this point, then this Deuines authority for accusing them, will forbear to
believe any thing he says of them. Only, If they should have hindered it,
foreseeing all this stir and inconvenience which has happened since the
Bishops coming, who can wonder if they would have hindered it, if they could,
though I am most credibly informed they never meddled not spoke word all the
time it was now last in treaty. Heertofore indeed when they were called to
Council they spoke what they thought, as it is the part of any honest man. But
this last time being not called, they did not speak a word, nor move a foot
in it. For, what is it to them? Do not they live as well where there be Bishops as
where there be none? I trow they do: why then should they hinder it? And thus
much for the Deuines third point of Temerity.

4. The fourth point of Temerity, as he says, is that these 3. private men
erect a new Tribunal, never heard of before, from which there is no Appeal,
in saying that the matter they speak of, viz. of their dangers, admits no
further question, which the Divine interprets, as if they would judge upon a
Bishop, and upon Ecclesiastical Authority, so as no further question is to be
made. What a frivolous objection is this for a man to make? Or with what
conscience can he transferr^ their words which they speak of the certaynty and
manifestnesse of their own dangers to so different sense, as if they did take
upon them to judge of Bishops and Ecclesiastical Authority, so, as if from them
there were no appeal? Nay what affinity is there between the bare affirmation
of a thing, by saying it is out of doubt, and, erecting a new Tribunal? This
man's head is so filled with Miters, that he dreameth of nothing but Tribunals.
This is too to gross: and as for saying, that these three private men erect a
a new Tribunal, as if it were but the act of three, I have touched that
before, and shall do again afterward.

The 5. point of Temerity he says lies in these words, from which (he putteh
this parenthesis of his own) refusing the Bishops authority) we cannot recede
for the reason aforesaid; which, he says, is a temerarious profession of
disobedience not only to the Bishop their immediate Pastor, but also to the
Pope. That, from which the Catholics say they cannot recede, is the substance
of the Letter concerning the difficulty of a Catholic Tribunal, and danger
which ensues thereof to themselves, which what disobedience can it be? Against
what Authority is it? for there is no obedience, nor disobedience but where
there is Authority. What power is it that commands men not to speak the
truth in matters of Fact, that so much concern them? What Law, what Superior,
can abridge them of this liberty, though he were a known Superior? Much less
here where the question is, whether my Lord Bishop have Authority over
Catholics or not, or what he may have, as things stand? For to be bound to
obey, there be these three things requisite at least; that the thing commanded
be possible; that the party that commands be a Superior; and that others be
subject in that kind, wherein they are commanded, or in the matter of command*
for men are not subject to al Superiors in all kinds, but to one in one kind,
and to another in another. So as this Divine, shoud first by proof have put it
out of question, that my Lord Bishop has the authority he prete^deth.
Secondly, that, that authority can stand with the present government and state
of Catholics. Thirdly, that Catholics are so far subject to him in matter of
life and temporal fortunes, as to hazard all for acknowledging and obeying his
Authority. And having made good all this, he might then have accused them of
Temerarious Disobedience. But till then, it were more honesty and wisdom to
forbear his Ce^sures. And this order was more suitable with the order of the
Letter; wherein having first said they were persuaded they could not be bound to
hazard the ruin of their state and posterity, where the necessity of
professing their faith does not oblige them, they conclude consequently that
they cannot recede etc. But the Divine had an eye in this to his conuenie^cy,
reserving this point for the last, therein to show his Divinity, which he has
hitherto made little show of: and so now he comes to that which follows.

6. Their 6. point of Temerity, says the Divine, is in their words; neither
can we be persuaded that there is a necessity of conforming our selves thereunto
(Episcopal power) (observe these two words of the Deuines own putting in by
the parenthesis, and by way of gloss) as to a matter of faith* or yet, that we
can be obliged to loose our state, and ruin our posterityes, where the
necessity of profession of Faith does not oblige us. Upon which words the
Divine descanteth: asking, what is this, but to get up into the Bishops chair,
and teach him how far they are obliged; where he says that as long as they
taught, what was common law, they were to be heard; but that where they come to
teach the duty of a Christian, they pass the duty of a Christian. And then he
teaches, that it is a matter of Faith, that there ought to be Episcopal power
in Gods Church; and that the Pastors are to be obeyed, and that although
particulars be not matter of faith, yet men are bound out of the virtue of
Religion to hold them so, where there is no cause of doubt. For, says he, it
suffices that they are obliged to obey their lawful Pastor, and that they
have no reasonable cause to doubt but that the Bishop of Clalcedon is such to
them: and so concludes, that they err exceedingly if they think that they
are not bound to conform themselves to any thing but matters of faith; for
that they are bound to conform their wills to matters of religion, obedience,
or other virtues commanded by God, and his Church, as they do their
understanding to matter of faith. Thus the Divine discourses, more it seems
to show his Divinity, then to speak to the purpose: for what needed all this
whereof there is no question; as that it is the institution of Christ, that
there should be Episcopal Authority in the Church; that lawful Pastors are to
be obayed; that men are no less bound to the practice of other virtues, then
the profession of faith? Who denies all this? Or what was there in the Letter,
that being rightly taken might enforce any such discourse? The Catholics
meaning therefore is plain that the acknowleging or obaying such Authority, as
my Lord Bishop now prete^deth here in England, as things stand, is not a
matter of necessity to the profession of the Catholic faith, or exercise of
any other virtue necessary for a good Christian. But that they may be good
Catholics without it, as they have approved themselves before God and the
world these 60. years: which if it had been necessary, the Sea Apostolic
would never have suffered them to want a Bishop so long. This was the thing the
Divine should have touched, without going about the bush: now what Temerity is
it for any lay man in the world to say this? Or wherein does he take upon him
more the^ he should? How does he teach the Bishop? or, by saying this how does
he pass the duty of a good Christian? What crime is it for a man now in time
of heresy and persecution, where the profession and exercise of the Catholic
faith, is dangerous to his life and fortune, when he shall be urged by my Lord
Bishop to further exercise or profession thereof then is necessary, to make
answer, that he thinks he cannot be bound unto it? Will this Divine in good
company and before learned men say, he can? No, no, he will be better advised
whatsoever he writes. Nay this thing is so plain, and so necessarily included
in the Common practice of the Catholic faith, all this time of persecution,
as I wonder this Divine should think it such a matter for a lay man to speak
so much Divinity. He need not; for his willbe never the less, though all the
world know it. And on the other side Catholics have been so beaten to it,
that there is no man can but know it. For what has made them stand out against
the oath of Supremacy, going to Church, the oath of allegia^ce etc. but the
necessary connexio^ that these things of their own nature have with the
profession of their faith? which were it not, all Catholics in England know,
they could not by any humane constitution be bound not to conform themselves
to our laws in this behalf, the dangers being such as they are. Now they see,
that the having of a Bishop at this time with such Authority as is pretended,
is not of such necessity on the one side, as these things; and on the other
side of no less danger, and therefore they think, they cannot be bound to it.
Is this such a deep point of Divinity, as a Lay man may not presume to know it?
Or if he know, not speak? Or if he speak of it, he must be said to get up
into the Bishops Chair? Who would think a Divine would trifle thus? But let
us see more: he enlarges himself in this, as being in his judgment a
substantial point of temerity, making another Paragraph of it. But before I
have done with this, I cannot omit to note the Deuines Parenthesis in the
beginning of this 6. Paragraph, where to the words of the Letter, which say*
Neither can we be persuaded, that there is a necessity of conforming our selves
heerunto, which they mean plainly of an Episcopal Tribunal as things stand.
This Divine with his parenthesis of (Episcopal power) makes as though
Catholics deny conformity to Episcopal power in general: which is a strange
slight; and I may say plain corruption. But to go on with him, he goes
forward thus. Like to this, is that other great error of theirs, where they
say they cannot be obliged to loose their estates, and ruin their posterityes,
where the necessity of profession of faith does not oblige them. For says he,
they are as well obliged to loose their estates, nay lives also, where the
exercising of any necessary Virtue does oblige them, as where the profession of
faith does. For example, he brings Joseph the Patriarch, who was obliged to
loose his estate and liberty, as well when the necessity of Chastity did bind
him, as necessity of professing his faith. So he says, Christians were no
less bound to obey the decrees of the Apostles, the^ believe their doctrine.
And he brings the Authority of S. Thomas to prove, that he suffers as a
Christian, whosoever suffers for doing any good* or avoiding any evil*
saying withal of himself, that to loose their lives for acknowledging their
lawful Pastor, is to loose it for profession of their faith. So the Church
holds them for Martyrs, who would rather die then subscribe to the
condemnation of S. Athanasius etc. To this I answer, that the Divine is very
free to call this an error, which by answering what he says against it, shall
manifestly appear to be a solid truth. For, that which he says first then,
that a man is bound to loose not only his estate, but life also, where the
necessity of exercising any necessary virtue does oblige him, no less then for
the profession faith, it is true; but nothing pertinent to our purpose, which
is, not to dispute whether a man be bound to hazard his life and fortune for
his faith only, and not for other virtues: but whether he be bound to hazard
all for a thing which is not necessary for profession of faith, and is supposed
not to fall under the necessary obligation of any other commandment, or virtue:
and so the question may be the same of any other virtue, whether a man be bound
to exercise it, when it is not necessary, with hazard of his life and fortune;
and this the Divine rather seems to grant by requiring a necessity of
exercising a necessary virtue to oblige a man: for I would ask him wherein is
the necessity of exercising a necessary Virtue, as he calls it, by
acknowledging and admitting his Authority? May we not have all things necessary
to salvation without it? If not, how have we done all this while? If we may,
what makes this for his purpose? You see then the Divine would decline the
question, by slipping aside to another matter. For his example of the Patriarch
Joseph, I say there was a necessity of exercising a necessary virtue (to use
the Deuines own Phrase (though it be not very good) and therefore nothing to
our purpose. But by the way I would know what he means by necessary Virtue in
this place, for my part I do not see what he can mean, other then an act which
a man is bound to exercise; so as either the word necessity, or necessary in
his Phrase, is superfluous; and then the meaning of his whole sentence is this.
A man is bound to loose his life for exercising any virtue whereto he is bound,
and so we are where we were at the first, to wit, whether al kinds of
obligation bind at all times and in all circumstances, and with all manner of
difficulties and dangers. For the Patriarch Joseph, there is no doubt, but he
was bound to hazard all, rather then his chastity, whereto the law of God and
nature did bind him in that case: not so the having of a Bishop with Ordinary
power in ours. For the Apostles Decrees, it is true, they are to be obeyed: but
yet I would know of this Divine, whether he thinks a man bound rather to
hazard his life or liberty, then to eat flesh in lent, or upon a friday or
saturday? And so of other Apostolical Precepts, which are not divine
Traditions, but enacted by them merely out of their own Authority. Only
here I say, by this it is manifest, that there is difference between the
obligation of profession of our faith, which is wholly divine, and obaying the
Decrees of the Apostles, which are but human. For S. Thomas his Authority I
reverence it, and am therefore sorry to see it applied by a Divine to so little
purpose: for who denies, but he sufferreth as a Christian, or for his faith,
and consequently is a Martyr, that suffers for exercise of any virtue, or
avoiding even the least venial sin? For example a man persuades a young woman,
that has many suitors to leave the world, and become Religious; some one of
the suitors who is most earnest, and in most possibility to have her,
conceaueth a great hate against the party that persuades her to Religion, and
so waiting his opportunity, kills him for it. This man no doubt suffers as
a Christian in this case by S. Tho. his rule. But does S. Thomas say, he is
bound with foresight of this danger to persuade the woman? No, nay will this
Divine say it? What then is this to that which Catholics say they cannot be
bound to loose all, where there is not a necessity of profession of their
faith? But the Divine infers here; that for a man to loose his estate for
acknowledging his lawful Pastor (I suppose he means the Bishop of Chalcedon
with his power of Ordinary) is to loose it for profession of his faith. Be it
so: what then? Is this a matter of necessity or obligation as the case
stands? If not, you say nothing: and this I say, supposing it an act of
virtue, as the Divine says it is. But now not to dehort any from this
acknowledgment, but only to justify a man that shall not acknowledge it for good
reasons, I ask whether it be an act of virtue to acknowledge that Authority,
which there is no sufficient ground for, but the Parties own saying; whereas
there is much against it? Is this discretion? If not discretion, how can it be
a virtue? Besides, grant he have that Authority, but that this Authority is on
the one side not necessary, and on the other side dangerous, so as the Danger
and Inconvenience does preponderate the conueniency or commodity. Is it
discretion to be silent in this case, or is this profession of faith, as our
Divine calls it, joined with discretion? Have not many been condemned
therefore, both aunciently and modernely for want of discretion, even in
profession of their faith. Is it virtue for men to put themselves into
needless dangers, or not prudently to decline them when they may without
offense? What such special virtue then is it, to acnowledge my Lo. of
Chalcedons Ordinaryship, and submit to his Tribunal, being no way necessary to
the profession of faith and being on the other side so dangerous as it is?
Neither does this Deuines example of S. Athanasius his followers help. For
first, it was an unjust, and wicked thing in it self to subscribe to the
condemnation of an Innocent man, the which for all the world a man may not do.
Secondly, the persecution of Athanasius being known to be for defense of the
Catholic Faith and belief, to subscribe to his condemnation was held in that
time to be a denial of a man's Faith, concerning the Divinity of Christ. So
here was a necessity (to use the Deuines phrase) of exercising two necessary
virtues, Justice and Faith. In our case no such matter. So that all this wind
hitherto shakes no corn. Now then I come to Caietans Authority, which indeed
comes near the point. For he puts the question aright, whereas the Divine
leads us out of the way all this while. And it is this; An lex humana ita
obliget in conscientia quod homo teneatur mori pro eius obseruatione? To which
he says that some teach this position, Non habet ^anc potestatem nisi in causa
fidei, vel tuend(...) republica. Which he says is erroneous and false
Doctrine: and proves it by diverse reasons as our Divine says, whereof he
brings this one. Lex humana est obligatiua ad peccatum mortale, vt manifest
patet, cum praecipitur aliquid sub poena capitis: Ergo est constitutiua
alicuius actus, in hoc quod sit peccatum mortale: Est ergo obligatiua ad
^uitandum magis actum illum, quam mortem corporalem, quia mors animae fugienda
est magis quam mors corporis And after says, Nos autem secundum veritatem
dicimus, quod vniuersaliter lex praeceptiua obligat ad mortem pro sui
obseruatione, in casu autem, non ex benignitate legum. From whence our Divine
concludes, that it is false and erroneous doctrine to teach that men are not
bound to loose their estates, and ruin their posterities where necessity of
profession of Faith does not oblige them; but that they are bound to loose both
estate and life ever where the necessity of a lawful command does oblige them
under mortal sin. And such no doubt it is to acknowledge and obey their
lawful Pastor (as he says.) Here you see Caietans Doctrine, and our Deuines
Inference. To which I answer first, that our Divine cannot be ignorant how
little Authority in many matters Caietan carries in schools now a days,
though he were a great Doctor in his time, and this in regard of his
singularity in many points of great moment and freedom in censuring other men's
opinions. Both which faults he seems somewhat to commit in this place. For as
for singularity, he can hardly escape it, having but one only man of the whole
school of Deuines to hold with him, who is Adrianus, of his own time, or
rather a little after him; so as when he taught it, it was singular among
Deuines for any testimony that is extant, and since, he has not any one man
but Adrian to follow him: which being so, then is it manifest that he falls
fowly into that other fault of censuring Doctrine as erroneous and false, which
was approved and taught in his own time by learned men, and that it seems
with such likelihood, that all Deuines of ensuing times have left his, and
followed this. Though in this he be not so much to be blamed, not being able to
forsee what men would say that came after, as our Divine, who lives now, and
cannot but know it to be allowed and taught by all learned men. All whom this
Divine in alleging and approving Caietanes censure, does condemn, which is a
great fault in a man of his profession. But to let that go; In my opinion it
had been more for our Deuines purpose to have alleged Caietanes bare
Authority without his reason. This reason which he brings, being Caietanes
best reason, as is to be presumed in our Divines Judgment (for sure he would
bring the best) and it proving nothing worth, it will appear that he has no
reason at all: for his reason is this. An humane Law may oblige a man under
mortal sin, as when a thing is commanded upon pain of death; but a man is
bound rather to loose his life then commit a mortal sin: Ergo a man may be
bound to loose his life for the observation of it. To this I might answer
first that his first Proposition is not altogether so certain. Nauar. apud
For that some great scholars not inferior to Caietan for Authority in
schools in moral matters, Tol. lib. ^. c. ^0. (...).
are of opinion, that no humane civil law does bind under mortal sin. But I
do not build upon that. And therefore I answer secondly, that Caietanes
reason, is petitio Principij, and consequently no reason, taking the very thing
in question, though delivered in other words, for a reason of his saying. For
it is the same question, whether an humane law can bind a man under mortal
sin, to loss of goods or life, but in case where there is some higher
obligation proceeding from the law of God, or nature: and whether an humane law
can oblige him to loose his fortunes and life, where there is no necessity of
profession of his Faith, or other higher bond. And this is it which Caietan
with one other Divine says, and all other Deuines gainesay him in. And the
reason is manifest. For, a law being to be for the common good, and the power
by which it is made, proceeding originally from the people (if we speak of
civil or Political power) and given for that end, it were a great abuse of
that power, to force men to so great damage as to hazard fortune and life, but
where it is merely necessary for that end: for men are not supposed to be so
void of reason, as to cast away themselves so freely. Now in that case of
common good the law of nature does come in, and fortify that bond. The like we
may say of Ecclesiastical humane power, which though it come originally from
God, not from the people, yet reason does prescribe the use of it: and a Law
made thereby to the damage and hurt of men's fortunes and lives, without a
necessity, for their eternal good, would rather prove prejudicial then
profitable, and therefore no Law. Nay, to matters of extraordinary difficulty,
though otherwise good and holy, even Religious men are not many times bound.
That Ordinary Example, which authors bring of a Religious man entering here in
Europe, who, they say, by his general Vow of Obedience is not bound upon his
Superiors command to go to the Indies through so many dangers by sea and
land: How much less then can secular men be bound with danger of life and
ruin of their fortunes, to things not absolutely necessary to faith and
salvation? Such as is, the not acknowledging and obeying of my Lo Bishop of
Chalcedons Ordinariship. And therefore no matter fit for so great an obligation,
as the loss of life, and ruin of a man's posterity. Wherefore that must needs
fail, which our Divine builds upon Caietanes Authority, as the foundation:
to wit that men are bound to loose all, not only for profession of Faith, but
also where the necessity of a lawful command obliges them, if he mean the
necessity which a command does bring with it subsequent, as an effect; which
he must mean for his purpose. For as I have said all this while, all co^maunds
do not bind in all occasions, and then there is no such necessity, or rather it
is no law or commau^d in this case being not able to bind. Therefore to avoid
all ambiguity and equivocation of the necessity of a lawful command, I
distinguish and say: If this necessity be antecedent and such as may be
sufficient to ground such a command on because the thing is of necessity of it
self for the salvation of a man's soul or the public good this command is
lawful and the necessity sufficient to bind a man to the loss of life and
goods: if not, but only the necessity subsequent, that is, because it is
commanded, I say, this is no sufficient ground for a man to hazard all; neither
is it a command in this case, having no power to oblige, as I have proved. And
so much for our Deuines Divinity, which has foiled him in this point of
Doctrine contradicting the whole current of Deuines. Let him look Bonacin. to.
2. disp. 2. q. 8. punct. 2. n. 3. and seq. Now to his temerity again.

7. The seventh point of temerity says he (if I may give it so sharp a
term) is in these words: We also most humbly beseech your Lordship, to
believe, that this which we here present unto you, is the sense of the Laity;
whereas scarce 30. Laymen knew of the writing of this Letter: and since they
knew of it, many hundreds have disclaymed from it, and openly protested against
it, some of them not accounting those Catholics that wrote this Letter.
Hitherto are the Deuines own words. And then he Rhetorically amplifieth it:
asking whether it be the sense of the English Catholic laity, that a Bishop
lawfully sent by the sea Apostolic does vsurp authority? must do nothing
against the settled Order of the state, in matter of spiritual Iurisdictition?
That a Catholic Episcopal tribunal is a new Tribunal in England? and so in
like sort he reckons up Epilogically al his former temerities, and prays,
God forbid that such presumption should be the sense of the Laity. And that
rather the quite contrary is their sense, to wit; to accept the Bishop for
their lawful Pastor; to thank his holiness for sending him; to be as ready if
not more, to ve^ture the loss of their estate for entertayning a Bishop their
Pastor, as for entayning regular Priests: and this he says many hundreds have
testified by word, writing, and deeds.

This point it seems is a shrewd one in the Deuines judgment: wherefore he
would feign have a worse term then Temerity for it. But let him stay, and see
whether it deserve eue^ that, any more the^ the rest that went before. To say
that this is the sense of the layty, whereas scarce 30. knew of the writing of
the Letter, he says is Temerity. Yea is it even so? Did 30. know of it? how
comes it the^ that all this while you spoke but of 3. calling it the three
Laymens Letter, in the very title, and afterward continually speaking but of
three? It is well increased suddenly from three, to thirty. But mean while
has not our Divine strangely forgotten himself confessing and confuting
himself out of his own mouth? For if 30. or near 30. were privy to the
writing of the Letter, and did not disclayme (as if they had done, the Divine
would not have passed it over in silence) it is to be presumed that they did
consent thereto. If they did consent, then was it their act, not the act of
those 3. alone: and what these 3 did, they did in the name of the rest.
Therefore those 30. are subject to all the Deuines censures of passion and
temerity no less the^ those 3. But he thought better to lay al upon 3. because
he thought he might be the boulder in his censures, the smaller the number was,
therefore he made it less to himself, though contrary to his own knowledge,
as is manifest by this his Confession. Well to go on, we have 30. may there not
be a great many more, that he does not know of? Will he arrogate so much to
himself as to know all that passes in private amongst men? might not many
utter their mynds so privately in this matter to their friends, as not only not
the Divine, but no man else but the party, that they spoke to, shall know it?
How then does this Divine, so peremptorily affirm, that there were scarce 30.
privy to it? As if no man did any thing but they came presently and told him:
but he must excuse me for not believing that, but rather it is to be presumed
that if he could come to the knowledge of 30. there were five times as many at
least, that knew of it, and are not known to every one, considering the secret
manner of carrying things of this kind among Catholics.

And so much this Divine might truly have imagined, at least believed, when
this Letter was delivered by 3. such persons in the name of the Laity, being
every one of them of such worth, as might deserve credit in a greater matter
then this. For it is no way to be presumed, that any one of them would do such
a thing in the name of others without very good warrant from them, especially
seeing they might be so easily disauowed. Nay it cannot be unknown unto this
Divine, that they were warranted by most of the Catholics of honor and
quality, in, and about London, at the time of the writing the Letter: for my
Lord Bishop himself, did then in a manner confess as much. For to one Noble
man very well known, he writ, that his Lordships Letter which he had written
to disclayme from the Lay men's Letter, appeared unto him like a star in a
cloud; as if he were the only man that stood for him. And it can be no less
known to this Divine, what a do there was to have a contrary Letter written by
some of my Lord Bishop friends in the name of the laity to the contrary
effect. But it would not succeed; and why? But because that none that
considered the state of Catholic affairs here in England and what
consequences the Authority of Ordinary brought with it, and withal had any
care of their own fortunes or common good, could think it safe for them to
admit of such Authority. It is true, that if a man, ask ordinary people that
diue not into the matter, whether they acknowledge my Lord of Chalcedon for
their Pastor, or some perhaps who understand the matter better, but have not
much to loose; it may be they will easily answer, they acknowledge him for
their Pastor. And this is the way which has been used, with those hundreds,
which this Divine says have disclaymed from this Letter. But though they were
more, it made not much matter. And though there should be but 30. that were
privy to this Letter, might not those 30. be of such account, as might be more
worth then many of this Deuines hundreds? I believe they might. For they are
the chief men for honor and estate that are most to be regarded in this
matter, as being the men upon whom the credit of the Catholic cause most
depends; and who, for a thing that shall be subject to exception, are most like
to suffer: and therefore they might well say the Laity, being the chiefest and
better part; and what they wanted in number they might counteruayle in worth.
This letter then is the sense of the Laity, not wrested and wrung, not glossed
and commentaryed by the Divine at his pleasure, but in the plain and obuious
meaning of the very words, far from passion, and temerity, as I have here
showed. And so I come to the 3. Section, the title whereof is this.

Sect. 3. That the motives of the three men, were not all humayne, and worldly.
IN this 3. section the Divine examineth what the Lay men's motives were to
resist the restoring of Episcopal power, or rather to impugn and banish it,
as he says, according to his usual manner, after it is restored by the Sea
Apostolic, which seeing, says he, that it is divine supernatural, instituted
by Christ, appointed by the Holy Ghost to govern the Church, observed always
in the Church in all times of persecution whatsoever, profitable for
administering Confirmation, hallowing of Oils, keeping unity and good life, the
motives had need be good; and then he reduces al to two: viz. fear of loss
of worldly fortunes, and troubles by contrariety of sentences betwixt the
Bishops Court and the Protestants. But then picketh out a third, which he
says, was the true motive, delivered somewhat in a covert manner: to wit, that
the Regulars may be freed from the Bishops approbatio^. Out of which he
deduceth certain points for the lay men to consider. 1. whether it be fit for
them to impugn spiritual and divine Authority upon mere worldly motives, and
such as may better be objected against Priestly Authority, it being forbiddden
by modern laws; Bishoply authority being not forbidden by them expressly.
Secondly whether it beseem them to reject Episcopal Authority, and the
certain spiritual commodityes thereof, for uncertain or rather pretended
temporal dangers. Thirdly how far they are from the Catholic Africans, who
would have a Bishop, notwithstanding the persecution threatened by the African
King if they had one. 4. Whether it beseem them to impugn a Bishop their
Pastor in behalf of Regulars not their Pastors Fifthly, whether Regulars
deserve this at their hands, since for the quiet of their Penitents
consciences, they would not ask the Bishops approbation, though he offered it
under his hand and seal, that it should be no prejudice to them, whereas the
Bishop for quiet of men's consciences with his own prejudice approved Regulars
though they would not ask it. This is the whole discourse of this Section.

To which I say first, that he commits a very foul fault for a man of
learning, in misreporting and mistaking the question, by saying that the
Laymen resist, impugn, and banish Episcopal Authority: whereas it is nothing
so. For it never came into the heart of any Cathoque man, much less of any of
these Lay men to question or make doubt of Episcopal Authority in general. But
the question being of my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon who came into England with a
foreign title of a Bishopric in Greece, but with Authority to be exercised
here in England, what Authority is given, what Authority can fitly be
exercised, and how far Lay Catholics stand bound, if new Tribunals with power
in foro externo, or Ordinary power be erected. And he clayming such Authority,
they whom it most concerned, declared their sense and judgment concerning
these points: which it seems our Divine would needs mistake and draw the
question another way to make himself a little more room to discourse at
liberty, of Episcopal Authority, crying out a Pastor, a lawful Pastor etc.
because what they said, was so just and consonant to reason, as he could not
impugn it. Wherefore it is no wonder that of all this deal, he says there is
so little said to the purpose. Secondly for the motives, he says not much
against them: but only takes upon him to judge of the secrets of hearts, by
saying, the principal motive was to free Regulars from approbation. Wherein I
might ask him, by what Autbority he takes upon him to judge of such matters
as are not subject to the judgment of the Church it self? for, Ecclesia non
iudicat de occultis. But I need not press him here: for it is ordinary with
him to censure men merely out of his own imagination. Now for his Corollary
demands, I answer to the first, that it supposes falsely, that they impugn
spiritual Authority, which they do not. Secondly, it may stand with very good
reason for a man to desire sometimes not to be urged to the acknowledgment and
admittance of such a special Authority out of fear of temporal danger of
life or fortunes, which though they be in themselves temporal things, yet
being desired or preserved discreetly with reference to a spiritual end, as
they may be, and as it may be presumed good men desire them, they are in a kind
spiritual. Thirdly, these motives do not make against Priestly Authority so
much as against the Authority of a Bishop, for they speak only of a Tribunal,
or power in foro externo, which does not belong to Priests, as Priests, and
which is against our ancient Laws, as is said before, which is worse then to
be against our modern laws. Besides the Authority of a Bishop is more against
our modern laws, for he comes with Authority and jurisdiction derived from the
sea of Rome, not only in foro interno, but also in foro externo, which is much
more against the intendement of our laws, howsoever it be against the words:
and this may appear by the Proclamations, and Persecutions which have been for
him in particular. Lastly put case the danger were the same yet God does bind
men to the one, as being a thing of necessity for the salvation of their
souls, but not to the other, being no way helpful to their souls in these
circumstances, but dangerous to their Lives and Fortunes.

But because this Divine makes such frequent mention and so sure account that
Episcopal Authority is not more, if not less against our modern laws then
Priestly power, this later being by them expressly forbidden, the other not, as
he says; I think it not amiss here in a word to show it to be forbidden
both expressly, and upon greater penalty. For first the Law of 27. Eliz. which
makes it felony to receive, relieve, and maintain, or comfort a Priest,
makes it felony to do the same to any religious or ecclesiastical person. Now
I presume the Divine will not a Bishop to be an Ecclesiastical person: how then
can he say, he is not expressly forbidden. It may be he means, because he is
not forbidden by the name of a Bishop: true, I grant the word Bishop is not
there; no more is the word monk, or friar; much less Benedictine, Dominican,
Franciscan etc. and yet who can say that these are not expressly forbidden by
the law in the word Religious person? If this Divine say again that they are
forbidden in the word Seminary, or other Priest, so say I also of a Bishop. It
is clear then, that a Bishop is also expressly enough, and as much forbidden by
that law as a Priest: and this our proclamatio^s sufficiently show, as that 1.
Caroli Regis for banishment of Priests and Jesuits, wherein the word Bishop was
also expressed. Now for the penalty of reconcileme^t, it is true it is treason
to be absolved or reconciled by a Priest. And is it not so by a Bishop also?
yea verily as much one as other, for in the nature of reconcileme^t neither one
nor other is named: where in I cannot but wonder why this Divine should so
specially note, that it is treason to be reconciled by Priests. The matter then
for that, is all one.

But to go a little further with him, I say, it is not Treason for a man to
hear mass, to receive the Blessed Sacrament, to be baptized, married,
annoyled, or the like, or to do any act in acknowledgeme^t of his Priesthood,
except only absolutio^ and reconciliation; whereas it is far otherwise of a
Bishop. For not only to be absolved or reconciled by him, but even to promise
any obedience unto him is high treason in the Doer, Cou^sellour, or A bettor,
much more to do any act in conformity of his Episcopal power in foro externo,
as to appear before him upon his citation, to obey his censures, or the like:
and this by a law of 23. Eliz. (to wit 4. years before that other of
receiving, relieuing etc. of Jesuits and Priests) where it is enacted that if
any person shall promise any obedience to any pretended Authority of the sea of
Rome, or of any other Prince, State, or Pote^tate, that then such person shall be
taken, tried, and judged, suffer and forfaite as in case of high Treason: in
which words is plainly comprehended Episcopal power as such; for it is derived
from the sea of Rome, whether it be delegate or ordinary. Or if it be Ordinary
as that of Bishops in their diocese, and as the Divine takes my Lord of
Chalcedons to be, then it is like it may be understood in that word Prince, for
such a Bishop is a spiritual Prince.

And that it may yet further appear that his Episcopal power as such, is so
forbidden by this law, I will put this Divine a case thus. Suppose there should
com one in hither sent by the Pope, without the order of Bishop, Priest, or any
other order, but only with Episcopal power or jurisdiction, as he might be, to
determine such causes here among Catholics, as Bishops do else where in their
spiritual Courts; would this case be comprehended in our Laws thinks he, or
not? or would it not be Treason for men to promise him obedience, come to his
Court, obey his ce^sures, etc? certainly it would; and even by this law of 23.
Eliz. How then can this Divine so confidently auerre, that Episcopal power is
no more against our modern Laws then Priestly? But here now I must entreat
this Divine to conceive me right, for my intention is not to enforce Laws
against my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, but only to answer his arguments, which
force me to this, to show that there may be some more danger in Episcopal
then Priestly power, for avoiding whereof Catholics are not to be blamed, if
they be less willing to admit of the one, then of the other, now in these
times, wherein it is but good discretion for men to serve God, and exercise
their religion with as little hazard of their Lives and Fortunes as they may.

To the second demand, whether it beseem them to reject Episcopal Authority,
and the certain spiritual commodityes thereof, upon uncertain or rather
pretended dangers. I answer as to the first, that it supposes falsely, that
they reject spiritual Authority. For they reverence it, though nothing seems
reverence to this man, but yielding to his will. Secondly, they do not refuse
any spiritual commodity that comes thereby, as Confirmation, hallowing of
Oils, or whatsoever else does not concern such manner of Ordinary Authority,
as they cannot safely admit, for the reasons alleged in their Letter; which
this man says, are uncertain or pretended: which conceit of pretented, so
much pleases the Divine, that he makes a distinct section of it, and therefore
if it deserve any answer, I will make it there.

To the 3. demand, how far short they are of the zeal of the Affrican
Catholics, who would rather venture a persecution, then want a Bishop; I
answer, it is well known, Catholics here want no zeal to Bishoply
Authority, who have suffered so long and sharp persecution for the Authority
of the sea Apostolic, which they have defended with loss of goods, and life,
for admitting of Priests sent by the Authority thereof: which that holy sea
considering, with great wisdom and charity has so tempered things all the
time of persecution, that as on the one side it has sent Priests with
sufficient Authority for our instruction, administration of Sacraments, and
other necessary matters: so on the other side it has for borne to press us
further for the admittance of such Authority, at is more dangerous then
needful. And who can blame us if we desire the continuance of the same course
still, till God send better times? And if our zeal be the same to the sea
Apostolic (for whose Authority we suffer, and upon whom we desire therefore
to depend immediately, as upon our proper Pastor) as those Catholics had to
their particular Bishop, of what can any man justly tax us? Are we worse
Catholics? Nay are we not rather so much better Catholics as we depend more
nearly of the Head of the Catholic Church? Besides our case is different from
the Africans in many respects: they had no other means of maintaining the
succession of Priests, for administration of the Sacraments, and preservation
of the Catholic faith, but by a Bishop of their own; we have. They desired a
Bishop of their own; we should also be glad of such a one; as for example a
Catholic Bishop of Canterbury, London etc. if it might be; but not a Bishop
of another Diocese, to come in hither as Ordinary; for that is against our
ancient Catholic Laws. Their Bishops seas were not possessed by others,
ours are: and the like. This Divine therefore does unjustly tax us of want of
zeal to our immediate Pastor. Besides, the example of the Africans is often
answered, and proved to make quite against the Deuines end.

To the 4. demand, which is, whether it beseem them to impugn a Bishop who
is their Pastor, in behalf of Regulars, who are not their Pastors: I answer,
that still this Divine supposes a false ground of impugning a Bishop. Now for
a Pastor, we know not what he means by it. If he mean one with power to
preach, teach and administer Sacraments without other ordinary forrayne power,
we grant he is a Pastor. But then why should not other Priests be also
Pastors, having the same power? and Regulars as well as seculars? for it is
not the name of a Bishop only. For any Priest that comes here into England is
more our Pastor, then the Bishop of Paris, Lions, Bordeaux, or any such Bishop
who has nothing to do here, but by special commission; which if it be no more
then is given to other Priests, the^ is he no more Pastor then they. Will this
Divine say my Lord of Chalcedon is a Pastor otherwise? Say it perhaps he may;
but prove it I think he cannot. Sure I am his Breue or Commission imports no
such thing, but all the contrary; as that he is Delegate, his power reuokable,
that it is only for the spiritual good of souls It is signified by the word
Facultyes, which signifies power in him, but no obligation on the other part
to obey, and we understand the ordinary form of creating a Bishop for ordinary
Pastor to be this: Prouidemus Ecclesiae tali, de tali persona: and praeficimns
cum in Patrem, ac Pastore^ ac Episcopum eiusdem Ecclesiae, co^mittentes ei
administratione^ in temporalibus and spiritualibus, in nomine patris, and
filij, and spiritus sa^cti. Amen. The omission of this ordinary form, and
avoiding of all words which might signify any power or Authority, makes us
verily believe his Holiness never meant to make him Ordinary, or Pastor, other
then in that general sense, that all that are sent with power of instructing men
and administering of Sacraments may be called Pastors. And this power every
body willingly affoardeth him. As for that which our Divine says, that the
Laity impugn the Bishop in behalf of Regulars, I say, that the one is even as
true as the other. For they nether impugn him (but he them) nor do what they
do in behalf of the Regulars, but of themselves, and their own right: for it
is their own lives and fortunes which they defend: and as for the Regulars
they defend their own privileges of another kind, and no doubt, will be able
of themselves to do it, without help of the Laity, being so learned as to know
how far they ought to yield, or not to yield to his Lordship, and so virtuous
as not to deny him any thing that is due.

To the 5. demand, whether Regulars deserve this at the hands of the lay men,
since for quiet of their consciences they would not ask approbation, though
the Bishop offered to give it under his hand and seal, that it should be no
prejudice to them; whereas the Bishop as the Divine says, for quiet of lay men
consciences approved the Regulars to his own prejudice, though they would not
ask it. I answer that lay men's consciences were quiet enough, till my Lord
Bishop began to disquiet them with needles scruples: and that therefore they
were not so much beholding to him for quieting them afterward, as they were
little beholding to him for disquieting them at first. Secondly Lay men saw
well enough, it was some thing else then the quiet of their consciences which
moved his Lordship to that course of moving approbations: to wit, to have his
Authority which he pretends, thereby published and acknowledged. For otherwise
he might either have approved all Regulars without more a do at first, or have
dealt the matter privately with them: and they denying to ask approbation, he
might have expected the award of the Sea Apostolic, without further
acquainting Lay Catholics, who, he might be sure, for all yet he could say,
would securely rely their consciences upon the word of so many, so virtuous,
and so learned men, as are in the several Orders of Regulars. Besides, that
they, the Regulars, give so good reason in their own Letter to the Bishop, and
there were so many and so good reasons alleged in a shorter letter of a
Priest for that matter, that no man that would be ruled by reason, would either
doubt of the power of Regulars to here co^fessions, or think that my Lord
Bishop himself, being so learned a man, could doubt of it, and therefore they
might well think he meant that but by the By, and aimed at another matter
principally: and so they answered that which seemed to them the principal
matter more largly, and touched the other but briefly.

Now, for Regulars to ask his Lordships approbation where the matter was so
manifest, was wholly unnecessary; besides, that though his Lordship should give
it under his hand and seal that it should be no prejudice to them, it is like
they knew it might be prejudicial in some respect or other: for the very
asking it as necessary, argues a dependency. But for his Lordships
approbation, which this Divine says, he gave to Regulars with his own
prejudice, I do not see wherein it can be prejudicial, for he approved them
but only for a time til the matter be decided, and without prejudice of his
own, or his successors right: wherein then has he yielded one jot of his
right, suppose he had any? Nay this manner of granting it was a putting of
himself in possession. In which respect the Regulars were wise enough not to
make any acceptance of it. Or wherein has he more obliged the Laymen, then the
Regulars have, unless it be by disquieting them with new pretenses? And for
some part of satisfaction, approves all Regulars, whereby he obliges
Catholics, like as that man does that first breaks another head, and then
gives him a plaster. So much then for that answer of this Deuines demands,
and clearing what he says of the Laymens motives.

But what if before I pass to another Section* I should touch a little upon
the the motive which makes the Divine and others of his mind to be so vehement
in the pursuit of this pretended Authority, that they will hear no reason to
the contrary? They say, it is spiritual good of souls by administering the
Sacrament of Confirmation, by hallowing oils, by keeping unity and good life;
because it is the institution of Christ, because it has been observed in Gods
Church, in all times of persecution. But these cannot be the motives; for as
for Confirmation and hallowing of oils, it is clear they may be without the
authority of Ordinary, and therefore cannot be the ground of such claim. For
keeping unity and good life, it is as clear, that Authority can do little in
it, as things stand now, and that it is only persuasion and fair means that
must do it. For the institution of Christ, sure it is not, that in all places,
and in all times there must of necessity be particular Bishops in every
particular Diocese, or* Country, for if it were so, then should those 10.
Popes from Pius 4. to Paulus 5. have offended grievously in not creating a
Bishop here. Nay these two last viz. Greg. the 15. and his Holiness that now is
Vrbanus 8. should offend in not making so many Bishops as we have Bishoprics.
How then can this Divine enforce out of the institution of Christ, that my Lord
Bishop of Chalcedon should have the Authority of Ordinary in England?

For the obserua^ce of Episcopal power in the Church in all times of
persecution, it is true, there have ever been Bishops, and would still be,
though there should be no Ordinary in England for a time. But where, when, and
how, for particular places, it has ever depended upon the wisdom of the Sea
Apostolic, giving Bishops in such manner, and with extent of power, as time
and place has required. So when some Cities or Countries have been first
converted to the faith, they have given them Bishops; when they have quite
fallen away, they have forborne to give them any; and now here in our Kingdom
which has fallen away by Heresy, yet so as there be some Catholics left,
with hope of total restitution of the Catholic faith, when Almighty God
shall please, the Sea Apostolic deals most prudently, sending men hither
with so much power as is necessary, and expedient for Catholics at this time,
reserving the fulness of Ordinary Episcopal power, till the full restitution
of Catholic Religion in this Kingdom. For, so Catholics are well assured,
that his Lordship is not Ordinary, howsoever the Divine cry nothing but
Pastor, and lawful Pastor, at every word. But men give him the hearing: only
they cannot but wou^nder, that he should so bravely carry out the matter, as if
there were no Declaration, or order to the contrary, when he cannot but know
that my Lord Bishop has had more orders the^ one to that purpose. Nay that my
Lord Bishop has acknowledged the receipt of them else where, though here he
do not, and has promised to cease from further stirring, though we do not yet
see the performance of it, unless it be that his Lordship indeed forbear, but
that his Officers will not be obedient to him in that wherein they may soon do
his Lordship much wrong. For their faults will be imputed to him.

Now, because this Divine says Episcopal power has been ever observed in
the Church in all times of persecution whatsoever, inferring thereupon that
here now in England there ought to be a Bishop; I would wish him to consider
whether even in the primitive Church, the persecution were like ours, in some
respects: for though it were more bloudy^ and the torments more various and
cruel yet it was but by fits, and generally the Christians had their Cripts
placed under ground, and howses dedicated to that use, wherein they had a
public kind of exercise of their faith, and even by public allowance; and
Priests and Clergy men were distinguished by their habit and tonsure, or
shauing of their crown, as it is used now generally in the Catholic Church.
But our case is far different, for here we have much ado to hear Mass in a
corner, as private as may be, without discovery: how much less might we have
those other things, which belong to the Authority of an Ordinary. But of this
again in another place.

These things considered, since none of these spiritual commodities which this
Divine speaks off are necessarily co^nected with the Authority of Ordinary,
neither are so necessary, but that a man may be a good Christian and Catholic
without them, they cannot be the true motive of pursuing the matter with such
violence and heat, to the greater scandal and harm of the Catholic cause,
then all the Authority my Lord Bishop would have, or this Divine have for him,
will do good: and therefore men are induced to think that the true motive is
Ambition, desire of Rule, interest in the fortunes of Lay men, disposing of
Legacies in maius bonum, as would be pretended, judgment of controversies
between party and party without their consents; and by little and little to
draw into practice a vexation, by the several tribunals, upon Catholics.
This I will not say, but surely there be great presumptions for it; for if
their reasons were good, they would carry things with more te^per, they would
with a little more patience endure to hear men propound their reasons to the
contrary; they would quietly expect the determination of the Sea Apostolic,
and obey it when it comes: besides that, in their very discourses they cannot
but bewray somewhat of their minds, concerning Legacies and monyes for pious
uses. But I will say no more of it, but pass to another Section.

SECT IIII. That the Temporal dangers are not merely pretended.
THE Divine in his 4. Section labors by many reasons to prove, that the
te^porall Dangers are but pretended; which is but even the same that he said
in the former Section in other words. For though he says in the title that
their motives were worldly, yet in his discourse he says, that those were not
their true motives, but their passionatenesse to Regulars; and so he says
here: yet I must yield to follow him, though he says but the same things over
again. His first reason to prove the dangers to be only pretended, is,
because they never mentioned those dangers till approbation was moved to
Regulars, which was about Easter 1627. whereas Episcopal Authority had been
restored since the year 1623. I answer first, that whereas he says that
Episcopal Authority was restored, I see not how that can be said to be
restored which never was: for when was there ever a Bishop of Chalcedon in
England with power of Ordinary in England, before this man's predecessor?
Secondly Catholics did little dream at first of any such Authority, as my
Lord Bishop challenges. For the foreign title of Chalcedon gave the^ some
assurance, that he was not to be a Bishop, like as in former Catholic times.
And though they heard somtymes of the word Ordinary among some of my Lords
Clergy, yet they made no great matter of it, not knowing any great ground.
Notwithstanding they were desirous to know, what Authority the Bishop had, and
for that cause used all the means they could to see his Letters, or Faculties,
but they could not get a sight of them; which made them begin to suspect
somewhat, and so they began to be a little more careful then before, especially
hearing of diverse things done by my Lord of Chalcedons officers, as
Excommunicating of some, and threatening others; as also coming to see the
Letters Patents whereby his Lordship did create his. Archdeacons, true and
lawful Rulers, and Ecclesiastical Superiors of the Laity; which when they
saw, they began to co^sult among themselves what was fit to be done. And all
this was before, that ever my Lord of Chalcedon moved any thing about
Approbation of Regulars. And without question they would have done what they
did for their own security, though the matter of Approbation had never been
moved to Regulars. It may be when they saw the flame break out so strong
against Regulars, who were otherwise exempt, by challenging of a thing which
could not belon^ but to a proper Ordinary in his Diocese, it might quicke^
them, and make them go about what they were doing, with a little more speed,
and thereupon they drew certain points concerning my Lord of Chalcedons
Authority, in which they were desirous to be resolved, and all of them
concerning themselves, and such as they had heard, many of my Lord of
Chalcedons Officers and friends speak of, as things that were like to be put
in practice. But because it was not fit for the^ to go upon uncertain reports,
they were desirous to know of my Lord of Chalcedon himself what his Lordship
did conceive to belong unto him; so that this Divine is clean out of his way,
in making the matter of approbatio^ of Regulars, the cause of the Laymens
stirring.

His second reason to prove the dangers to be pretended only, is, because no
man has been in danger since the restitution of Episcopal Authority. For
answer to this reason, I remit this Divine to a great friend of my Lord
Bishops, who is wont to allege his favor to my Lord Bishop, for a reason of
the Kings displeasure toward him. I might for answer also allege the
Proclamations, and much and continual searching for him, which has brought so
great vexation upon Catholics, and upon many Priests taken by his occasion,
but that I list not much to meddle in such a matter as this. Only this I may
tell the Divine, that my Lord Bishop himself, as I have been credibly
informed, took notice and exception to the speachs of some Catholics of
worth, who spoke feelingly of what they suffered by his occasion, and wished he
would for avoiding their trouble, withdraw himself: which shows that
Catholics find the contrary of what this Divine would make them believe.

His 3. reason is, because there can be no greater danger justly pretended
against one Bishop, then against so many Priests, they being forbidden by the
modern laws, and he being not forbidden by either modern or ancient laws.
Whereto I answer, that as I have showed before, the danger is far greater. For
Episcopal Authority is so much more forbidden, as it is greater Authority,
derived from the sea of Rome, and a double Authority. For besides the
jurisdiction of forum internum, which Priests have, the Bishop would have
another of forum externum, which is much more against the modern laws, then
the former. Besides that I have showed before, that the Authority which my Lord
Bishop of Chalcedon challenges, is truly against our ancient Laws.

The 4. reason is, because there is no Law ancient or modern against
Catholic Episcopal Authority: for the ancient laws forbid an extraordinary
Tribunal, as that of Legates, and ordain only for Catholic times, when
there were true Episcopal tribunals, which they would not have disturbed by
extraordinary Tribunals, and so are rather in favor of usual Episcopal
Authority, as the Bishop of Chalcedons is, then any way against it; that they
are only against a new Tribunal, such as a Catholic Episcopal tribunal is
not.

For this reason I answer, it is the same with the former, and has been often
repeated; the often repetition of the same discovering the want of matter the
Divine has. The substance of the argument I answered fully before in the
answer to the 2. point of Temerity, where I showed this Tribunal, which he
pretends, to be new, and to be by many degrees more near a Legatiue, then an
Episcopal Tribunal, though indeed neither; and so not only extraordinary,
but most extraordinary. Here therefore I will only speak of that, which the
Divine decideth so plainly of my Lord of Chalcedons Tribunal, in saying the
ancient laws are rather in favor of usual Episcopal Authority, such as my
Lord Bishop of Chalcedons is* wherein I cannot but note how this Divine is a
little more free in auouching my Lord Bishops Tribunal, or power in foro
externo, then I believe my Lord Bishop himself or some of his more wary
Officers are, when they write, or speak to men of understanding.

For though my Lord Bishops words in his own Letter did seem very plain in
this point, as that he was delegated by his Holiness to an universality of
causes belonging to Ordinaries, and that he was made a Judge in prima
instantia; yet afterward in a certain Letter, to a Lady, which has been
seen under his own hand, his Lordship says, that concerning the new
Tribunal, which some say he has erected, it is a mere fiction, invented
without ground, for he never thought of erecting such a Tribunal, and that his
Authority over them, is merely spiritual; as the words of his Breue are, in
Spirituale bonum Catholicorum, to wit, to administer to them that Sacrament,
which they cannot have, but by a Bishop etc. And in conformity hereof, there
being a meeting appointed by some of the Clergy, and some of the Layty, and
Conference held concerning this Letter of my Lords to the Lady, those of the
said Clergy, that were there (and were like to know most of my Lord Bishops
mind) acknowledged; and conformably themselves said, that my Lord Bishop never
intended any such Tribunal. And it went so far, as that the Lay Gentlemen drew
a certain Letter to the same effect, in explication of his Lordships first
Letter, in which he said his meaning was mistake^, which his Lordship might
please to write to the Laity, expressing as much to the^, as he had done to the
Lady; which though it were no more then he had already written, and was
confessed by his own officers, yet he would not write it: for what reason I
know not.

Nay, this Divine himself in mayntayning this Tribunal, seems a little
contrary to himself. For in his first section, and 3. point of Passion, he
complayneth of the Gentlemen for stretching, as he says, my Lord Bishops words
upon the Te^ter hooks, in that they understood his Lordships words of an
Episcopal Tribunal, or power, in foro externo. Whereas, says he, the Bishop
speaks only of such Authority, as Ordinaries have, or can hane in their
Diocese, and which was sufficient to exact of Regulars, that they should ask
his approbation. And a little after: Where, says he, in all the Bishops
Letter, is there one word of temporal Authority, or of Authority over
temporal fortunes, or such as have been altered or directed by our Temporal
Princes? What word then of the Bishops enforced them to make this sense? None
surely but their own passion, which made them make this forced sense, this
forced inference. These are the Deuines own words: which I do not see well,
how he can reconcile with his words in this place. Wherefore, though I will not
take upon me to teach such a Divine, yet I may say he should have been better
advised, and agreed better upon his tale, both with himself and with others of
his own said, before he had fallen to write; and so perhaps he might have
saved himself all this needless labor of writing, and me the labor of
answearing; for neither he, nor any else can well tell what Authority they would
have for my Lord Bishop; only Authority they would have for him, and for
themselves: But what, or how, they cannot tell. For, feign they would have his
Lordship to have Authority of Ordinary: for without that, they cannot so well
compass their ends; nor with it neither, I may truly say. And yet they find
such main obstacles on the other side, making it not only difficult, but even
impossible, that they are feign for shame sake to deny all such pretenses. And
thence it is, that sometimes they say one thing, sometimes another. Sometimes
that he is Ordinary, sometimes that he has faculties only for the spiritual
good of Catholics, etc. And they are so nice and wary, when they speak with
people that understand things, or may make any use of their words, that one
cannot tell well, what they say; and yet they are more free of their tongue,
then their pen. For they will not give half that under their hands, which
they talk freely. But if they went upon a sure ground, and meant nothing but
well and fairly, what should all this need?

Well then; so it is, that the Divine does here challenge more Authority for
my Lord Bishop, to wit, a true Episcopal tribunal, then his Lordship does for
himself. For in his said Letter to the Lady under his own hand, he says it is
a fictio^: to which Letter I remit this man for answer to his 4. reason. After
these 4. substantial reasons to prove that the dangers are only pretended,
this Divine comes to answer that which the Lay men say in their Letter; that
the execution of this Episcopal Authority, allows no possibility of secrecy,
by asking, why not as well as the execution of Priestly function, who say mass,
preach, and communicate before many scores of men, women, and Children; whereas
to the Bishops Tribunal there come no children, few women, and not many men.
He asks moreover how the Bishop has gone over almost all England, and
confirmed many thousands with sufficient secrecy? How was secrecy kept in the
primitive Church? How is it now kept in Ireland and Holland?

To this I answer, first, that it is no wonder, that such men as this Divine,
relate the case of English Catholics elsewhere as they please to strangers,
when this Divine will tell men here at home such a tale as this is in writing.
Secondly I tell him, though he cannot but know it, the Execution of Episcopal
Authority in a Court, is of its own nature public. There must of necessity be
a Judge, and other Officers; there must be parties; there must be witnesses,
there must be writing; there must be records: some must be sometimes grieved;
some will complain, some will appeal. Is any of all this needful in hearing
of Mass, Sermons, or receiving of Sacraments? May not a man hear a Mass,
confess, and communicate without a Judge, a Summoner, a Notary, without an
accuser, a witness, without a writing etc? What then does this Divine mean to
bring such an argument? Suppose there be 10. persons at Mass, may there not be
one alone? Can a business be so dispatched iu^idically in a Bishops Court,
without writing, witness, or Officer? Nay again, suppose there must of
necessity be 20. at Mass, and a business in the Bishops Court might be
dispatched but with the priuity of 2. men, would not even this be more public
in regard the things must remain in writing, with note of place, time, and
other circumstances; or that one of the parties may be grieved, as it falls
out commonly, in matters of suite?

For the Secrecy of the Bishops going over a great part of England and
co^firming, I am full glad that he, and they have done so well with it, and
wish they may do so still. But for all that, it is not good bragging: and as
secret as it is, I know many a right good man, that would be loath to have it
so well known, when he has a Priest in his house, as it is known whersoeuer
almost his Lordship went: and the secrecy it seems, was so great in some
places, that there was a great complaint made in Parliament, to what bouldnes
the Papists were grown, to have a Bishop, to whom there was such resort in a
certain place in Staffordshire, where he confirmed many, and showed himself
in his Pontifical Ornaments.

Thirdly I answer, that suppose the Bishops going up and down and confirming
were as secret, and void of danger as this Divine would have it, what does it
make for his purpose? Which is to prove that a Bishops Tribunal allows as
much secrecy, as the exercise of Priestly function? For who doubts but the
Bishop may if he will, confirm a man as privately, as a Priest may communicate
him? Does it then follow, that he may with the same priuacy judge, and
determine a controversy between party and party? What manner of arguing then
is this?

Now for the Primitive Church, which our Divine speaks of, I said a word
before, and it is clear there is a great deal of difference. For that
persecution was more by fits, more violent for the time, but shorter; and in
the interim, there were such calmes as Christians had free resort to public
places of prayer and sacrifice, and houses deputed and dedicated for that use:
and that not only by a conniuency but even by public allowance of the
Emperors, restoring unto them their Churches, and permitting of free access
to them, and the Cemiteries or places of burial, where the bodies of the
Christians and Martyrs relics were buried and kept. There was an outward
appare^t distinction in habit and hair, between Clergy men and others. Where
has there been any thing like this, all this time of Schism in England? Have
not men enough to do to hear a Mass privately in a corner? Where is there a
Church to say Mass, or to preach, or an Oratory for me^ to meet and pray
together, or Churchyard for Catholics to bury their dead? Or where is there
a Priest, or Religious man that goes publicly in his habit, or with his
crown shaven? Would not any man count one half mad that should go so, because
they did so sometimes in the Primitive Church? What wonder then is it, if in
the Primitive Church Bishops kept their Tribunals, and Provincial Councils,
met with many scores of Bishops, as the Divine says? Though by his leave, they
met not so freely, nor exercised their Authority so much at all times; to wit,
in those hoate fittes of persecution. And what a wonder is it for our Divine
who must be supposed to have a little knowledge of the Ecclesiastical History,
to bob men here in the mouth, with the state of the Primitive Church?

The same is of Ireland and Holland. For Ireland, Catholic Bishops have still
continued in their several Seas, with their proper titles, heresy having never
taken so deep root there. But here it is well known, that when our Catholic
Bishops were suppressed, they, during their lives, forbear the exercise of that
power which they were in possession of; and the state of things being such as
it was and impossible to exercise Episcopal Authority: wherefore the Sea
Apostolic did not put any Bishop in their place, during the space of 60
years till of late, the state of things nothing changed but only that for
matters of life and death the laws were not so rigorously put in execution,
upon informatio^ of some men, who longed for Myters, as if the times were now
for it, Gregory the 15. of happy memory condescended to their importunity,
sending one with Title of a Bishop, but not with that full power, which
belongs to a Catholic Country: which experience shows to be more then the
times can well bear. What comparison then between Ireland, and England?

Now for Holland, though considering the littleness of persecution, they might
ten tims better have a Bishop there then we here; yet they have only a Bishop
with a foreign Title, and I believe with power far short of that which this
Divine would feign have for my Lord of Chalcedon. Where if they had Bishops,
and Bishops Courts as we have, such laws of ancient and late times as we
have, I doubt whether they would have even that. But to be brief, I say in a
word, that our Kingdom is more different from both Ireland, and Holland, then
they two are from perfect Catholic countries. And whereas this Divine
brings a place of Scripture for proof of the providence of God, thereby to
make men not so to stand upon secrecy, I may bring two to the contrary. One is
that of our Savior Math. 4. Non tentabis Dominum Deum tuum, thou shall not
tempt thy Lord God, as they do that put themselves into needless perils.
Another is that of our Savior also which he gave to his Apostles, when he sent
the^ to preach, Matthew. 10. Ecce ego mitto vos sicut oues in medio luporum:
estete ergo prude^tes sicut serpents, and simplices sicut columbae: Cauete
autem ab hominibus, tradent enim vos etc. Behold I send you as shep amiddest
wolves, be therefore prudent as serpents, and simple as doves: but beware of
men, for they will betray you etc. Which admonition is as proper for our
Country, and our times, as ever it was for any. And therefore notwithstanding
our Deuines confidence, I shall wish still, that with sincerity and zeal, men
join prudence, or else their zeal may do more harm then good. And we find by
experience, that the prudent secrecy of some has been a greater means of
preserving Catholic Religion in these hard times, the^ the ouer-hardy zeal
of others. And so much for the fourth Section.

SECT. V. That their cause of public disauowing the Bishops Authority is not
pretended, and feigned.
WHEREAS the Catholics in their Letter say, that it was unsafe for them to
have been silent so long toward his Lordship, so clayming and publishing his
Authority; this Divine says, that they pretend the cause of disauowing the
Bishops power of Ordinary, was the fear of danger of the State, if they had
not so done. Which to be merely feigned he proves by many reasons, all of
them almost alleged, and answered before. But as he alleges them here
again, so must I be feign to repeat the answers. The first is, because no
usual Authority of an Ordinary, which alone the Bishop claymeth, but at most
Extraordinary of Legates and such like, was forbidden by the ancient laws,
without the Princes approbation. I answer as before, that my Lord Bishops
Authority which he claymeth is not that usual Authority of an Ordinary, but
that extraordinary of Legates* and such like; as appears plainly by the
words of his own Letter; wherein he says, he is not Ordinary, Ordinario modo,
but Extraordinario, as Legates, Nu^tio's, and such like. Now that is usual
Authority for an Ordinary, which is had in the usual manner: therefore that
Authority which he claymeth, is that, which is forbidden by the aunicent laws.

The 2. reason, because those laws were made for Catholic times, and in
favor of Catholic Ordinaryes: not for herelicall times, and in favor of
heretical Ordinaries against Catholics. I answer; well, be it so. Does this
Divine think in his Conscience such an Answer would quit a man that should
stand at the bar for acknowledging of my Lord Bishops Ordinaryshippe, or
Iudicatiue Power? Sure he cannot think it; For though the law were made in a
Catholic time, when they little dreamed of such a change, as has been since;
yet now the times are changed, and Protestant Ordinaryes are come in place of
Catholics; all the power and privileges of the one conferred upon the other;
and the Law not repealed, are not men still liable? What with right, and what
with might, questionless, a man would be found guilty.

For his 3. reason, he says, he much suspecteth, that only priuity does not
make a man guilty, but grants it of acknowledgement or participation? But he
asks, what need they had, to take knowledge of such Authority? For, the
Bishop, he says, wrote but one Letter of this matter, which came to few hands,
and far fewer can be convinced to have seen it. I answer, that for the
priuity, though this Divine say he suspecteth that will not make a man guilty,
yet I presume he cannot be so bad a Lawyer as not to know that priuity in
matter of felony or treason makes a man accessory, if he but only know it,
and not discover it. If accessory, then certaynely guilty: and this is general
in all criminal matters without exception. Why then, should he make question in
this matter? Or taking knowledge of it, I would feign hear how could any man
avoid it? Suppose any man should have been questioned for acknow; ledgement of
his Lordships Authority, could he plead ignorance of his Lordships claim, it
being made, by a Letter written to all the Catholics of England, for their
satisfaction, and to let them know, what Authority he had? Would it seem
probable that any Catholic should not see, or hear of such a Letter? Now
that the Letter was but one, that it came to few hands; It is true, it was but
one: But that one was enough, and more then enough. For what he says, of the
Letters coming to few hands; I answer first, it seems by the matter and
manner of writing, to have been my Lord Bishops intention that it should come
to more. Secondly, it is well known, that there were more copies made, and
some of my Lords Clergy had the care speedily to diuulge it; so as it was
diuulged in some remote parts of England; at the very same time it was
published here. How then can this Divine say, the Letter came but to few men's
hands? And for being convinced to have seen it, in so public a thing as that
was, no man will stand to prove it, but presume it, as any man well may. For
what Catholic could be ignorant of it?

The 4. reason is, That many months before my Lord Bishop published his
Authority of Ordinary, these Gentlemen sent Interrogatories (as this Divine
terms them) unto him to have him declare whether he was Ordinary or no. So as
he says, they were rather desirous, he should declare himself to be Ordinary
then conceal it. It is true, Catholics saw many things they could not tell
what to make of; and so might be willing to know certainly, and from his
Lordship himself what Authority he had: but might not the answer have been
private, as the demands were? They were desirous to know, but not so, that all
the world must know, they knew; had they known in private, they might have
represented the inconueniency and dangers privately to my Lords consideration.
But his Lordship feared some such thing, and therefore made answer in such
public manner, as to carry the matter clear, without reply. But that put men
upon a greater necessity of reply. As for that which he says, that they seemed
desirous he should declare himself Ordinary, it is plain they desired it not,
but the clean contrary. But whatsoever it was that he pretended, they desired
to know it.

The fifth reason is, That the Bishop ever since his coming avouched himself
Ordinary, and till the matter of approbation of Regulars, his Ordinaryship was
not questioned, nor danger pretended; whereof, he says, they cannot deny, but
they had some priuity. I answer that here again the Divine forgets
himself, for he was angry before with Catholics, for understanding the
Bishops own words in his Letter so plainly of his Ordinaryship, and yet he
would have them take notice of ordinary uncertain reports. It is true
therefore that they heard sometimes speeches, as if he were Ordinary, but they
made not much account of them (for his predecessor was sometimes said to be
Ordinary also, and yet he never pretended any Authority over them, that they
could hear.) But when they heard of many things, which his Lordships Officers
did, and of peremptory, and Authoritatiue Letters which they writ, with the
Iudicatiue manner of proceeding of some Rural Deanes, and saw the very Patents
or Letters of institution of Archdeacons plainly signifying the same, then
they began to look about them, and to enquire a little more of that
Ordinaryshippe, what it meant, and whether my Lord of Chalcedon took himself
to have the same power, which Bishops had heretofore in Catholic times, and
so sent to his Lordship to know it from himself; so that all this while they
had no priuity of it, nor after, till his Lordship published it by his Letter,

The 6. reason: They gave this Letter to be sent to Rome, and as some say
(says he) long before they sent it to the Bishop, and desired the Bishop, that
it might be known abroad: Now, to what end was it sent to Rome, and desired to
be sent abroad, if it were made only for the state? I answer, that the Divine
with his (as some say) is egregiously mistaken in saying the Letter was sent to
Rome, before it was sent to the Bishop, for there be others that know better
then all his (some says) if there be any besides himself, which auerre the
contrary. Now for the demand why it was sent to Rome, and desired to be sent
abroad, if it were only made for the State? I demand again, where he finds
that it was made only for the state? If he mean that the chief reason of
writing it, was to declare the dangers and inconveniences which might fall upon
them from the state by acknowledgment and admittance of his Lordships pretended
Authority, it is true: but that is not all one, as to say, that it was made
only for the state. For it was made principally for his Lordship, and for
those, of whom his power, and the enlarging and diminishing thereof does
depend, to see; that considering the dangers and inconveniences, both his
Lordship might please to desist from such pretensions, and others forbear to
grant such power as was so dangerous, and so peiudiciall to Catholics. Now
what inconsequence was there in this to desire his Lordship to make it known
abroad? or fearing with themselves (for they expressed no such fear to him)
that he would not, they sent it by some other means? What a doughty reason
then is this, to prove the Catholics cause to be pretended, and feigned?

The 7. reason: When Father Campian came in, and made public challenge of
disputation in print, and proclamations were made against him, what Catholic
did publicly disauowe him, or his Authority, or faculties? My answer to this
is, that I see not what there is to answer; for what likeness can there be
imagined in this argument, save only the publiquenesse of Father Campians
challenge of disputation, and the publiquenesse of my Lord Bishops claim of
Authority? Which if it be sufficient, then I will make the Deuines argument a
little better for him, by asking, why Catholics do not disauow al Letters, or
Breues of the Sea Apostolic nay al books written of Controversies, in defense
of the Catholic Faith for these are public? Now, I assure my self there is
no Divine in the world so dull, but can easily find a great deal of difference
between these two last, and my Lord Bishops Letter, though one be much more
like the instance of Father Campians challenge. But because the Divine perhaps
will not be willing to find a difference, I will do it for him. It was not
Father Campians doing nor meaning to publish any such challenge, but made two
Copies of his writing, one to have about himself in case he should be taken
suddenly, before he should have time to do any thing, of what he came for: and
another in a friends hand, with order to publish it when he should be taken, if
by chance, as it was most like, his adversaries should suppress that which he
should have about him. But his friend not observing this order, goes and
publishes it of himself. So the publishing was not his doing. Besides it was a
particular act, which concerned himself only, without relation to
Catholics, no matter of Authority, or jurisdiction either in foro externo or
interno, but a necessary defense of the Catholic faith at that time, no
exercise so much as of Priestly function, but a thing which any Layman, for the
thing it self, might do. What need then of disauowing his Authority, or
Faculties for that matter?

Now, my Lord Bishops Letter was intended to be public, as being written to
Catholics, so that they could not but know of it, having also for the matter
particular relation to them; the subject of the Letter an authority of an
outward Court or Tribunal, not necessary at this time, nor convenient for the
defense or propagation of the Catholic faith, but offensive to the State,
dangerous to Catholics, as being contrary to the ancient, and modern laws;
grievous in regard of many inconveniences, which it brings with it; and the
very knowledge, much more admittance whereof, brings danger. What then does
this Divine talk of disauowing Authority and facultyes such as Fa. Campian
had, as if any man denied them to my Lord Bishop? No, no man denies, or
disauoweth the^, or any thing else of my Lord Bishops, but only they desire not
to be pressed to the admittance of that Authority of Ordinary, which without
any furtherance, or any the least necessity of their spiritual good may bring
many temporal dangers upon the^, and put them into more straites, then they
have been this time of persecution. Which truly, is but a very ordinary, and
reasonable request. There is no affinity therefore between my Lord Bishops
claim of Authority, and F. Campians challenge of Disputation.

The eight reason. It is more notorious, that there are many hundred of Priests
then one Bishop, and more severe laws against any priuity or participatio^
with them, then for the Bishop; and yet these men, says he, make no public
disauow of Priests Authority, nor account themselves unsafe for having been so
long silent. I answer, that the reason is idle. Suppose there were as many
thousands of Priests, as there are hundreds, nay if there were as many Bishop
as there are Priests, if they had not the power of Ordinary what were that to
our purpose, the question being of an Ordinary with power in foro externo? Now
for the danger of a Priest or Bishop whether greater, is impertinent as long
as the one is necessary, the other not. Besides that, such Bishoply Authority
with the dangers, and inco^ueniences proper to it self, brings with it the
dangers of Priestly Authority. The Divine could not, but know thus much of
himself, and yet he must put down this reason to make number.

The ninth reason; None but these 3. and some few of their adherents apprehend
this danger of being silent, touching the Bishops Authority, and yet many have
more to loose then they; and a Noble man told them by public Letter, that
Timebant, vbi non erat timor. I answer, for the number, and worth of the
Persons that apprehend this danger, there is enough said before: and the thing
is so well known, that surely this Divine would not have ventured his credit
by speaking so apparent an untruth, but that he concealed his name. For the
Noble man's saying, I answer it with the wisemans saying, sapiens timet, and
declinat a malo: stultus transilit, and confidit. The wiseman fears and
auoydeth evil; the fool leapeth over and consideth.

The 10. reason; The Monks made claim of a far greater Authority, and far
more dangerous to the Laity, and in a more public manner by many printed
copyes, and yet these men do not go about to disauowe the same publicly. I
answer, that till my Lord Bishops Letter no man heard of any such matter from
the Benedictines, or any else. Therefore if there were any danger in their
claim we may plainly thank my Lord Bishops Letter, as the cause thereof.
Secondly, the same Letter whereby the Catholics desired to be excused from my
Lord of Chalcedons Ordinaryship, is sufficient against that, or any other
book, that shall claim such Authority, as things stand here in England, and
therefore there needs no other disclayming. Now for their claim, I do not
see that for the present they exact any such matter of subjection from
Catholics, but only say, they keep a kind of possession of their ancient
right, against the time shall serve for it; and that if they would stand upon
it, they might better do it then my Lord of Chalcedon. Now what offense or
danger is this to Catholics? And for the publiquenesse, the book is printed
indeed, but no way directed to Catholics, but to their own Religious. But
this Divine, that in this place thinks much, that me^ do not disauow this
Book, I presume, was privy to another Paper delivered up at Rome, wherein it
was said, that the Layty were much offended at such a vast claim: how do these
hang together? But that was for the purpose in that place, and this, it
seems, in this; and he perhaps thought the same man should never come to see
both the papers. But as close as that and such like papers are carried by this
Divine, and his friends, they come to light one way or other, little to their
credit, that care so little for truth in what they say.

The last reason, is delivered by the Divine in these words: Lastly what needed
they to have ince^sed the state against the Bishop? therefore these pretenses
are ad excusandas excusationes in peccati^: whereas the true cause was to help
some Regulars to banish Episcopal power out of England. This is the Deuines
Conclusion. Whereto I answer; that for a conclusion I did expect a concluding
reason, but it is so far from concluding, that I see no show of reason. For
how does the asking of this question, what they needed to incense the State
against the Bishop, prove that the cause of writing their letter, was
pretended? The Divine might have made this a motive, which might have moved
them not to write their Letter to the Bishop in that manner: but to make it an
argument to prove, that their pretense was faygned, I see not with what Logic
it can stand* But now for the matter, it is a strange thing, that a Divine
should have no more scruple then to charge me^ of known virtue, and wisdom;
with incensing the State against the Bishop. Were it not more time for him to
study his cases, and examine well his Conscience, then to stand censuring men
so deeply, and so injuriously? What do they say tending this way? That the
erecting of a new tribunal, will move the State to a more exact search etc?
For this, I have answered before, and showed, that this is said to the clean
contrary end; to wit, to decline the Search and Persecution, which his
Lordships claim would bring upon himself and others; and by their saying to
appease that which his Lordships doing would incense. Which if it seem
prejudicial unto him, is wholly besides their meaning and he may th^nke
himself for it. For they in this, do but defend themselves, cum moderamine
inculpatae tutclae.

Therefore to answer this Deuines applied place of Scripture, of excuses in
sins, I may now ask him in behalf of these Gentlemen, and all others whose
letter it was: Quis ex vobis arguet (...) de peccato? St male locutus sum,
testimonium perhibe de malo: Si autem been, quid ^ecaedis? Who of you will
accuse me of sin? If I have spoken ill, bear witness of the ill: but if
well, why do thou strike me? And for the last word of all, that the true
cause was, to help some Regulars to banish Episcopal power out of England,
being but a bitter gal belike of a distempred stomach to end withal, and
deserving rather pity, then answer, I let it alone: wishing this Divine the
same measure of Charity, which he desires of Authority, both for his own
good, and the quiet of others, boing more his friend therein, then himself.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
GOod Reader. This Treatise was written two years ago, when the foresaid
Judgment of this Divine, began to go up and down; but that other Books
coming then out, and ministering other occasion of Discourse, the Author
thought better to let it alone; as he would have done wholly, but that now of
late the same Letter of the Catholics, being a new published, with A
Declaration to the same effect, some of the other side, began to repeat their
former ungrounded Discourses. For rectifying whereof, and stating the Question
aright, the Author has thought fit, now to publish the same.

FINIS.

