A Curious Treatise OF The Nature and Quality OF CHOCOLATE.

Written in Spanish by ANTONIO COLMENERO, Doctor in Physic and Surgery.

And put into English by Don Diego de Vades-forte.

Imprinted at London by J. Oaks, dwelling in Little St. Bartholmewes. 1640.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord Viscount CONWAY and KILLULTAH; Baron of
RAGLEY; Lord Marshall of the Army, and Privy Counselor of IRELAND; and one of
the Counsel of War to His MAJESTY of GREAT BRITAIN.
MY LORD,
THis Stranger, who has newly learnt the English Tongue, dares not venture
himself in Public, without a Patronage; which, with all humbleness, he
entreats of Your Lordship. The great Affection, Your Lordship has shown to
the Spanish Language; and the Benignity, wherewith You are pleased to
entertain whatsoever relisheth of Art, or Ingenuity; makes him hope, You will
not refuse Your Favor and Protection to one of that Nation. Nor knows he,
where to shelter himself with so much safety; the Eminence of Your Person, and
Judgment, being of power to secure him, from all petulant and malicious
Exceptions. Be pleased then, my Lord, to receive him with Favor: So may those
Excellent, and Natural Beauties of this happy Isle (who shall have either
Health or Pleasure, from this Confection) be ever serene, and grateful to Your
Lordship; presaging increase of Honor, and all Felicity, answerable to the
humble Devotion, and hearty Prayers of

Your Lordships most obedient, and obliged Servant Don Diego V'ades-forte.

The Allowance of Melchor de Lara, Physician General for the Kingdom of
Spain.
I Doctor Melchor de Lara Physician General for the Kingdom of Spain, at the
command of Don John de Velasco, and Asebedo, Vicar General of Madrid, have
seen this Treatise of Chocolate, composed by Antonio Colmenero of Ledesma;
which is very learned, and curious; and therefore it ought to be Licensed for
the Press; it containing nothing contrary to good Manners; and it cannot but
be very pleasing to those, who are affected to Chocolate. In testimony whereof,
I have subscribed my Name, in Madrid the 23. day of August. 1631.

Melchor de Lara.

The Testimonial of John de Mena, Doctor and Physician to the King of Spain.
I John de Mena, Physician to his Majesty, and one of the Counsel General of
the Inquisition, have seen this Treatise of Chocolate (composed by Doctor
Antonio Colmenero of Ledesma) by command of the Supreme Royal Court of
Justice: which contains nothing contrary to good Manners, and the Subject is
very learnedly handled, and with great Judgment; and no doubt, but it will
give much pleasure and content to all those, who are affected to Chocolate; and
therefore may be printed: And in confirmation of this truth, I have hereto
subscribed my Name the 17. of September. 1631.

John de Mena Doctor in Physic.

To the Reader.
THe number is so great of those, who, in these times, drink Chocolate, that
not only in the Indies, where this kind of Drink has its orignall; but it
is also much used in Spain, Italy, and Flanders, and particularly at the
Court. And many do speak diversely of it, according to the benefit, or hurt,
they receive from it: Some saying, that it is stopping: Others, and those the
greater part, that it makes one fat: Others, that the use of it strengthens the
stomach: Others, that it heats, and burns them: And others say, that although
they take it every hour, and in the Dog-dayes, yet they find themselves well
with it. And therefore my desire is, to take this pains, for the pleasure, and
profit of the public; endeavoring to accommodate it to the content of all,
according to the variety of those things, where with it may be mixed; that so
every man may make choice of that, which shall be most agreeable to his
disposition. I have not seen any, who has written any thing, concerning this
drink; but only a Physician of Marchena, who (as it seems) writ only by
Relation; holding an opinion, that the Chocolate is stopping, because that
Cacao (the principal Ingredient of which it is made) is cold, and dry. But
because this only reason, may not have power to keep some from the use of it,
who are troubled with Opilations. I think fit to defend this Confection, with
Philosophical Reasons, against any, whosoever will condemn this Drink, which
is so wholesome, and so good, knowing how to make the Paste in that manner,
that it may be agreeable to diverse dispositions, in the moderate drinking of
it. And so, with all possible brevity, I shall distinguish and divide this
Treatise into four points, or Heads. In the first place I shall declare, what
Chocolate is; and what are the Qualities of Cacao, and the other Ingredients of
this Confection; where I shall treat of the Receipt set down by the aforesaid
Author of Marchena, and declare my opinion concerning the same. The second
point shall treat of the Quality, which resulteth out of the mixture of these
Simples, which are put into it. In the third place, the manner of Compounding;
and how many ways they use to drink it in the Indies. In the fourth, and last
place, I shall treat of the Quantity; and how it ought to be taken; at what
Time; and by what Persons.

The first Point.
COncerning the first Point, I say, that Chocolate is a Name of the Indians;
which in our vulgar Castilian, we may call a certain Confection, in which
(amongst other Ingredients) the principal Basis, and Foundation, is the Cacao;
of whose Nature and Quality it is necessary first to treat: And therefore I
say, according to the common received opinion, that it is cold, and dry, a
praedominio; that is to say, that though it be true, that every Simple
contains in it the Qualities of the four Elements, in the action, and
re-action, which it has in it, yet there results another distinct Quality,
which we call Complexion.

This Quality, or Complexion, which arises of this Mixture, is not always
one, and the same; neither has it the effect, in all the mixtures, but they
may be varied nine ways; four Simple, from whence one only quality does
abound; and four Compounded, from whence two Symbolizing qualities are
predominant, and one other, which we call ad pondus, which is of all these
foresaid qualities, which are in aequilibrio, that is to say in equal measure
and degree.

Of all these, the Complexion of Cacao is composed, since there arise two
qualities, which are cold, and dry; and in the substance, that rules them, has
it restringent and obstructive, of the nature of the Element of the Earth. And
then, as it is a Mix, and not a simple Element, it must needs have parts
correspondent to the rest of the Elements; and particularly, it partakes (and
that, not a little) of those, which correspond with the Element of Air, that
is, Heat and Moisture, which are governed by the Unctuous parts; there being
drawn out of the Cacao much Butter, which, in the Indies I have seen drawn
out of it, for the Face, by the Criollas.

It may Philosophically be objected, in this manner: Two contrary Qualities,
and Disagreeing, cannot be, in gradu intenso, in one and the same Subject:
Cacao is cold and dry, in predominency: Therefore, it cannot have the
qualities contrary to those; which are Heat, and Moisture. The first
Proposition is most certain, and grounded upon good Philosophy: The second is
consented unto, by all: The third, which is the Conclusion, is regular.

It cannot be denied, but that the Argument is very strong, and these reasons
being considered by him of Marchena, have made him affirm, that Chocolate is
Obstructive; it seeming to be contrary to Philosophy, that it there should be
found Heat and Moisture, in gradu intenso; and to be so likewise in Cold and
Dry.

To this, there are two things to be answered: One, that he never saw the
experience of drawing out the Butter, which I have done; and that when the
Chocolate is made without adding any thing to the dried Powder, which is
incorporated, only by beating it well together, and is united, and made into a
Paste, which is a sign that there is a moist, and glutinous part, which, of
necessity, must correspond with the Element of Air.

The other reason, we will draw from Philosophy; affirming that, in the Cacao,
there are different Substances. In the one, that is to say, in that, which is
not so fat, it has a greater quantity of the Oily, then of the earthy
substance; and in the fatter parts, it has more of the earthy than of the Oily
substance. In these there is Heat and Moisture in predominancy and in the other
cold and dry.

Notwithstanding that it is hard to be believed, that in one and the same
substance, and so little of the Cacao, it can have substances so different: To
the end that it may appear more easy, clear, and evident, first we see it in
the Rubarbe, which has in it hot and soluble parts, and parts which are
Binding, Cold and Dry which have a virtue to strengthen, bind, and stop the
looseness of the Belly: I say also, that he that sees, and considers the
steel, so much of the Nature of the earth, as being heavy, thick, cold, and
dry; it seems to be thought unproper for the caring of Opilations, but rather
to be apt, to increase them; and yet it is given for a proper remedy against
them.

This difficulty is cleared thus, that though it be true, that it has much of
the Earthy part; yet it has also parts of Sulphur, and of Quicksilver, which
do open, and disopilate; neither does it so, until it be helped by Art, as it
is ground, stirred, and made fine, in the preparing of it; the Sulphurous
parts, and those of Quicksilver, being thin, active, and penetrative, they
mingle, at the last with those parts, which are Earthy and astringent:
Insomuch, that they being mingled after this manner, one with another, we
cannot now say, that the steel is astringent, but rather, that it is
penetrative, attenuating, and opening. Let us prove this Doctrine by
Authorities; and let the first be from Gallen, lib. 3. of the qualities of
Simples, cap. 14. Where, first of all he teaches, that almost all those
Medicines, which, to our sense, seem to be simple, are notwithstanding
naturally Compounded, containing in themselves contrary qualities; and that is
to say, a quality to expel, and to retain; to incrassate, and attenuate; to
rarifie, and to condense. Neither are we to wonder at it, it being understood,
that in every foresaid Medicine, there is a quality to heat, and to cool; to
moisten and to dry. And whatsoever Medicine it be, it has in it, thick, and
thin parts; rare, and dense; soft, and hard. And in the fifteenth Chapter
following, in the same Book, he puts an example of the Broth of a Cock,
which moves the Belly; and the Flesh has the virtue to bind. He puts also the
example of the Aloes, which if it be washed, loses the Purgative virtue; or
that which it has, is but weak.

That this differing virtue, and faculty, is found in diverse substances, or
parts of simple Medicaments, Gallen shows in the first Book of his simple
Medicines, and the seventeenth Chapter, bringing the example of Milk; in
which, three substances are found, and separated, that is to say, the substance
of Cheese, which has the virtue to stop the Flux of the Belly; and the
substance of Whay, which is Purging; and Butter, as it is expressed in the said
Gallen, Cap. 15. Also we find in Wine which is in the Must, three substances,
that is to say, earth, which is the chief; and a thinner substance, which is
the flower, and may be called the scum, or froath: and a third substance, which
we properly call Wine; And every one of these substances, contains in it self
diverse qualities, and virtues; in the color, in the smell, and in other
Accidents.

Aristotle in the fourth Book of the Meteors and the first Chapter, treating
of Putrefaction, he found the same substances; and in the second Chapter next
following, where he that is curious, may read it. And also by the doctrine of
Galen, and of Aristotle, diverse substances are attributed to every of the mixed
under one and the same form and quantity; which is very conformable to reason,
if we consider, that every Aliment, be it never so simple, begets, and
produces in the liver, four humors, not only differing in temper, but also
in substance; and begets more or less of that humor, according as that
Aliment has more or fewer parts corresponding to the substance of that humor,
which is most engendered. And so in cold diseases, we give warm nourishment;
and cold nourishment, in hot diseases.

From which evident examples, and many others, which we might produce to this
purpose, we may gather, that, when we grind, and stir the Cacao, the diverse
parts, which Nature has given it, do artificially, and intimately mix
themselves one with an other; and so the uuctuous, warm, and moist parts,
mingled with the earthy (as we have said of the steel) represses, and leaves
them not so binding, as they were before; but rather with a mediocritie, more
inclining to the warm, and moist temper of the Air, then to the cold and dry
of the Earth; as it does appear when it is made fit to drink; that you scarce
give it two turns with the Molinet when there rises a fatty scumme: by which
you may see, how much it partaketh of the Oily part.

From which doctrine I gather, that the Author of Marchena, was in an error;
who, writing of Chocolate, says, that it causes Opilations, because Cacao is
astringent; as if that astriction were not corrected, by the intimate mixing of
one part with an other, by means of the grinding, as is said before. Besides,
it having so many ingredients, which are naturally hot, it must of necessity
have this effect; that is to say, to open, attenuate, and not to bind, and,
indeed, there is no cause of bringing more examples, or producing more reasons,
for this truth, then that which we see in the Cacao it self: which, if it be
not stirred, and compounded, as aforesaid, to make the Chocolate. But eating of
it, as it is in the fruit, as the Criollas eat it in the Indies, it does
notably obstruct, and cause stoppings; for no other cause but this, that the
diverse substances which it contains, are not perfectly mingled by the
mastication only, but require the artificial mixture, which we have spoken of
before.

Besides, our Adversary should have considered, and called to his memory, the
first rudiments of Philosophy, That, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter, non valet consequentia; As it is not enough to say, the
Black-a-Moore is white, because his teeth are white; for he may be black,
though he have white teeth; and so it is not enough io say, that the Cacao is
stopping; and therefore the Confection, which is made of it, is also stopping.

The Tree, which bears this fruit, is so delicate; and the earth, where it
grows, is so extreme hot, that to keep the tree from being consumed by the
Sun, they first plant other trees; and when they are grown up, to a good
height, then they plant the Cacao-trees; that when it first shows it self
above the ground, those trees, which are already grown, may shelter it from
the Sun; and the fruit does not grow naked, but ten or twelve of them are in
one Gorde or Codde, which is of the bigness of a great black Fig, or bigger,
and of the same form, and color.

There are two sorts of Cacao; the one is common, which is of a gray color,
inclining toward red; the other is broader, and bigger, which they call
Patlaxte, and this is white, and more drying; whereby it causes watchfulnes,
and drives away sleep, and therefore it is not so useful, as the ordinary.
This shall suffice to be said of the Cacao.

And as for the rest of the ingredients, which make our Chocolaticall
Confection, there is notable variety; because some do put into it black
Pepper, and also Tauasco; which is not proper, because is is so hot and dry;
but only for one, A red root like Madder.
who has a very cold Liver. And of this opinion, was a certain Doctor of the
Universite of Mexico, of whom a Religious man of good credit told me, that he
finding the ordinary round Pepper was not fit to bring his purpose about; and
to the end, he might discover, whether the long red pepper were more proper, he
made trial upon the liver of a Sheep; and putting the ordinary pepper on one
side, and the red pepper Chile.
on the other, after 24. hours, the part, where the ordinary pepperlay, was
dried up; and the other part continued moist, as if nothing had bin thrown
upon it.

The Receipt of him who wrote at Marchena, is this: Of Cacaos, 700; of white
Sugar, one pound and a half; Cinnamon, 2. ounces; of long red pepper, 14. of
Cloves, half an ounce: Three Cods of the Logwood or Campeche tree; or in stead
of that, the weight of 2. Reals, or a shilling of Annisseeds; as much of
Achiote, as will give it the color, which is about the quantity of a
Hasell-nut. Some put in Almons, kernels of Nuts, and Orenge-flower-water.

Concerning this Receipt, I shall first say, This shoe will not fit every
foot; but for those, who have diseases, or are inclining to be infirm, you
may either add, or take away, according to the necessity, and temperature of
every one: and I hold it not amiss, that Sugar be put into it, when it is
drunk, so that it be according to the quantity I shall hereafter set down.
And sometimes they make Tablets of the Sugar, and the Chocolate together; which
they do only to please the Pallats, as the Dames of Mexico do use it; and
they are there sold in shops, and are confected and eaten like other
sweetmeats. For the Cloves, which are put into this drink, by the Author
aforesaid, the best Writers of this Composition use them not; peradventure upon
this reason: that although they take away the ill savor of the mouth, they
bind; as a learned Writer has expressed in these verses:

Foetorem emendant or is Cariophila foedum;
Constring unt ventrem, primaque membrajuvant.
And because they are binding (and hot and dry in the third degree) they must
not be used, though they help the chief parts of Concoction, which are the
stomach, and the Liver, as appears by the Verses before recited.

The husks or Cods of Logwood, or Campeche, are very good, and smell like
Fennel; and every one puts in of these, because they are not very hot; though
it excuse not the putting in of Annis-seed, as says the Author of this
Receipt; for there is no Chocolate without it, because it is good for many cold
diseases, being hot in the third degree; and to temper the coldness of the
Cacao; and that it may appear, it helps the indisposition of cold parts, I
will cite the Verses of one, curious in this Art:

Morbosos renes, vesicam, guttura, vuluam,
Intestina, iecur, cumque lyene caput
Confortat, varijsque Anisum subdita mortis
Membra: istud tantam vim leve semen habet.
The quantity of a Nut of the Achiote is too little to color the quantity made
according to his Receipt; and therefore, Tabasco.
he that makes it, may put it in, as much as he thinks fit.

Those, who add Almons, and Nuts, do not ill; because they give it more body
and substance then Maiz, or Paniso, which others use; and for my part, I should
always put it in to A grain like Millet
Chocolate, for Almonds (besides what I have said of them before) are
moderately hot, and have a thin juice; but you must not use new Almons, as a
learned Author says in these Verses.

Dat modice calidum dulcisque Amigdalasuccum,
Et tenuem; inducunt damna nova.
And the small Nuts are not ill for our purpose; for they have almost the
temper, which the Almons have; only because they are dryer, they come nearer
the temper of Choler; and do therefore strengthen the Belly, and the Stomach,
being dried: for so they must be used for the Confection; and they preserve the
head from those vapors, which rise from the Belly: as it appears by the said
Author in these Verses.

Bilis Avellanamsequitur* sedroborat aluum
Ventris, and a fumis liberat assacaput.
And therefore they are proper for such as are troubled with ventuosities, and
Hypochondriacall vapors, which offend the brain, and there cause such
troublesome dreams, and sad imaginations.

Those who mix Maiz, or Paniso, in the Chocolate do very ill; because those
grains do beget a very melancholy Humor: as the same Author expresses in
these verses.

Crassa melancholicum praestant tibi Panica succum
Siccant, si ponas membra, geiantque foris.
It is also apparently windy; and those which mix it in this Confection, do it
only for theit profit, by increasing the quantity of the Chocolate; because
every Fanega or measure of Maiz, or Indian Wheat.
Grani containing about a Bushel and a half, is sold for eight shillings, and
they sell this Confection for four shillings a pound, which is the ordinary
price of the Chocolate.

The Cinnamon is hot and dry in the third degree; it provokes Urine, and helps
the Kidneys and Reins of those who are troubled with cold diseases; and it is
good for the eyes; and in effect, it is cordial; as appears by the Author of
these verses.

Commoda and urinae Cynamomum and renibus affert;
Lumina clarificat, dira venenafugat.
The Achiote has a piercing attenuating quality; as appears by the common
practice of the Physicians in the Indies, experienced daily in the effects of
it, who do give it to their Patients, to cut, and attenuate the gross
humors, which do cause shortness of breath, and stopping of urine; and so it
may be used for any kind of Opilations; for we give it for the stoppings, which
are in the breast, or in the Region of the belly, or any other part of the Body.

And concerning the long red Peper, there are four sorts of it. One is called
Chilchotes: the other very little, which they call Chilterpin; and these two
kinds, are very quick and biting. The other two are called Tonalchiles, and
these are moderately hot; for they are eaten with bread, as they eat other
fruits, and they are of a yellow color; and they grow only about the Towns,
which are in, and adjoining to the Lake of Mexico. The other Pepper is called
Chilpaclagua, which has a broad husk; and this is not so biting as the first;
nor so gentle as the last: and is that, which is usually put into the Chocolate.

There are also other ingredients, which are used in this Confection. One
called Mechasuchil; and another which they call Vinecaxtli, which in the
Spanish they call Orejuelas, which are sweet smelling Flowers, Aromaticall and
hot. And the Mechasuchil has a Purgative quality; for in the Indies they make
a purging potion of it. In stead of this, in Spain they put into the
Confection, powder of Roses of Alexandria, for opening the Belly.

I have spoken of all these Ingredients, that every one may make choice of
those which please him best, or are most proper for his infirmities.

The second Point.
AS concerning the second point, I say, as I have said before, that though it
be true, that the Cacao is mingled with all these Ingedients, which are hot;
yet there is to be a greater quantity of Cacao; then of all the rest of the
Ingredients, which serve to temper the coldness of the Cacao: Just as when we
seek, of two Medicines of contrary qualities, to compound one, which shall be
of a modera te temper: In the same manner does result the same action and
re-action of the cold parts of the Cacao, and of the hot parts of the other
ingredients, which makes the Chocolate of so moderate a quality, that it
differs very little from a mediocrity; and when there is not put in any
ordinary pepper, or Cloves, but only a little Annisseede (as I shall show
hereafter) we may boldly say, that it is very temperate. And this may be proved
by reason, and experience: (supposing that which Gallen says, to be true, that
every mixed medicine, warmeth the cold, and cools the hot; bringing the
example of Oil of Roses.) By experience, I say, that in the Indies (as is the
custom of that Country) I coming in a heat to visit a sick person, and
asking water to refresh me, they persuaded me to take a *Draught of Chocolate;
which quenched my thirst: and in the morning (if I Hicara; the shell of a Nut to
drink in.
took it fasting) it did warm and comfort my stomach. Now let us prove it by
reason. We have already proved, that all the parts of the Cacao are not cold.
For we have made it appear that the unctuous parts, which are many, be all
hot, or temperate: then, though it be true, that the quantity of the Cacao is
greater than of all the rest of the Ingredients, yet the cold parts are at the
most, not halse so many as the hot; and if for all this they should be more,
yet by stirring, and mingling of the warm unctuous parts, they are much
qualified. And, on the other side, it being mixed with the other Ingredients,
which are hot in the second and third degree, being the predominant quality, it
must needs be brought to a mediocrity. Like as two men, who shake hands, the
one being hot, and the other cold, the one hand borrowes heat, and the other is
made colder; and in conclusion, neither hand retains the cold, or heat it had
before, but both of them remain more temperate. So like wise two men, who go
to wrestle, at the first they are in their full vigor and strength; but after
they have strugled a while, their force lessens by degrees, till at last they
are both much weaker, than when they began to wrestle. And Aristotle was also
of this opinion in his fourth Book of the Nature of Beasts, cap. 3. Where he
says, that every Agent suffers with the patient; as that which cuts, is made
dull by the thing it cuts; that which warmes, cooles it self; and that which
thrusts, or forces forward, is in some sort driven back it self.

From whence I gather that it is better to use Chocolate, after it has been
made some time, a Month at the least. I believe this time to be necessary, for
breaking the contrary qualities of the several Ingredients, and to bring the
Drink to a moderate temper. For, as it always falls out at the first, that
every contrary will have it predominancy, and will work his own, Nature not
liking well to be heated and cooled, at the same time. And this is the cause
why Gallen in his twelfth Book of Method, does advise not to use Philonium,
till after a year, or, at the least, six months; because it is a composition
made of Opium (which is cold in the fourth degree) and of Pepper, and other
Ingredients, which are hot in the third degree. This Theorum, and Doctrine, is
made good by the practice, which some have made, of whom I have asked, what
Chocolate did best agree with them: and they have affirmed, that the best is
that which has been made some months; and that the new does hurt by
loosening the Stomach; And; in my opinion, the reason of it is, that the
unctuous or fat parts, are not altogether corrected, by the earthy parts of the
Cacao. And this I shall thus prove; for, as I shall declare hereafter, if you
make the Chocolate boil, when you drink it, the boiling of it divides the fat
and oily part; and that makes a relaxation in the Stomach in the old
Chocolate, as well as if it were new.

So that I conclude in this second point, that the Chocolaticall Consection is
not so cold as the Cacao, nor so hot as the rest of the Ingredients; but there
results from the action and re-action of these Ingredients, a moderate temper
which may be good, both for the cold and hot stomachs, being taken moderately,
as shall be declared hereafter; and it having been made a month at the least;
as is already proved. And so I know not, why any man having made experience of
this Confection (which is composed, as it ought to be, for every particular)
should speak ill of it. Besides, where it is so much used, the most, if not
all, as well in the Indies, as in Spain, find, it agrees well with them. He of
Marchena had no ground in saying, that it did cause Opilations. For, if it were
so, the Liver being obstructed, it would extenuate its subject; and by
experience; we see to the contrary, that it makes fat; the reason whereof I
shall show hereafter. And this shall suffice for the second Point.

The third Point.
HAving treated in the first point, of the definition of Chocolate, the quality
of the Cacao, and of the other Ingredients; and in the second Point, of the
Complexion, which results from the mixture of them; There remains now in the
third point, to show the way how to mingle them: And first I will bring the
best Receipt, and the most to the purpose, that I could find out; although it
be true which I have said, that one Receipt cannot be given, which shall be
proper for all; that is to be understood of those, who are sick; for those
that are strong, and in health, this may serve: and for the other (as I have
said in the Conclusion of the first Point) every one make choice of the
Ingredients, as they may be useful, to this, or that part of his body.

The Receipt is this.
TO every 100. Cacaos, you must put two cods of the Chiles;
long red Pepper, of which I have spoken before, and are called, in the Indian
Tongue, Chilparlagua; and in stead of those of the Indies, you may take those
of Spain, which are broadest, and least hot. One handful of Annis-seed
Orejuelas, which are otherwise called Vinacaxlidos: and two of the flowers,
called Mechasuehil, if the Belly be bound. But in stead of this, in Spain, we
put in six Roses of Alexandria beat to Powder: One Cod of Campeche, or
Logwood: Two Drams of Cinnamon; Almons, and Hasle-Nuts, of each one Dozen: Of
white Sugar, half a pound: Of Achiote, enough to give it the color. And if
you cannot have those things, which come from the Indies, you may make it with
the rest.

The way of Compounding.
THe Cacao, and the other Ingredients must be beaten in a Mortar of Stone, or
ground upon a broad stone, which the Indians call Metate, and is only made for
that use: But the first thing that is to be done, is to dry the Ingredients,
all except the Achiote; with care that they may be beaten to powder, keeping
them still in stirring, that they be not burnt, or become black; and if they
be over-dried, they will be bitter, and lose their virtue. The Cinnamon, and the
long red Pepper are to be first beaten, with the Annis-seed; and then beat the
Cacao, which you must beat by a little and, little, till it be all powdered;
and sometimes turn it round in the beating, that it may mix the better: And
every one of these Ingredients, must be beaten by it self; and then put all
the Ingredients into the Vessel, where the Cacao is; which you must stir
together with a spoone, and then take out that Paste, and put it into the
Mortar, under which you must lay a little fire, after the Confection is made.
But you must be very careful, not to put more fire, than will warm it, that
the unctuous part do not dry away. And you must also take care, to put in the
Achiote in the beating; that it may the better take the color. You must Searse
all the Ingredients, but only the Cacao; and if you take the shell from the
Cacao, it is the better; and when you shall find it to be well beaten, and
incorporated (which you shall know by the shortness of it) then with a spoone
take up some of the Paste, which will be almost liquid; and so either make it
into Tablets; or put it into Boxes, and when it is cold it will be hard. To
make the Tablets, you must put a spoonefull of the paste upon a piece of paper,
the Indians put it upon the leaf of a Planten-tree; where, being put into the
shade, it grows hard; and then bowing the paper, the Tablet falls off, by
reason of the fatness of the paste. But if you put it into any thing of earth,
or wood, it sticks fast, and will not come off, but with scraping, or breaking.
In the Indies they take it two several ways: The one, being the common way,
is to take it hot, with Atolle, which was the Drink of the Ancient Indians
(the Indians call Atolle pappe, made of the flower of Maiz, and so they mingle
it with the Chocolate; and that the Atolle may be more wholesome, they take off
the Husks of the Maiz, which is windy, and melancholy; and so there remains
only the best and most substantial part.) Now, to return to the matter, I
say, that the other Modern drink, which the Spaniards use so much, is of two
sorts. The one is, that the Chocolate, being dissolved with cold water, and the
scumme taken off, and put into another Vessel, the remainder is put upon the
fire, with Sugar; and when it is warm, then power it upon the Scumme you took
off before, and so drink it. The other is to warm the water; and then, when
you have put it into a pot, or dish, as much Chocolate as you think fit, put
in a little of the warm water, and then grind it well with the molinet; and
when it is well ground, put the rest of the warm water to it; and so drink it
with Sugar.

Besides these former ways, there is one other way; which is, to put the
Chocolate into a pipkin, with a little water; and let it boil well, till it be
dissolved; and then put in sufficient water and sugar, according to the
quantity of the Chocolate; and then boil it again, until there comes an oily
sum upon it; and then drink it. But if you put too much fire, it will run
over, and spoil. But, in my opinion, this last way is not so wholesome, though
it pleases the palate better; because, when the Oily is divided from the
earthy part, which remains at the bottom, it causes Melancholy; and the oily
part loosens the stomach, and takes away the appetite. There is another way to
drink Chocolate, which is cold; and it takes its name from the principal
Ingredient, and is called Cacao; which they use at feasts, to refresh
themselves; and it is made afrer this manner. The Chocolate being dissolved in
water with the Molinet, take off the scumme, or crassy part, which rises in
greater quantity, when the Cacao is older, and more putrified. The scumme is
laid aside by it self in a little dish; and then put sugar into that part,
from whence you took the scumme; and power it from on high into the scumme; and
so drink it cold. And this drink is so cold, that it agrees not with all
men's stomachs; for by experience we find the hurt it does, by causing pains
in the stomach, and especially to Women. I could deliver the reason of it; but
I avoid it, because I will not be tedious.

There is another way to drink it cold, which is called Cacao Penoli; and it
is done, by adding to the same Chocolate (having made the Confection, as is
before set down) so much Maiz, dried, and well ground, and taken from the
Husk, and then well mingled, in the Mortar, with the Chocolate, it falls all
into flower, or dust: And so these things being mingled, as is said before,
there rises the Scum; and so you take and drink it, as before.

There is another way, which is a shorter and quicker way of making it, for men
of business, who cannot stay long about it; and it is more wholesome; and it is
that, which I use. That is, first to set some water to warm; and while it
warms, you throw a Tablet, or some Chocolate, scraped, and mingled with sugar,
into a little Cup; and when the water is hot, you power the water to the
Chocolate, and then dissolve it with the Molinet; and then, without taking off
the scum, drink it, as is before directed.

The fourth Part.
THere remains to be handled in the last Point, of the Quantity, which is to
be drunk: at what Time; and by what persons: because if it be drunk beyond
measure, not only of Chocolate, but of all other drinks; or meats, though of
themselves they are good and wholesome, they may be hurtful. And if any find
it Opilative, it comes by the too much use of it; as when one drinks over much
Wine, in stead of comforting, and warming himself, he breeds, and nourishes
cold diseases; because Nature cannot overcome it, nor turn so great a quantity
into good nourishment. So he that drinks much Chocolate, which has fat parts,
cannot make distribution of so great a quantity to all the parts; and that part
which remains in the slender veins of the Liver, must needs cause Opilations,
and Obstructions.

To avoid this inconvenience; you must only take five or six ounces, in the
morning, if it be in winter; and if the party who takes it, be Choleric, in
stead of ordinary water, let him take the distilled water of Endive. The same
reason serves in Summer, for those, who take it physically, having the Liver
hot and obstructed. If his Liver be cold and obstructed, then to use the water
of Rubarb. And to conclude, you may take it till the Month of May; especially
in temperate days. But I do not approve, that, in the Dogdayes, it should be
taken in Spain, unless it be one, who by custom of taking it, receives no
prejudice by it. And if he be of a hot Constitution, and that he have need to
take it in that season, let it, as is said before, be mingled with water of
Endive; and once in four days, and chiefly when he finds his stomach in the
morning to be weak and fainting. And though it be true, that, in the Indies,
they use it all the year long, it being a very hot Country, and so it may
seem by the same reason it may be taken in Spain: First, I say, that Custom
may allow it: Secondly, that, as there is an extraordinary proportion of heat,
so there is also of moisture; which helps; with the exorbitant heat, to open
the pores; and so dissipates, and impoverisheth our substance, or natural
vigor: by reason whereof, not only in the morning; but at any time of the day,
they use it without prejudice. And this is most true, that the excessive heat
of the Country, draws out the natural heat, and disperseth that of the
stomach, and of the inward parts: Insomuch, that though the weather be never
so hot, yet the stomach being cold, it usually does good. I do not only say
this of the Chocolate, which; as I have proved, has a moderate heat. But if
you drink pure wine, be the weather never so hot, it hurts not, but rather
comforts the stomach; and if in hot weather you drink water, the hurt it does
is apparent, in that it cooles the stomach too much; from whence comes a
viciated Concoction, and a thousand other inconveniences.

You must also observe, that it being granted, as I have said, that there are
earthy parts in the Cacao, which fall to the bottom of the Cup, when you make
the drink, diverse are of the opinion, that, that which remains, is the best
and more substantial; and they hurt them selves not a little, by drinking of
it. For besides, that it is an earthy substance, thick, and stopping, it is of
a melancholy Nature; and therefore you must avoid the drinking of it,
contenting your self with the best, which is the most substantial.

Last of all, there rests one difficulty to be resolved, formerly poynted at;
namely, what is the cause, why Chocolate makes most of them that drink it,
fat. For, considering that all of the Ingredients, except the Cacao, do rather
extenuate, than make fat, because they are hot and dry in the third degree.
For we have already said, that the qualities which do predominate in Cacao,
are cold, and dry; which are very unfit to add any substance to the body.
Nevertheless, I say, that the many unctuous parts, which I have proved to be
in the Cacao, are those, which pinguifie, and make fat; and the hotter
ingredients of this Composition, serve for a guide, or vehicall, to pass to
the Liver, and the other parts, until they come to the fleshy parts; and there
finding a like substance, which is hot and moist, as is the unctuous part,
converting it self into the same substance, it does augment and pinguifie.
Much more might be said from the grounds of Philosophy, and Physic; but
because that is fitter for the Schools, than for this discourse, I leave it,
and only give this Caution, that in my Receipt, you may add Mellon-seeds, and
seeds of Pompions of Valencia, dried, and beaten into powder, where there is
any heat of the Liver or Kidnyes. And if there be any obstructions of the
Liver, or Spleen, with any cold distemper, you may mix the powder of
Ceterach; to which you may add Amber, or Musk, to please the scent.

And it will be no small matter, to have pleased all, with this Discourse.

Errata.
IN the Title of the Dedication, read, And one of the Lords of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Counsel of Ireland. Page 3. line 14. for mix read
mixed. p. ib. l. 32. for that it, r. that in it. p. 6. l. 19. for unctuous r.
unctuous. p. 8. l. 2. r the Marginall note at Tevasco. p. ib. l. 11. r. the
Marginall Note at red pepper, p. 13. l. 27. r. own effects. p. 15. l. 12. r.
every one may.

FINIS.

