A RIGHT FRVITfull admonition, concerning the order of a good Christian man's
life, very profitable for all manner of Estates, and other to behold and look
upon.

Made by the famous Doctor Collet, sometime deane of Paul's.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London for Gabriell Cawood. 1582.

A fruitful monition, concerning the order of a good Christian man's life, very
profitable for all manner of Esates and other to behold and look upon.
REmember first of all (virtuous reder) that it is high wisdom and great
perfection, thy self to know, and then thy self to despise. Thou must know
that thou have nothing that good is of thy self, but of God: For the gifts of
nature, and al other temporal gifts of this world, which be lawfully and
truly obtained, well considered, been come to thee by the infinite goodness
and grace of God, and not of thy self. But in especial it is necessary for
thee to know that God of his great grace has made thee his Image, having
regard to thy memory, understanding, and free will, and that God is thy
maker, and thou his wretched creature, and that thou art redeemed of God by the
passion of Christ Jesus, and that God is thy helper. thy refuge, and thy
deliverer from all evil, and to consider and know the goodly order which God
of his infinite wisdom has ordained thee to be ordered by. As to have these
temporal goods for the necessity of thy body: the body and sensual appetites
to be ordered by thy soul: thy soul to be ordered by reason and grace: by
reason and grace to know thy duty to God and to thy neighbor, and by all
common reason if thou keep this convenient order to God and his creatures, they
shall keep their order to thee: But if thou break thine order to them, of
likely hood they shall break their order to thee. For how should thy wife,
children, servant, and other creatures, with the which thou have doings, do
their duty, and keep their order to thee, if thou do not so to God and to
them? And also think thou of a surety, that if thy sensual apetite be not
ordered by reason and grace, thou art worse ordered than a beast: for then thou
live out of order, and so does not a beast, which is a great shame and rebuke
to thee a reasonable creature, and without the great mercy of God, it shall be
to thine eternal damnation. And therefore think and thank God, and utterly
disspise thy self, and think thy self a great wretch, in that God has done
so much for thee, and thou have so often offended his highness, and also done
him so little service. Surely it is also great wisdom to think, that if it had
pleased God for to have given to all other men (as well beggars as other) like
grace as he has given to thee, that they would have served his goodness better
than thy self have don: Wherefore think thy self a wretch of al wretches,
except the mercy of God. And therefore by his infinite mercy and grace, call
unto thy remembrance the degree or dignity which almighty God of his goodness
has called thee unto, and according thereunto yield thy debt, and do thy
duty.

First and principally, honor God as thy maker, love him as thy redeemer,
fear him as thy judge. Secondarily, thy neighbor which is thy superior,
obey: Have concord and peace with them which be even with thee in degree: and
have mercy and pity on thine inferiors Thirdly, provide thee to have a clean
heart, and a good custody of thy tongue. Pray and take labor by grace to have
wisdom and cunning to do thy duty to God and to thy neighbor. And in all
thy words and deeds have ever in mind, that God and his angels hears and
sees every thing, and that nothing is so privily done, but it shall be made
open. And in especial have in mind that thou shall die shortly, and how Christ
died for thee, the subtilty and falsenes of this temporal world, the joys of
heaven, and the pains of hell. And every morning, among other thy meditations
and prayers, pray unto thy Lord God, that the day following, thou (acording to
the degree which he of his infinite goodness and mercy has called thee unto)
may use this temporal wretched world in thy thaughtes words, and deeds,
that by them and the merit of Christ's passion, thou may eschew the pains
of hell, and come to the joy everlasting. And in executing thereof keep truth in
words and deeds. Defend no man, nor no matter, against the truth. In all
things think and trust in God, and he shall direct thy ways. Trust not to
thine own wit, but fear God, and he will keep thee from evil. If thou
trust more in thine own wit than in the grace of God, thy policy shall be
soon subverted. Be content to hear good counsel, though it be contrary to
thy will: For he is a very fool that will hear nothing gladly, but that is
according to his mind. Do thou no man harm, least thou suffer the same. As
thou would be done unto, so do thou unto other. Be such to other, as thou
desire they should be to thee. If thou be religious, remember that the due
execution of true religion is not in wearing of the habit, but with a clean
mind in very deed to execute the rules and ordinances of religion: For so it
is, that to wear the habit and not to execute the rule and order of religion,
is rather to be deemed hypocrisy, or apostatasie, than otherwise. If thou be
lay and unmarried, keep thee clean unto the time thou be married. And remember
the sore and terrible punishmente of Noys flood, and of the terrible fire and
brimstone and sore punishmente of Sodom and Gomor, done to man for misusing of
the flesh. And in especial ca^l to remembrance the marvelous and horrible
punishmente of that abominable great pocks daiely appearing to our sightes,
groing in and upon man's flesh, the which sore punishment (every thing well
remembered) cannot be thought, but principally for the inordinate misuse of to
flesh. And if thou intend to marie, or be married, and have a good wife,
thank our Lord therefore, for she is of his sending. Ane remember that three
thieges in especial been pleasant to the spirit of God, that is to say,
concord between brethren, love and charity between neighbors, and a man and
his wife well agreeing. And if thou have an evil wife, take patience, and thank
God, for all is for the best, well taken: How be it thou art bound to do and
pray for her amendment, least she go to the Devil, from whom she came. And
have in remembrance, that the intent of marriage is not in the beastly apetite
or pleasure in the thing, but the intent there of is, to eschew the sin of
the flesh, or else to have children. And if thou have children, as much as thou
may bring them up in virtue, to be the servant of God: for it is better
for thee and them not to be borne, than to be other wise. In thine authority,
busy thee rather to be beloved of thine inferyours, than to be dreaded. Let
thy subjects and servants rather serve and obey thee for love, than for
dread or need: With such a sovereign goodness govern thy subjects, that
they may be glad to serve thee both in punishing and in cherishing.

Keep a manerly mean. Be not to strait. Forgive not to soon. Keep a
convenient mesure in all thy works Go not to meat as a beast, but as a
easo^able man, say thy grace, and then remenber that mo be sick and die by
superfluities of meats, then otherwise. Wherefore eat with measure, to live
in health. at thy meat have none other but honest communication, and such as
is according to thy cunning. Backbite no man. Be merry in honesty: For sorrow
and care has killed many, and no profit therein. In no wise swear, without
compulsion of the law: For whereas is great swearing, from thence is never the
plague of God. In no wise braul, ne chyde without an urgent cause: For Solomon
says, better is a little with joy, than a house full of vitailes with
brawling. Also he says, An evil person is ever chyding, and therefore the
Angel of God shall be sent against him. Be content at thy dinner, and also at
other times to give part of that which God has sent thee: For he that will not
hear the cry of a poor man, he shall cry to God, and not be heard. After thy
meat thank God of that he has sent thee, or else thou do not as a reasonable
man, but like a beast, which in eating remembers nothing but his meat. With
good providence and discretion see thee time where, when, how, why, or
wherefore thou speak, do, or byddest any thing to be don. When thou
deemest or iudgest any, be he poor or rich, behold and consider the cause,
and not the person. Be as meek in other men's causes and offenses, as in thine
own. Sit never in dome and judgment without pity or mercy. For while thou
have pity, and art merciful to other men's offenses, thou have mercy on thy
self: For in what measure thou measurest, it shall be meaassured to thee. Yet
thou must execute judgment, but it must be with pity or mercy: For (of a
surety) to do mercy and justice, is more pleasant to God, then to pray or to
do sacrifice unto him. Deem no man by light suspections. First prone, and
then deem. In doubts, reserve the sentence to Gods might. That thou know
not, commit it to God. have little or none affection and love to these earthly
and temporal things.

For blessed is the rich man that trusts not in his money and treasure.
Remember, as a man loves so he is: For the lover is in the thing loved more
properly, than in him self. Wherefore, if a man love earthly things, he may
be called, an earthly man. And if he love principally heavenly things or
God, he may be called, An heauenty or a Godly man. And therefore love God and
heavenly things, for undoubtedly that is best and most assured love, for they
be and ever shall be permanente, and all earthly things be soon vanished and
ended, and so the love of them is in vain. Also it is wisdom to fear God:
For as he says him self. Fear not him that may kill the body, and can not
hurt the soul: but fear him that can kill the body and also the soul, and
commit them to everlasting pain. Wherefore, every evening ere thou go to bed,
call to remembrance (as much as thou can) thy thoughts, words, and deeds,
said and don that day. And if any have been to thine own profit and to the
pleasure of God, heartily thank him, for by his grace it was done. And if any
have been contrary to his pleasure, ask heartily mercy and reconcile thy
self shortly by repentance, to eschew the everlasting and terrible pains of
hell. For (as Saint-Austine says) there is not a greater madness, than for a
little temporal delectation (which is soon done) to lose the eternal joy,
and to be bound to everlasting pain: from the which the almighty Father of
heaven by his infinite power and mercy, and bitter passion and infinite wisdom
of Jesus Christ, and by the infinite goodness and charity of the holy Ghost
keep us. Amen. Deo gracias.



Use well temporal things.

Desire eternal things.



