genealogical chart THE ANCIENT HISTORY AND only true and sincere Cronicle
of the wars betwixt the Grecians and the Troyans, and subsequently of the
first ever cyon of the ancient and famous City of Troy under Lamedon the
king, and of the last and fynall destruction of the same under Pryam, written
by Daretus a Troyan and Dictus a Grecian both soldiers and present in all the
said wars and digested in Latin by the learned Guydo de Columpnis and sythes
translated in to english verse by John Lydgate Moncke of Burye. And newly
imprinted. An. M.D.L.V.



To the reader.
ALthough the battayles betwixt the Grecyans and the Troyans before the last
and fynall euersion of ye Cyty of Troy (as an hisstorye worthy of eterne
memory has passed through the pens of sundry famous Poets and great
clerks, Greeks, and Latynes, as Homer, Vergyle, Ouyde, and others, which for
that their works there of came to the hands of most men, have therefore
hitherto ben holden as chiefest reporters of that hystorye. Of whom
nevertheless part lie by affection toward their countreythemen, as Homer
fauourynge the Grecyans, and Virgyle and Ouyde the Troyans, and partelye
breaking out (as who says) into their poetycall fictions, the historye was so
perverted: that the very truth thereof is not to be had in their dygestes.
What we may then hope to find of the truth, in their doings that have
only labored as translators of Virgyle and Homer into their peculyer and
vulgar languages, as it is easelye to be considered. Of whom, although some I
do confess have learnedlye and that right well performed their enterprise
therein. Yet has there ben other some, so beastly bold to undertake without
either wit or any learning, to translate the same history namelye the Eanedes
of Virgyle into english, not understanding searse any word what Virgile me^t
in all that work. As by example, if a man studyouse of that historye, should
seek to find the same in the doings of Wyllyam Caxton in his lewd recueil
of Troy: what should he then find thyncke you? assuredlye none other thing,
but a long tedious and brayneles bablyng, tendyng to no end* nor having any
certain beginning: but proceadynge therein as an ydyot in his follye, that can
not make an end till he be bydden. Much like the foolyshe and unsavory
doings of Orestes, whom Iuuinall remembers, that after he had wryt his book
to the just volume, filled then the mergentes and outward sides with his
madness, which after both that with in and without considered tended to no
purpose at all. which Caxtons recueil, who so list with judgment peruse, shall
rather thyncke his doings worthy to be nu^bred amongst the trifelinge tales
and barrayne luerdries of Robyn Hode, and Beuys of Hampton, then remain as a
monument of so worthy an history. Yet has there not wanted the faithful and
true reporters of ye historye, as Daretus the Phrigyan, and Dytus the Grecyan,
who both curyouse of the worthy deeds of their countreithes, and both likewise
present in all the said wars have dyligently regestred the same, whose books
although by iniurye of the time, were not of long extant, yet at the last being
found at Athenes, have sins by dew conference ben found holy to agree, in
all the dyscourse of ye said wars, which the labores as well of Darete as Dyte,
at the last came to the sight and hands of the learned and dylygent Guydo of
Columpna, who has syncerelye and pythely digested the same in one latyne
volume. And so by these degrees, has been at the last by ye diligence of John
Lydgate a moncke of Burye, brought into our english tongue: and dygested as
may appear, in verse who estranayle as well in other his doings as in this
has without doubt so much prevailed in this our vulgar language, that
having his praise dew to his deservings, may worthyly be numbered amongst
those that have chefelye deserved of our tunge. As the very perfect disciple
and imitator of the great Chaucer, ye only glory and beauty of the same.
Nevertheless, likewise as it happened ye same Chaucer to lease ye praise of that
time wherein he wrote being then when in deed al good letters were almost
aslepe, so far was the grosenesse and barbarousnesse of that age from the
understanding of so deuyne a writer. That if it had not been in this our time,
wherein all kinds of learning (thancked be god) have as much floryshed as ever
they did by any former days within this realm, and namelye by the dylygence
of one willyam Thime a gentilma^ who laudably studyouse to ye polyshing of so
great a Jewel, with right good judgment trauail, and great pains causing
the same to be perfected and stamped as it is now read, ye said Chaucers
works had utterly peryshed, or at ye lest bin so depraved by corrupcion of
copies, that at the last, there should no part of his meaning have been
found in any of them. Even the same iniurye almost has happened to this
writer in this his Pamphlite of the euercio^ of Troy: being printed
about.xlii. years ago, even then in the tail (as it happened) of the dercke
and unlearned times, such was then the ignorance of both the prynter and
correctour, neither of them as it should seem either learned or dnderstandynge
english, yt ye same work is so falsed in his verse by either lack, folishe
surplus, or displasinge of ye words, that thereby ye sentence and
co^seque^tlye ye historye is so confused and obscured, that in most places,
there can be almost nothing gathered thereof. I therefore much meruaylinge how
it has happened, whether for lack of copies, (as in deed they be but few) or
otherwise yt this book being thouly true and sincere english Cronicle, of that
so worthy an historye whereupon so many great clerks in other languages have
voutsafed their trauayles, has not before this time (which in deed lacks
not that have already by their doings showed them selfs to have right good
judgment in our language) bin purged of his falsyties, and redused as nere as
mgiht be with conuenie^ce to the auctours translation. Have therefore taken upon
me as one studyous of ye language of my countreyth although I must confess ye
least able of a great nu^bre, to, bring again this historian into light
somewhat I trust more perfect and polished then before, not inuertyng therein
either matter or sentence, but leauyng that to the auctour his commendacyon, as
of right apperteineth. Natheles if I would have been withdrawn from this mine
attempt, with that which I might justly have recompted with my self, that is, to
consider how great an enterprise he undertakes, that goes about to bring
perfected into the hands of men ye corrupted labors of former writers, and
how little thank is gained thereby I should never then have dared, to have
bestowed hereof one penful of yncke. Considering that who so trauaylethe in
other men's doings is thought to do nothing of him self, and thereby in some
men's judgments has before hand the thancke that he deserves. But if any such
be that shall so discern hereof. I may account his judgment like indifferent
as is that ma^s that should judge, that he which has purged an ouergrowe^
field of thorns, and stones, has also sowed ye same with corn, and should in
ye end be no partaker of ye fruytes or increase thereof. And surely who so ever
shall take upon him thus to travail in others men's labores, whether ye list to
way ye difficulty of the thing or the commoditye and pleasure that shall
ensewe to them that be desirous to understand the pryueties of our english
tongue, me thincketh such one worthy of his praise. And that I may say my
judgment his travail ought not to be thought much less then is his that
writes of his own inue^cyo^. For if the one commend ye quickenes of ye wit,
the other declares the ripenes of judgment. He having a large field to
discourse in, the other compelled within ye straight bounds of ye writer. The
one may use ye frugalitye of inuencion and wytt, the other must so moderate the
same, yt when he has greatest neade thereof, yet may he not pass the lmittes.
Not one only copye must be perused, but many exa^plars looked over, and therein
he may not chose such as lyketh his fantasye, but yt which shall seem to come
more nere to ye auctours meninge, and may most please and pleasure the
readers. So that therein, he shall be compelled to put on (as it were) their
fantasye, and yet that so sparinglye, yt he may neither add nor take away,
but where he shall be thereto ledd by certain and sure judgments. Al which
things how easy they be, who so list practice the same may sone discern.
Thus much I have thought good to set in writing before this work. To thend
the readers may be admonyshed, that this without other is the very true and
sincere english historyan of the lamentable battles, destinye, and utter
euersion of the ancient and famous City of Troy and also to prevent the
malice of such, as shall happlye account my travail herein, rather rash
presumpcyon, then any virtuous imitacion of well doing.

Finis.
(...)Robert Braham.

The prologue of the Translatour.
O Mighty mars that with thy stern light,
In armies have the power and ye might.
And named art from east till occident,
The mighty lord, the god Armipotent.
That with the shininge of thy stremes read:
By influence do the brydell led,
Of chivalry as soueraygne and patron.
Full hot and dry of complexion:
Irous wood and malencolyke,
And of nature brent and collerike.
Of color shininge like the fiery glede,
Whose ferse lokes ben as full of dread,
As is the leuene that alighteth low,
Down by the skies from Jupiter his bow,
So been thy stremes passing dispyteous,
And to behold so inly furious.
Thou causer art with thy fyrie beams,
Of werre and strife in many su^drye realms.
Whose lordshyp chiefest is in Capricorn,
But in the crabbe is thy power lorne.
And causer art of conteke and of strife.
Now for the love of her Vlcanus wife,
With whom whilom you were at mischief take,
So help me now only for her sake,
And for the love of thy Bellona,
That with the dwells beyond Cirrha,
In Lybye land upon the sands read:
So be my help in this great need,
To do succor my style to dyrecte,
And of my pen the traces to correct.
Which barrayne is of aureat lycoure.
But in thy grace I find some succoure:
For to conuoy it with thine influence,
That stumbleth aye for fault of eloquence.
For to rehearse or written any word:
Now help o mars yt art of knighthode lord:
And have of manhood the magnificence.
And other gods yt arne of high prudence,
This work texplete that ye not refuse,
But makes Clyo for to be my muse,
With her systren that on Pernasus dwell,
In Cirrha by Helycon the well.
Renning full clear with stremes cristallyn.
And called is the fountain Caballyn,
That springs by touch of the Pegase.
Help me also o thou Callyope,
That were mother unto him Orpheus.
Whose dytees weren so melodius,
That the werbles of his resowninge harp,
Appeased all the words sherpe:
Both of Parchas and furyes infernal,
And Cerberus so cruel found at all.
He coyed also both beast foul and tree.
Now of thy grace be helpyng unto me.
And of thy golden dew let the lycoure wete,
My dulled breast that with thy honey sweet:
Sugrest the tunges of Rethoryciens,
And maystresse art to all musciens.
Now be mine help tenlumine with thy work:
Which am beset with clouds dim and derke,
Of ignorance in making to proceed:
To be to them lustye that shall it read.
And in heart I am so full of dread,
When prudent lysters hereto shall take heed:
Who as in making more skill can than I:
That they vouchesafe I pray full beningly,
Of their goodness to have compassion:
Where as I err in my translacion.
For god I take highly to witness:
That I this work of hertie low humblesse,
Took upon me of good entencion,
Deuoyde of pride and al presumpcion.
For to obey withouten varyaunce,
My lords biddynge fully and plesaunce.
Which has desire sothely for to said,
Of very knighthod to report again,
The worthiness if so I shall not lie:
And eke the prowess of old cheualrye.
Because that he has joy and great deintye,
To read in books of old antiquitye.
To find only how he may virtue sewe,
By their ample also and to eschew:
The cursed vice of slouthe and idelnesse.
So he enioyneth in verteous business,
In all yt longs to manhood dare I said,
He busyeth him and thereto is so feign,
To haunte his body in plays marciall,
Through exercise to exclude slouthe in all,
After the doctrine of Vigecius.
Thus is he manfull and eke virtuous,
More passingly than I can of him write.
I want conning his renown to endite.
So much of manhood men may in him seen,
And for to witen who^ that I would mean,
He eldest son is of the noble king,
Henry ye fourth of knighthode well and spring.
In whom is showed of what stock he grew,
The rootis virtue thus can the set renew:
In every part the tarage is the same.
Like his father of manners and of name.
In sothfastnes and this no fable is,
Called Henry eke ye worthy prince of Wales.
To whom shall long as by succession,
For to govern this Brutis albion,
Which has me bydde the drery pyteous fate,
Of them of Troy in ynglyshe to translate.
The siege also and destruction.
Like as the latin makes mention,
For to compile and after Guido make,
So I could and write it for his sake.
Because he would that both to high and low,
The noble storye openly were know.
And in our tunge about in every age,
Written it were as well in our language,
As in the latin and the frenshe it is.
That of the storye we the truth not mys.
No more than does each other nation:
This was the fine of his entencion.
The which emprise anon I ginne shall,
In his worship as for memoryall.
And of the time to maken mention,
When I began on this translation,
It was the year sothly for to seyne,
Fourtene complete tho of his fathers reygne.
The time of year shortly to conclude,
When.xx. grees was Phoebus altitude.
The hour wha^ he has made his stedes draw
His rosen chariet low under the wawe,
To bathe his beams in the wawy sea,
Gresed like gold as men might plainly se,
Passing the bordure of our Occion.
And Lucina of color pale and wan,
Her cold arisynge in Octobre dyght,
Tenchase the darkness of the frosty night,
That then amiddes was of the Scorpion.
And Hesperus began fast to wester down,
Her course to haste again the morrow gray.
When Lucifer the night to void away,
The messenger is called of the day.
Our hemispher to put out of Affray,
With bright kale^des of Phoebus vprist shene,
Out from ye bounds of Proserpin ye queen.
Where Pluto dwells the dark region,
And there the furyes have their mansion.
Till after soon Apollo list not tarry,
To take his soiourne in the Sagittarye.
Which time I began the prologue to behold,
Of Troy book ymade by days old.
Where written was of Auctours us beforne,
Of all the deed the very true corn,
So as it fell severed from the chafe.
For in their hand they hold as for a staff,
The truth only which they have compyled,
Unto this fine that we were not begiled,
Of necligence thorough foryetfulnesse,
The which serpent of age by long process.
Engendered is fiercely us to assail,
And of the troth to maken us to fail,
For nere writers all were out of mind,
Not storyed only but of nature and kind,
The true knowing should have gone to wrake,
And our wits from science put abacke.
Ne had our elders serched out and sought,
The sothfast pythe to impe it in our thought,
Of things passed fordyrked of their hew,
Which through the writing be refreshed new.
Of Au^ceters and left to us be hynde.
To make a myrrour only to our mind.
To se each thing truly as it was,
As bright and clear as it were in a glass.
For nere their writynge now memoryall,
Death with his sword should have slain all,
And ydimmed with his sudden showers,
The great prowess of these conquerours.
And derked eke the brightness of their fame,
That shines yet by report of her name.
For unto us their books represent,
Without fayninge the way that they went,
In their days when they were alive,
Again the troth who so ever strive,
Or counterplede or make any debate,
The south is read of high or low estate,
Without favor who so list take heed,
For after death clerks litell dread,
Of their deserte for to bear wytnes,
Nor of a tyrant the truth to express.
As men deserve without excepcion,
With lak or pris they grant their guerdon.
Wherefore me seems every manner man,
Should by his life in all that ever he can,
For virtue sake eschew to do amys:
For after death plainly as it is,
Clerks willlyn write and except none,
The plain troth when a man is gone.
And by old time for their writing true:
They cheryshed were of lords yt the^ knew.
And honored greatly as in tho days.
For they enacted and gilt with their says,
Their high renown their ma^hod and prowes:
Their knighthod eke and their worthiness.
Their trihumphes al and eke their victories,
Their famous conquest and their fonge glories.
Fro point to point rehersinge all ye troth,
Without fraud neclygence or sloth.
They did their labor and their besinesse,
For else certain the great worthiness:
Of all their deeds had been in vain.
For dyrked age else would have slain,
By length of years the noble worthy fame,
Of conquerours and plainly of their name,
For dimmed eke the letters aureat.
And eke deffaced the palm laureat,
Which yt they wan by knighthod i^ their days.
Whose freting ruste new and new assayes,
For to eclipse the honor and the glory,
Of high prowes which clerks in memory,
Have truly set through dilygent labor,
And enlumined with many curious flower,
Of Rethorike to make us comprehend,
The troth of all as it was tho kind.
Bysied them and faithfully travailed,
Again all that that age would have assailed,
In their books every thing yset,
And with the key of remembrance is shet.
Which lasts yet and dureth ever in one.
Record of Thebes that was so long agone.
Of which the ruin and destruction,
Ye may behold by good inspection.
Croppe and root right as it was in deed,
On Stace look and there ye may it read.
How Polynece and Eteocles,
The brethern two ne could not live in peace:
Till Thebes brought was to his ruin.
And all the manner how they diden fine,
That death also of worthy Tideus,
And how Edipp with tears full pyteous,
Wept out his eyes and all his drery pain,
And how ye smokes departed were in twain,
At the feast of fyres funeral.
In great Stace ye may reden al.
The sire engendered by brotherly hatred,
Where through ye death was the cruel mede.
In very sothe of many worthy man,
Like as mine Auctour well rehearse can.
Of Troy also that was of latter years,
By diligence of these Cronycleres.
Ye may behold in their writing well,
The strife werre the siege and every dell.
Right as it was so many years sin passed,
Whose storye yet age has not diffaced,
Nor cruel death with his mortal strokes,
For maugre death ye may behold in books,
The storye fully rehearsed new and new,
As fresh as flower of color and of hew.
From day to day quick and nothing feinte,
For clerks have this storye so depeynt,
That death nor age by any other weye,
The troth may not make for to deye.
Al be that some have the troth spared,
In their writing and playnty not declared.
So as it was nor told out faithfully,
But it transformed in their poesy,
Through vain fables which of entencion,
They have contrived by false transsumptio^.
To hide troth falsely under cloud.
And the sothe of malice for to shroude.
As Homer did the which in his writing,
I feyned has full many diverse thing,
That never was as Guydo list devise.
And things done far in anotherwise,
He has transformed then the troth was,
And feyned falsely that gods in this case.
The worthy Greeks help to warrey,
Again Troyens and how that they were sey,
Like lyfely men among them day by day.
And in his dytyes that were fresh and gay,
With sugared words under hoony sote,
His galie is hyd low by the root.
That it may not outward be aspyed,
And all for he with Greeks was alyed.
Therefore he was to them favorable,
In much thing which is not commendable.
Of them that lust to deine after right,
For in making love has lost his sight.
To give a prys where none is deserved,
Cupide is blind whose domes ben observed,
More after lust then after equytye:
Or after reason how the troth be.
For syngulertee and false affeccion,
Reyseth full often by vain lausion,
A man to worship that deserves none.
By false report and thus full many one,
Without merit has his fame blow,
Whereof another the renown is unknow,
That i^ arms has sundry meruailes wrought
Of who^ peraunter speaks no man naught.
For favor only is fostred more the^ rightes,
That hindered has many worthy knights.
Ouide also poet egally has closed,
Falshed with truth yt make the men enosed:
To which part that they shall them hold,
His misty speech so hard is to unfold.
That it entriketh readers that it see.
Virgil also for love of him Ene,
In his Eneyd reherseth much thing:
And was in party true of his writing.
Except only that him list somwhile,
The traces follow of Homeris style.
And of this syege wrote eke Lollius,
But tofore all Daretus frigens.
Wrote most truly after that he fond,
And Ditus eke of the Greeks land.
For they were present and seen every dell,
And as it fill they write true and well.
Each in his tunge by such consonaunce,
That in their books was no variaunce.
Which after were unto Athenes brought,
And by process serched out and sought,
By diligence of one Cornelius,
Who neuewe was unto Salustius.
Of rome yborne which did his dew,
Them to translate and the traces sewe,
Of these Auctours by good auisement,
But for because he set all his intent,
For to be brefe he left much behind:
Of the story as men in books find.
The first meninge and cause original,
What was the ginninge and root in special,
Ne how they come by land or by navy,
How first the spark was kindled of envy,
Betwixt Greeks and them of Troy town,
Of this Cornelie makes no menciowne.
Of their ships nor of their vytayle,
Nor how that Greece is called ytayle.
And the less as books verifye,
Is named now the land of Romanye,
What number of kings and of Dukes went,
Toward the syege all of one assente,
To win worship and for exercise,
Of arms only in full knyghtly wise,
Abydyng there to se the version,
Of the city and noble Illyon.
Nor what the manner was of their armure,
Nor at the syege who longest did endure.
In what wise each other did assail,
Nor how often they met in battle,
How many worthy lost their his life,
How old hatred wrought up new strife,
Nor of their death he dateth not the year,
For his wrytinge was so partyculere.
Without fruit he was compe^dious:
This foresaid Romayne this Cornelius.
Wherefore but late in comparysowne.
There was an Auctour of full high renown
That besyed him the traces for to sewe,
Of Dite and Daret and cast him not transmewe.
In all the story a word as in sentence.
But follows them by such conuenyence,
That in effect the substance is the same:
And of Columpna Guydo was his name.
Which had in writing passing excellence,
For he enlumineth by craft and cadence:
This noble storye with many fresh color.
Of Rethorik and many rich flower,
Of eloquence to make it sound the bett.
He in the storye ymped has and set.
That in good faith I trow he has no pere,
To reckon all that write of this mattere.
As in his book ye may behold and se.
To whom I say knelyng on my kne.
Laud and honor and excellence of fame,
O Guydo master be unto thy name.
That excellest by souerayngtye of style,
All that write this matter to compyle.
Whom I shall follow as nere as ever I may,
That god grant it to be to the pay,
Of him for whom I have it undertake,
So as I can this storye for to make.
Prayinge to all that shall it read or see,
Where as I err there to amend me.
Of humble heart and low entencion,
Committing all to their correction.
And thereof thank my will is yt they wyn,
For through their support thus I will begin.
The end of the prologue
The first book.
How ye knge of Thessalie named Pelleus lost all his men by divine punisheme^t
who after by his prayers obtained others. Ca. i.
IN ye reign and land of Thesalye,
The which is now ynamed saloni
There was a king called Pelleus:
Wise and discrete and also virtuous.
The which as Guido list to specify,
Held the lordshippe and the regalye,
Of this isle as governor and king.
Of which the people by record of writing,
Mirundones were called in tho days.
Of whom Ouide fayneth in his says,
Metamorphoseos where as ye may read,
How this people sothfastly in deed,
So as mine Auctour makes mention,
Were brought echeone to destruction
With sudden tempest and with fyry leven,
By the gods sent down from the heaven,
For they of ire without more offense,
With sword and with ye stroke of pestilence,
On this isle whilom took vengeance:
Like as it is put in remembrance.
For this people destroyed were certain,
With thunder dint and with hayle and rain,
Full unawarely as Guido list descriue,
For there was none of them left a live,
In all the land that the vyolence,
Escape might of this pestilence.
Except the king the which went alone,
Into a wood there to make his moan,
Sool by him self all disconsolate,
In a place that stood all desolate.
Where this king ronnynge to and fro,
Complayninge aye of this his fatal woo:
And the harms that he did endure,
Till at the last of case or adventure.
Beside an holt he saw where stood a tree,
Of full great hight and large of quantitye:
Holowe by thee root as he could know,
Where as he saw by the earth low,
Of Antes crepe passing great plente,
With which sight he fell down on his kne.
And made his prayer in his panim wise,
To the gods with humble sacrafise.
Upon his woe and great aduersytee,
Only of mercy for to have pytee.
To turn these Antes into form of man:
Thus began he pray with color pale and wan.
His land tenhabite which stands desolate,
And he alone awhaped and a mate,
Comfortles of any creature:
Him to releue of that he did endure.
And as Ouide makes mention,
The god Jupiter herd his orison,
And has such routhe on him at the least,
That he anon fulfilleth his request.
And of his might which that is divine,
His grace he made from heaven for to shine,
Beningly unto the earth adowne,
That by a sudden transmutaciowne,
The Antes were brought to form of me^ anon,
Which on their fete upright began to gone.
To Thesaly and salve there the king,
And like his lieges took their dwellinge,
Within a city called tho Egee,
As in Ouide ye may behold and se.
The which people for their worthiness,
For their strength and great hardiness,
Mirundines so long have bore the name,
As in the life ye read may thee same.
Of saint Mathewe how they be called so,
Where the Apostle so much had a do.
Which for their wisdom their prudent aduertence,
Besy labor and wilful diligence,
By forseing and great discrecion,
As I suppose in mine opinion:
That this fable of Antes was contrived,
Which by their wisdo^e have so much acheued.
Through their knighthod who so list to look,
Their manly deeds throughout Troy book,
In all mischief so well they have them borne,
That they full wisely provided were toforne,
Of that it fill both in werre and peace:
For of slouthe they weren not reckles.
But as the Ante to eschew idelnesse,
In somer is so full of besinesse,
Or winter comme to save her from the cold:
That she to fore astored has her hold.
But in this matter I hold no sermon,
Ywill no longer make disgression,
Nor in fables no more as now soiourne,
But there I left I will again return:
Of Pelleus ferther to proceed.
Which king forsothe in story as I read,
And as mine Auctour listeh to endite,
Had a wife that called was Tethite.
Of which twain platly this no lees,
The manly man the hardy Achilles,
So as Guido list to termine,
Descended was sothely as by line.
Most renoumed of manhood and of might,
Among Greeks and the best knight,
Yholde in sothe throughout all the land:
In worthiness preued of his hand.
Whose crueltye Troyens sore abought,
By his merueyles that he there wrought,
During the syege as ye shall after lere:
Pacyently if ye shall list to hear.
This Pelleus that I of spoke aforne,
A brother had of one mother borne,
That hight Eson so far yronne in years,
That he of lust has lost all his desires:
So far he was cropen into age,
That all his wit was turned to dotage.
For both mind and memorial,
Furdulled were and dercked so in all,
That verily his discrecyon:
Was him berafte in conclusion.
Wherefore the reign and land of Thesalye,
Crown and ceptre with all the regalye,
He has assigned his brother for to queme:
Estate royal and also diadem.
How Eson the king for that he was old and might no longer welde the
gouernayle caused to crown his brother Pelleus. Ca. ii.
Because he crooked was lame and blind,
And to govern lost both wit and mind,
So feeble was his celle retentife,
And forderked his imaginatife,
That lost were both memory and reason.
For which he made has resignacion,
To his brother next heir by degree:
And nyest allye of his affynytye.
But as some Auctors in their books said,
To youth he was restored new again,
By craft of Mede the great Sorceresse.
And renewed to his lustiness.
For with her herbys and with her pocions,
By subtyl workynge of confexions,
By queintise eke of her instruments,
With her charms and enchauntmentes,
She made a drink in books as it is told,
In which a yerde that was dry and old,
Without abode anon as she it cast,
To blome and budde would begin fast:
And eke grene and fresh to behold.
And through this drink she has fro years old,
Eson restored unto lusty age.
And was of wit and reason eke as sage,
As ever he had in all his life aforne.
The which Eson of his wife yborne,
Had a son and Jason was his name,
In work of who^ nature was not to blame.
For she her craft platly and conninge,
Spent upon him holy in workynge.
When she him made with heart will and thought,
That of her craft behind was right naught.
To reken his shape and also his fayrnesse,
His strength, his beauty, and his liuelynesse,
His gentylnes and his wise governance,
How large he was and of dalyaunce,
The most goodly that men could know,
In all his port both to high and low,
And with all this auise and eke tretable,
That of conning god wot I am not able,
For to discriue his virtues by and by.
For as mine Auctour tells faithfully,
He was beloved so of old and young,
That through ye la^d so is his honor sprung.
But for yt he was yet but young and slendre,
Of age also inly grene and tender,
He was committed to the gouernaile,
Of Pelleus to whom withouten fail.
In every thing he was as seruiable,
As diligent in chamber and at table,
As ever was child or any man:
Unto his lord in all that ever he can.
Glad in heart, of faithful obeyssaunce,
So that in cheer nor yet in countenance,
Inward in heart nor outward in showing,
His uncle against was he not grutching,
All be he had holy in his hand,
The worthy kingdom and the rich land.
Of this Jason and the heritage.
Only for he was tho to young of age.
Unto whom Pelleus did his pain,
Against his heart falsely for to feign,
To show other that he mente not in heart,
And kept him close yt nothing him outsterte.
Like an addre under flowers fair,
For to his heart his tunge was al contrayre.
Benign of speech of mening like serpent,
For under color was the treason blente.
To show him goodly unto his allye,
But inward brent of hate and of envy,
The hoote fire and yet there was no smeke,
So covertly the malice was yreke.
That no man might as by sign epsy,
Toward Jason in heart he bare envy,
And marvel none for it was causeles,
Save he dradde that he for his encres,
And for his manhood likely was tatteine,
For to succeed as in his fathers reign.
Which Pelleus unjustly occupies,
And day by day cast and fantisyeth.
How his venim may by some pursuit,
Upon this Jason be fully execute.
Here on he museth every hour and time,
As he that dradde to se an hasty prime,
Follow change as it is wont to done,
Suddenly after a change or new moan.
He casts ways and compasses sore,
And under color always more and more
His fell malice he began to close and hide,
Like as a snake that wonted is to glide,
With his venim under fresh flowers.
And as the son is right hot after shoures,
So of envy hotter brent the glede.
Till on a time he thought he would proceed,
To execute his meaning every dell.
In port a lamb in heart a lion fell.
Double as Tygre slyghtly to compace,
Galle in his breast and sugar in his face.
That no man has to him suspection,
How he purueyeth the destruction,
Of his neuewe and that within a while,
Pretending love all be the fine was gile:
His malice was yshet so under keye,
That his intent there can no man bewreye.
It was conceled and closed in secre,
Under the cloak of priuye enmitye.
And that in so the grieved him the more,
Upon him self the anger frette so sore,
Abidynge aye till unto his intent,
He find may leysur convenient,
Upon his purpose platly to proceed,
For to perform it fully up in deed.
Whereof Jason has full little rought,
His uncle and he ne were not in one thought.
Of whose meaning was no conuenience,
For so was malice linked with innocence.
And ground of all so as I can devise,
Was false envy and hateful couetise.
Which frette so sore falsely for to win,
As croppe and root of every sorrow and sin.
And cause has been since go full yore,
That many a realm has bought full sore,
The dreadful venim of couetise alas.
Let them beware that stand in this case.
To think before and for to have in mind.
That all falshed draws to an end.
For though it bide and last a year or two,
The end in sothe shall sorrow be and woo.
Of all that been false and envious,
Hereof no more but forth of Pelleus
I will you tell that has so long sought,
Upon this thing till they were to him brought,
Tydinges new and that so merueylous,
That he astoned was and all his house.
Of a marvel that tho was newly fall,
Beside Troy the plage orientalle,
How in Colchos as the tidinges came,
Within an isle enclosed was a ram,
Which bare his flese full richly all of gold.
And for the richesse it was kept in hold,
With great advice and great dilygence,
That no man might there to do offense.
And in this i will there was a governor,
A noble king a worthy warrour.
That Oetes hight wise discrete and sage.
Which was also yronne far in age.
That in his time as books can devise,
Had vnderfonged many great empryse.
In peace and war and much worship won,
And he was also son unto the son.
That gave him ure to honor to atteyne,
So as these poets listen for to feyne.
Touching his line I leave as now ye great,
And of this Ram my purpose is to treat.
That was commit I dare you well assure,
To the keeping and the busy cure,
Of cruel Mars the mighty god of werre,
Which with the stremys of his read sterre.
And influence of his deytee,
Ordained has by full great crueltee.
This Ram to keep bullis full vnmilde.
With brazen fete ramageous and wild.
And there with all fell and dispitous,
And of nature wood and furious.
To hurt and slay ever of one desire,
Out of whose mouth, leven and wild fire.
Like a flawme ever blased out,
To brenne all them that stood nygh aobut.
Eke of their eyes the lokes most horrible,
To a fourneys the stremes were visyble.
And who that would tencrease his glory.
This Ram of gold wynnen victory.
First he must of very force and might,
Unto oultraunce with these bulls to fight.
And them vanquishe alder first of all,
And make them humble as any ox in stall.
And sith them yoke and do them ere ye land,
Of very manhood this must he take in hand.
And after that he must also endure,
With a serpent of huge and great stature.
Without favor plainly have to do,
To oultraunce eke without words mo.
The which serpent shortly for to tell,
Was like a fend coming out of hell.
Full of venym and of cruel hate,
And with skales hard as any plate.
He armed was to stand at defense,
And by his brethe werse then pestilence,
Infecten would enuiron all the air,
In each place where was his repeyre.
He was so full of foul corruption,
And eke so dredefull of infection.
That death in soth shortly to deuyse,
Was the fine of this high Empryse.
To such as would this quarrel take in hond,
Ylyke in one both to free and bond.
But if he could the bet him self defend,
And of his conquest this was eke the end.
That when he had the mighty serpent slawe,
He must anon by custom and by law.
Out of his head his tethe echeone arrace,
And after sow them in the self place.
Where as the oxen eryd had aforne,
Of which seed there sprange a wonder corn.
Knights armed passing of great might,
Eueryche with other ready for to fight.
Til each his brother had ybrought to ground,
By mortal fate and give his dethes wound.
This was the end of euerychone,
For sowfastly of all there was non.
That live might by that fatal law,
A longer time then lived his fellow.
And by this way dreadful and peryllous,
Who so desires to ben victorious.
He pass must and manly to endure,
And how so fall take his adventure.
For of estate was no excepcion,
Chese who so will for this conclusyon,
He may not escape for favor ne for mede,
Who so begins a vyse him well I read.
For by the statute of the king he may,
Who so that will enter and assaye.
But after that he ones has begone,
He may not chese till he have lost or won.
Yet as some other of this Ram express,
And of his flese also bear witness.
It was nothing but gold and great treasour,
That Oetes king with full hye labor.
Made keep it as by Incantacions,
By sorserye and false illusyons.
That was spoke of in realms fer about,
For which many put their life in doubt.
Of hye desire that they had for to win,
The great treasoure that was shyt within.
Colchos land, as ye have hard deuyse,
Whose pursuyte rose out of couetyse.
Ground and root of woe and of myschaunce,
By vain report them self to auaunce.
For which they put them self in ieopardy,
Without rescues lykely for to dye.
There was no help ne no sleyght of arms,
That veil might again ye cursed charms.
So were they strong and supersticious,
That many worthy in knighthode famous.
Enhasted were unto their death alas,
That ieoparde list their lives as in this case.
This lasts forth till afterward byfell,
That Pelleus platly has hard tell.
The great mischiefs and destructions,
In Colchos wrought on sundry nations.
That have pursued these auntres to co^quere,
Till Pelleus so ferforth began enquere.
That he knew holy how the troth was,
And in his heart anon he began compass.
How that he might by any slyght make,
His neuewe Jason for to undertake.
This hye Empryse in Colchos for to wend,
For by that way he might him best shende.
And began pretend a color fresh of hew,
Ygylte outward so lusty and so new.
As though there were no treason hyd within,
He saw also it was time to begin.
On his purpose tho first he made it queint,
And began forthwith with gold and asure paint.
His gaye words, in sownyng glorious,
Knowing Jason was young and desirous.
Unto such thing and lightly would enclyne,
Therefore he thought that he would not fine:
Plainly to work to his conclusyon,
And made anon a convocation.
Of his lords and of his baronye,
About enuyron the land of Thesalye.
For to assemble estates of each degree,
Of all his realm within the chief city.
To hold a counseyle utterly he cast,
Thereby to acheue his desire as fast.
And so his court continued days three,
Till at the last his hyd iniquity.
He out began rake that has be hyd so long,
For he ne might no longer forth prolonge.
The venym hyd that fret so at his heart,
In so slye wise that no man might auerte.
Upon no side but that he mente well,
So was his treason covered euerydell.
And curtined so under treachery,
For he this thing so slyghtly began to gye.
At pryme face that no man might deem,
By any word as it would seem.
In chere, in port, by sign or dalyaunce,
But that he cast knyghtly to auaunce.
His young neuewe as by lykelynesse,
To hye honor of manhood and prowess.
For of thentent of which he began purpose,
No man cowde spy theffect he did so gloss.
The text was so conveyed with flatery,
That the people cowde not then espy,
Little or naught of his intent within.
For which anon to preyse him they begin.
That he such honor to his neuewe would,
For with such chere he began unfold,
Tofore them all this entencion.
That he has voyded all suspection.
From all that were assembled in the place,
And toward Jason he turn began his face.
Full louyngly in countenance and chere,
And to him said that all might it here.
Throughout ye court when maked was silence,
Thus word by word platly in sentence.
How Pelleus fearing to be deposed by his brothers son Jason, a worthy and
valiau^t young knight, cou^sayled him to undertake ye perellous and almost
invincible conquest of the golden flese at Colchos, who by his perswacion
undertook the same. Cap. iii.
COsyn Jason take heed what I shall sain
For the I am so inly glad and feign,
And so surprised with mirth through my heart
That it enchaseth and voideth all my smerte.
For to consider in mine inspection,
Of thy youth the disposicion.
The which shortly for to comprehend,
Save to virtue to nothing do entende.
Unto worship and to gentylnesse,
To manly fredom and to hye largess.
That verily whether I wake or wynke,
My joy is only there on for to thyncke.
My self I hold so passinge fortunate,
And all my land of hye and low estate.
That lykely are in honor for to flete,
And to live in rest and perfect quiet.
Through thy supporte and worthy gouernaile,
Whose manhood may so much to us avail.
By likelyhod and eke so much amend,
In very soth to save us and defend.
Again al tho as I can descryue,
That of malis would against us strive.
Or rebel be in any manner way,
Of surquedrye or pride to werraye.
Our worthiness assured in tranquyll,
From all assaute of them that would us ylle,
For to perturbe our noble state royal,
Against whom thou art our only wall,
Our mighty shyelde and our protection,
Thus deem I fully in mine opynion.
For of thine age, thy wit, thy providence,
Thy knyghtly heart thy manly excellence,
Reported ben and thine hye renown,
In many land and many regyowne,
This round world about in circuit.
How might I than stand in better plyte.
For thine honor like as it is found,
To my worship so hyghly does rebounde,
That I would plainly seek and nothing cease,
If I could help thine honor to increase,
And high renown Ywys in every hour.
And thereupon spenden my treasoure.
This hye desire withouten any fail,
Of entier love me does so sore assail,
That night nor day I may have no rest,
And all shall turn I hope for the best.
For tenhaunce thine honor to the heaven,
Above the poole and the sterres seven,
To which thing I have away espied,
As I my wit thereto have applied,
This is to mean what should I longer dwell,
My dear Cosyn as I shall after tell,
If it so were by manhood sovereign,
Of thy knyghthode that thou durst attain,
The flese of gold to conquer by thy strength,
Which is spoke of so fer in breadth and length,
And home return in body saufe and sound,
If so this conquest might in the be found,
That thou acheue durst this high emprise,
More hertes joy could I not deuyse.
In all this world, for sothly at the best,
My realm and I were fully then in rest.
For by thy manhood all men would us dread,
Wherefore Cosyn of knyghthode and manhede:
Take upon the my prayer and request.
And here my troth and take it for beheste,
What ever needs in meyne or costage,
I will my self toward this viage,
Ordain enough in harneyse and array,
That naught shall fail yt may be to thy pay.
And furthermore I plainly the ensure,
That if I see thou do thy besy cure,
This high empryse for to bring about,
Thou shall not fear another ben in doubt,
After my day by succession,
For to be king of this Region,
And holy have scepter and regaly.
Wherefore Jason lift up thine hertes eye,
Think thy name shall be long recorded,
Throughout ye world wherefore be accorded,
Within thy self and plainly not ne spare:
Of thine intent the sentence to declare.
When Jason had his uncle understand,
He much reioyseth for to take on hand,
This dreadful labor without auisement.
He naught aduertith the menyng fraudule^t,
The prive poison under sugar cured,
Nor how to galle with honey he was lured.
The dercke deceyte the cloudy false engyne,
Ygylt without but under was venyme.
Whereto Jason, has none aduertence.
The king he wend of clean conscience,
Withouten fraud had all this thing yment.
Wherefore anon he yeueth full assent,
At words few and plainly began to seye,
His uncles will that he would obey.
He was accorded in conclusion,
With humble heart and hoole entensyon,
Whereof the king receives such gladness,
That he uneath might the same express.
But right as fast did he his besy pain,
For this journey in have there needs ordain.
And for asmoche as Colchos the country,
Enclosed was inuyron with a sea,
And that no man how long that he strive,
Without ship thither may arryue,
To his presence anon he did call,
Famous Argus that could most of all,
To make a ship and first that art yfonde,
To sail with by sea fro land to land.
And he has wrought a ship by sotyl craft,
Which was the first that ever wawe rafte,
To have enter and Argon bare the name.
Gramariens do yet record the same.
The which ship first for that marvel,
Is called so which proudely bare her sail,
As Guydos book does us specifye.
But how it happed forth of this nauye.
When all was ready meyne and vytayle,
They bide naught but wind for to sail.
And many worthy was there in company,
Of noble birth and of great allye.
In that vyage ready for to gone,
Both for love and worship of Jason.
Among the which the great Hercules,
Of force and might of strength pereles.
And he begetten was upon Alcmene,
So inly fair and womanly to seen.
Of Iubiter, and that full long agone,
Taking lykelynesse of Amphitrion.
Down fro the heaven for all his deyte,
He rauisshed was through lust of her beauty.
For he her loved with heart and hole intent,
And of them two sothly by descent,
Came Hercules the worthy famous knight,
Most renoumed of manhood and of might.
Which in his time was so meruaylous,
So excellent and so victorious,
That Ouyde list recorden all him selue,
In Methamorphosis his deeds twelve.
Which ben remembered there inspeciall,
In his honor for a memoryall.
And them rehearse in order by and by,
If ye list here I purpose utterly.
He slough Antheon in the eyer on hight,
And many an other Gyaunt by his might.
He has outrayed for all their lymes rude,
The serpent Hydra he slough eke in pallude.
And Serberus the hounde he bond so sore,
At hell gates that he brake no more.
And made him void his venym in ye strife,
And upward gave him such a laxatyfe,
That all the world his brethe contagyous,
Infected has it was so venymous.
That with an blast he althinges would do die,
He took the Harpyes birds of Archady.
And slough the Centaurus bestes mo^struous.
The fyerse Lion he berafte his house.
This is to said when that he was slawe,
Out of his skin he has him stripped and flawe.
With cruel heart through his hye renown.
The golden applys he berafte the dragone.
The fyrye catte he slough withouten more,
Of Archadye likewise the cruel bore.
And at the last on his shuldres square,
Of very might the fyrmament he bare.
But for that I ne may not reaken all,
His passing deeds which ben historyall,
Redeth Ouide and there ye shall them find.
And of his trihumphes how he makes mi^de.
Thoughout ye world how he his honor fet,
And of the pyllers that at gades he set.
Which Alexsaundre of Macedone ye king,
That was so worthy here in his living.
Rood in his conquest as Guydo list to write,
With all his host proudely to visyte.
Beyond which no land is habitable,
Nor sea to sail sothly conuenable.
So far it is beyond the Occian,
That shypmen thense no further no skill can.
And Sibilles streightes maryners it call,
And these bounds named be of all,
Of Hercules for he him self them set.
As for his marks all other for to let,
Ferther to pass as Guydo makes mind,
And yet the place is called as I find.
Saracenica as fine of his labor,
Of Longa, Saphy, record of mine auctour.
Of this matter what more should I said,
For unto Jason I will return again.
That in all haste does him ready make,
Of his uncle when he has leave take.
Toward the sea and Hercules yfeare,
With all his men anon as ye shall here.
THe time of year when the shene son,
In his sphere was so far up run,
That he was fully passed the Gemyny.
And has his chare whyrled up so hye,
Through the draught of Pirrous the reed,
That he had made in the crabbes head,
His mansion and his sea royal,
Where hallowed is the stondyng estiuall,
Of fresh Appollo, with his golden wayne.
When herd men in heart be so feign,
From the hete to shroude them in the shade.
Under these branches and these bows glade.
When Phoebus beams that so bright shine,
Descended ben right as any line,
And cause the eyer by reflection,
To be full hoote, that lusty fresh season.
When corns gyn in the field to sede,
And the grasses in the grene mede,
Fro year to year ben of custom mow,
And on the plain cast and leyde full low,
Till the moisture consumed be away.
On holte and hethe the merye summers day.
At which time the young knight Jason,
With Hercules is forth to ship gone.
And with them eke as I rehearse can,
Of Greeks also many a lusty man.
Shypped echon with royal apparayle.
And when they were crossed under sail,
Within the ship which that Argus made,
Which was so stau^che it might no water lade
They began to sail and had wind at will.
The ship began break the sturdy wawes ill.
Upon the sea and so both day and night,
To Colchos ward they held the way right.
Gydyng their course by the lode sterre,
Where ere they sail by costs nigh or far.
For Philoctetes was their alder guide,
That could before so prudently provide,
Of great insyght to cast before and see.
Tempest or wind both on land and sea.
Or when there should trouble of storms fall,
For he was master plainly of them all.
In shipman craft and chose their governor.
And could them warn before of every shour,
That should be fall, when sterres did appear,
And specially as Guydo does us lere,
This Philoctetes which was tho no fool,
Had most his sight erecte unto the pole.
His aduertence and clear inspection,
To the sterres and constellacion,
Which the artre round about gone,
That clerks call the septemtrion.
For the pole ycalled Articus,
Ever in one appears unto us.
Right so in sothe who can look aryght,
Antarticus is shrouded from our sight.
But to shypmen that be discrete and wise,
That list their course prudently deuyse,
Upon the sea have suffysaunce enough,
To gye their passage by Arthourys ploughe.
For it to them is plain direction.
Unto the costs of every region.
With help only of nedle and of stone,
They may not err what costs yt they gone.
For maryners that be discrete and sage,
And like expert be of their lodmanage,
By strange costs for to sail far,
Gynne their course only by the sterre.
Which that Arthur compasses enuiron,
The which cercle and constellacion,
Ycalled is the cercle Artophilax.
Who knows it needs no more to axe.
For it to shypmen on the sterry night,
Is suffysaunt when that they see his light.
And as poets of these pooles twain,
In their books lyken for to feign,
And in their ditees manifest to us,
Calixto and the young Archadius,
Her own son were both ystellyfyed,
In the heaven and there defied,
For that Juno had to her envy.
With Jupiter when she did her espy.
For which she was into a bear turned.
And for her gilte she has in earth mourned.
Till into heaven Nason can you tell,
She was translate eternally to dwell.
Among sterres where she as is stalled,
And vrsa mayor is of clerks called.
So as her son for his worthy fame,
Of vrsa minor bears yet the name*
Of such, the course might not asterte,
Philectetes that was the most expert,
Of all shypmen that ever I herd tell*
For of cunning he might bear the bell.
And when the Greeks had long be,
Fordryue and cast saylynge in the sea,
And all forweried after their travail,
They cast to aryue if it would avail.
Them to refreshe and disporte in joy,
Upon the bounds of the land of Troy.
How Jason in his expedicion toward Colchos, casually with his fellowship
arrived in the territoryes of Troy, meaning only there for a while to
refreshe and rest them. Cap. iiii.
VUhan Hercules and Jason on his hand,
Out of their ship taken have the land,
And with them eke their knights euerichone,
That fro the sea be to land gone,
Sore forweried after their travail,
As they in sothe come to aryuaile,
At Symeonte an haven of great renown,
That was but little distant fro Troy town.
And they were glad to be in sykernesse,
From storm and tempest after werinesse.
For they ne mente treason, harm, nor gyle,
But on the stronde to resten them awhyle.
No wight to hurt of any manner age,
Nor in that isle for to do damage,
To man nor beast where ever that they go,
But as to abide for a day or two,
Them to refreshe and efte repair anon,
When that the rage of the seas were gone,
And while that they upon the stronde lay,
They did naught else but to disporte and play,
And bath and wash them in the fresh ryuere.
And drunk waters that were soote and clear:
That sprange like cristall in the cold well.
And took right naught but if it were to selle.
It was nothing in their entencion,
Unto no wight to do offensyon.
Or to moleste or greuen any wight.
But the unstable rule of fortunes might,
Has ever envy that men live in ease.
Whose hasty course unawarely does disease.
For she was cause god wot causeles,
This gery fortune, this lady recheles,
The blind goddess of transmutacion,
To turn her whele by reuolucion,
To make Troyens unjustly for to wene,
That Greeks were arrived them to tene.
So that the cause of this suspicion,
Has many brought unto destruction.
Full many worthy of kings and princes,
Throughout ye world reckened in provinces.
Were by this slaundre unto mischief brought.
For thing alas that never was be thought.
For it was cause and chief occasiowne,
That this city and this royal town,
Destroyed was as it is plainly found.
Whose walls hie were bete^ down to ground.
And many a man and many a worthy knight,
Were slayue there and many a lady bright,
Was wedowe made by duresse of this werre.
As it is kouthe and since reported far.
And many a maid in grene and tender age,
Be left were sole withouten marriage.
Behind their fathers alas it fall should,
And for naught else but yt fortune would,
Shown her might and her crueltye.
In vengeance taking upon this city.
Alas that ever so worthy of estate,
Should for so little fallen at the debate,
When it is gone it is not like to staunche.
For of the graffing of a litell branch,
Full sturdy trees grown up full often.
Who clymbeth hye may not fall soft.
And of sparks that be of sight small,
Is fire engendered that deuoureth all.
And as a gnat first of litell hate,
Encauseth flawme of contek and debate.
And enuiouslye to sprede abroad full far.
And thus alas in realms mortal werre,
Is first begone as men may read and se,
Of a spark of litell enmitye.
That was not staunched first when it bego^ne.
For when the fire is so far yronne,
That it embraseth hertes by such hatrede,
To make them brenne as hot as any glede.
On other party through his cruel tene,
There is no staunche but sherp swerdes kene.
The which alas consumes all and slethe,
And thus the fine of enmite is death.
And though the ginning be but casuell,
The biding frete is passingly cruel.
To void realms of rest peace and joy,
As it fill whilom of this worthy Troy.
It does me weep of this case sudden,
For every wight ought it to complain.
That litell gilt should have such vengeance,
Except percase through gods purueaunce,
That this mischief should perhaps be,
The ensuing cause of great felycitye.
For Troy brought thus unto destruction,
Was the ginninge and occacion,
In mine auctour as it is specified,
That worthy Rome was after edified.
By the of spring of worthy Eneas.
Whilom from Troy when he exiled was.
The which Rome read and ye may se,
Of all the world was head and chief city.
For the famous passing worthiness.
And eke when Troy was brought thus in distress,
And ye walls cast and broke adowne,
It was in cause that many regiowne,
Begone was and many a great city,
For this Troyan this manly man Enee,
By sundry seas began so long to sail,
Till of fortune he came into Itayle.
And wan that land as books tellen us,
With whom was eke his son Ascanius.
That after Enee does by line succeed,
The land of Itale justly to possede.
And after him his son Siluius,
Of whom came Brute so passingly famous.
After whom if so I shall not feign,
Whilom this land called was Britayne.
For he of geauntes through his ma^hode wa^,
This noble isle and it first began.
From Troy also with this ilke Enee,
Came worthy Francus a lord of hye degree.
Which after Rome te^crease his high renown
Builded in his time a full royal town,
Which he sothely his honor to auaunce,
After his name he made do call it France.
And thus began as I understand,
The name first of that worthy land.
And Anthenor departing from Troyens,
Began the city of the Veneciens.
And Sycanus within a litell while,
Began tenhabite the land of Cecile.
And after parting of this Sycanus,
His worthy brother called Syculus,
So as I find reigned in that isle,
And after him it called was Cecile.
But Eneas is forth to Tuscy gone,
It tenhabite with people right anon.
And in Cicile he Naples first began.
To which full many Neopolitane,
Longs this day full rich and of great might.
And Diomede the noble worthy knight.
When Troy was fall with his toures fair,
How to his reygne he cast to repair.
His lieges tho began a quarrel feign,
And him withstode with al their might and maine.
And of malice and conspiraciowne,
They him wtheld both scepter and the crown.
Their deutye and their old aligeaunce,
And him denied both troth and obeyssau^ce.
Wherefore anon so as the books tell,
With all his folks he went for to dwell,
To Calabre and began it to possede.
And there the knights of this Diomede,
That fro Troy have him thither sewed,
To form of birds were anon tra^smewed,
By Circes craft daughter of the Son,
And in the eyer to flee anon they gonne.
And called been in I sodore as I read.
Among Greeks the birds of Diomede.
Not as some books of them list bear witness
This change was made by Venus ye goddess.
Of wrath yt she had to this worthy knight,
Only for that she saw him ones fight,
With Eneas her ownely son dear.
At which time as they faughte yfeare,
And Diomede with a darte ygrounde,
Began ame at him a deadly mortal wound.
His mother Venus began anon him shroud,
Under a sky and a misty cloud.
To save him tho that time fro mischaunce.
And for this skill Venus took vengeance,
Into birds to turn his meyne.
And in that form from year to year they fle,
Unto his tomb where as he is grave,
So yt on him as yet a mind they have.
That of custom for a remembrance,
A rite they hold and an obseruaunce,
At his exequies these birds every chone,
A days space and thence not ne gone.
And moreover as it to them is dew,
They love the Greeks and platly they eschew,
Latins all for ought that may betyde,
For they present anon they flee aside.
And each from other as books us assure,
These birds know only of nature.
Greeks and latins kindly assonder,
When they them se yt which is such a wonder,
Unto my wit that I can not espy,
The causes hid of such sorcerye.
But well I wot though my wit be blent,
That root of all was false enchauntement,
But of our faith we ought to defye,
Such apparences showed to the eye.
Which of the fend is but illusion,
Thereof no more and thus when Troy town,
Euersed was and that brought to naught,
Full many city was ybylde and wrought.
And many land and many rich town,
Was edifyed as by occasiowne,
Of this werre as ye have herd me tell.
Which to declare as now I may not dwell.
From point to point like as books said,
For to Jason I will resort again,
That landed is with worthy Hercules,
At Symeonte the haven that he ches.
As I have told to rest them and comfort,
And for not else but only to desporte.
But to the king reygnyng in Troy town,
That was that time called Lamedowne.
Of false envy reported was and told,
How certain greeks were of heart bold,
His land to enter the which they not knew.
Well arrayed and in a vessel new.
Which to aryue had there no license.
And them purpose for to done offense.
By likelyhed and his land to grieve.
For they of pride without any love,
Or safe conduite have the stronde ytake.
And such masteries on the land they make,
As in their power were all manner thing,
Without regard plainly to thy king.
Of his estate taking tho none head.
Of such strangers great is for to dread.
If men by laches other neclygence,
Fully to wete what is their pretense,
But forth prolonge and no peril cast,
Such sodeyne thing would be wist as fast,
And not differred till the harm be do.
For it were wisdom that it were so.
Men may to long suffer and abide,
Of necligence for to let slide,
For to enquere of their governance,
This was the speech of the dalyaunce,
Eueriche to other by reuelaciowne,
In every street throughout Troy town.
Some rowning and some spoke abroad,
And this speech so long there abode,
From one to an other sothely that the sown,
Reported was to king Laomedowne.
As ye have herd the which of wilfulness,
Without counsel or auisenesse.
To hastily maked has his sonde,
To wit how they were hardy for to land.
Beside his leave of presumption.
Wherefore he bad that in conclusion,
Without abode soon to remewe.
Or finally they should not eschew,
To be compelled maugre who says nay.
And so the king upon a certain day,
In haste has sent his imbassadore,
Unto Jason of Greeks the gouernoure,
That another thought harm nor villanye,
But Innocent with his company,
Disported him endlonge on the stronde.
And ever has do since he came to land.
And of the charge that he on him laid,
And word by word to Jason how he said,
As in effect with every cyrcumstaunce,
This was the sum plainly in substance.
How Lamedon king of Troy sent to Jason commaundyng him and his fellowship
forthwith to depart the confines of his countreith and of their answer sent
again to the king. Ca. v.
THe wise worthy and famous of renown,
The mighty king ye noble Lamedowne,
Has unto you his message thus ysent.
Of which theffect as in sentement,
Is this in sothe that he has marvel,
Into his land of your ariuayle.
Bringing with you Greeks not a few,
And have no conduite for you for to show.
Protection plainly nor license,
In prejudice of his magnificence.
Wherefore he has on me the charge laid,
And will to you that it be platly said,
That ye anon without more delay,
Without noise or any more affraye,
Of Troy land the bonds that ye leave,
Or you and yours he casts for to grieve,
And better it is with ease to depart,
Than of folly your lives to Ieoparte.
In any wise for lack of providence.
Against his will to make resistance.
Other of pride or of wilfulness,
For to be bold without auisenesse,
To interrupt his high felicitye.
For he desires in tranquillity,
To hold his reign withouten perturbau^ce*
In whose parson is made such alyaunce,
Atwene his manhood and Royal majesty,
That they will suffer none of no degree,
Him to disquiet in any manner wise.
Wherefore I counsel as ye semen wise,
To take good head unto this that I seye,
And this his bidding not to disobey.
Lest ye offend his knightly excellence.
For ye shall find as in experience,
Without feyninge the sothe of that I tell.
Take heed therefore I may no longer dwell.
From point to point since ye be wise and sage,
For this is hoole the effect of my message.
When Jason herd had of the messegere,
These words al he ga^ to chau^ge^ chere.
And kept him close with sobre countenance,
And was not Ireful hastye for greuaunce,
Ne for no rancoure he caughte of his tale,
Save in his face began to waxen pale,
Long abiding or he ought would said,
And or he spoke any word again.
As unto him that fro the king was sent,
He began disclose the sum of his intent,
Unto his folks standing round about,
For unto them he tho discured out,
The message hole and first when he abreyde,
Then word by word thus to them he said.
Syrs he says to you be it well know,
Take heed I pray and that both hye and low.
How Lamedone that is the king of Troy,
Has sent to us a wonderful Lenuoye.
Chargyng in have to hye out of his land,
And axeth how we thus upon the stronde,
For to ariue hadden hardiness.
Withouten leave se there his gentilnesse.
And his fredome the which is not alite.
How like a king he can him self aquite.
Unto strangers that enter in his isle.
For naught god wot but for a litell while,
Them to refreshe and to depart anon.
Like as ye can recorden euerychon.
And hereof bearen witness al and some.
Alas fredome where is it now become.
Where is manhood and gentilnesse also,
Which in a king together both two,
Should of custom have their resting place.
And where is honor yt should also embrase.
A lords heart which of kyngely right,
Of manly fredome with all his full might,
Should strangers half refreshe and recomfort.
That afterward they might of him report.
Larges expert manhood and gentillesse,
That they have found in his worthiness.
For if noblesse were aught of his allye,
And fredome eke knit with his regallye,
So as longs to honor of a king,
He should have charged first of all thing,
His worthy lieges with all that might please,
To have showed their comfort and their ease;
With all their might and their busy cure,
Unto strangers that of adventure,
Were in the sea fordryuen and dismayed.
And of our coming not be evil appayed.
For if that he in any case semblable,
Oether by fortune that is variable,
By sort or hap that may not be withstand,
Aryued had into Greeks land,
More honestly and like to his degree.
He should of us have there received be.
Like as it longs unto gentrye,
But since that he for ought I can espy,
Has fredom honor and humanytye,
At ones made out of his court to fly,
Chose dishonor and let worship gone,
There is no more but we shall euerichone,
That he has chose help to fulfiil,
When that power shall not be like his will.
That is to say and sothe it shall be found,
That his deed shall on him self rebounde.
Since of malice he has this work begone,
Perauenture or that the somer son,
To zodiak has thrice gone about.
For let him trust and nothing be in doubt,
We shall him serve with such as he has sought,
For if I live it shall be dear abought.
Albe thereof I set as now no tide,
And in this land I will no longer abide,
Till I have leysur better to soiourne.
And with that word began anon to fourne,
With manly face and with a stern cheer,
All suddenly unto the messagere.
That fro the king was so unto him sent.
And in this wise he shows his intent.
My friend quod he I have well understand,
The message hoole that you have took in hand,
From thy king to bringen unto us.
Right now unawarely and since it stands thus,
That now I have his meaning every dele,
From point to point and understand it well.
Word by word and plainly it conceived,
And the gifts that we have received,
On his behalf in this our great need,
I will remember and take of it good head.
To every thing that thou have to us brought.
For trust well that I forget it naught.
But shall imprinte it surely in my mind.
And withal this how goodly that we find,
The great bounty in all manner thing.
Within this land of Lamedone the king.
His welcominge and his great cheer,
And goodly sonde that thou bring here.
Not according as to our intent.
For god well wot that we never meant,
Harm unto him nor plainly no damage,
To none of his of any manner age.
And there upon the gods inmortall,
That of their kind ben celestial,
Unto record with all mine heart I take.
And touching this my borowes I the^ make.
In witnessing we meant none offense,
Ne have not taken as by violence,
Within this realm of woman child or man,
And so thou may report if thou can.
But for that we fordriuen in the sea,
Compelled were as of necessyte,
For to ariue as thou have herd me said.
Only to rest us here upon the plain.
Without more unto a certain day,
And afterward to hold forth our way,
Upon our Journey and make no tarying.
Like as thou may record unto thy king.
And say him eke he shall the time se,
That he perauenter shall mow thanked be,
When time comes by us or by some other.
Go forth thy way and say him thus my brother.
And then anon as Jason was in peace,
The manly knight the worthy Hercules,
When he had herd this thing fro point to poi^t,
He was anon brought into such disioynt,
Of hasty rancoure and of sodeyne Ire,
The which his heart almost set a fire,
That suddenly as he abreyde abacke,
Of hie disdeyne even thus to him he spoke.
With chere askoyne unto the messengere.
And said fellow be nothing in fear.
Of our abydinge but do the well certain,
That are Titan his bemes reyse again,
We shall depart and hence to ship gone,
That of our men shall not be left one,
Within this land and god to forne to morrow.
And there upon have here my faith to borowe.
For we no longer shall hold here soiourne,
For else where we shall make our return,
To morrow early by the day dawninge,
On pain of reprefe and so go say thy king.
And or three year if god us grant life,
Maugre who grutcheth or makes any strife
Unto this land we shall again return,
And cast anchor a while to soiourne.
Take heed thereof and note well the time.
A new change shall follow of this prime.
And the^ his power shall not so large stretche,
Of his safe conduit litell shall we reche,
I say the platly as is our intent,
We will not have unto his maundement,
But small regard and we that day abide.
For taking leave shall be set aside.
Because he has begonnen here a play,
Which we shall quite by god if that we may.
That turn shall into his own shame.
And spare not to say thy king the same.
This messeger then began again replye,
And said sir ye may not me deny,
Of honest my message to declare,
Auise you well for I will not spare.
The kings sonde plainly for to tell.
And where so beye list to go or dwell,
Ye may yet chese who so be lefe or loathe,
Ye have no cause with me to be wroth,
For it sit not unto your worthiness,
If ye take heed by way of gentellesse,
Of manassing such arowes for to shete,
For bett it were your thretninge to let,
And keep secret till ye be at your large,
For certainly no parcel of my charge,
Is to strive with you or make debate.
But better is betimes than to late.
That ye beware for harms that might fall.
And for my part I say unto you all,
It were pytie that ye destroyed were.
Or any man should hinder or do dear,
So worthy persons in any manner wise.
Which likly ben to be discrete and wise.
And lest with words as now I do you grieve,
I say no more I take of you my leave.
THe night ypassed at springing of ye day,
When that the lark with a blessed lay,
Began to salve the lusty rows read,
Of Phoebus chare yt there were freshly sprede,
Upon the bordure of the orient.
And Aurora of heart and hole intent,
With the swetenes of her silver shoures,
Bedewed had the fresh somer flowers,
And made the rose with new bawme to flete,
The soote lylye and the margarete,
For to enclose their tender leaves white,
Oppressed hertes with gladness to delight.
That drery were before of nights tene.
And honey suckels among the bushes grene,
Enbawmed had enuyron all the air.
Long or Titan began make his repair,
With the brightness of his beams merye,
For to rejoice all our Hemisperie.
For long aforne are he did arise,
This worthy Jason in full hasty wise,
And his fellow Hercules also,
Ycharged have their shypmen have ado,
To hale up anchor and them ready make,
And bad in haste every man to take,
The right way unto the ship anon.
For in sothnes this manly man Jason,
Thought he was not stuffed of meyne,
To gin as than a werre on Troy city.
For he was not shortly to conclude,
Egall in nombre nor in multitude,
As for that time a werre to begin.
It was not likely that he should win.
Victory as tho for they were but a few.
And it sits naught for a man to hew,
Above his head when it is over hye,
Lest that the chippes do fall in his eye.
Wherefore of Troy they leave the costs bliue,
They drew up sail the ship began to drive,
The wind was good the gods favorable,
Fortune their friend though she be variable,
And thus to Colchos safe they ben ycome.
And unto land safe both all and some,
They ben arrived in a litell space.
For in the sea found they have such grace,
Of Neptunus that caused them as blyue,
As I said erst at Colchos to aryue.
NOw in this isle and in this little land,
That Colchos hight ye shall understand,
How that there was a royal chief cyty,
In all that reygne most of dignitye.
Of worthiness of riches and of fame,
And Iacomtes tho it bare the name.
Chefest of all to speak of buylding,
With streets large and curyous of housinge.
And therewith all dyched well without.
Strong walled and toured round about.
Of huge height and aloft battayled,
And ye right strongly lest they were assailed,
With many paleys stately and royal,
For there was tho the seat most principal,
The king to abide better than else where.
And at that time it happed him be there.
And he was called Oetes as I read,
Full reno^med of knighthod and of manhead,
And him about a well besene mean,
Like as was sitting unto his degree.
And every where the lands enuirowne,
The fame spredde of his hye renown.
And al about this mighty chief city,
Where as Oetes held his royal sea,
Were rivers fresh of which ye waters clean,
Like cristall shone again the son shene.
Fair playnes as Guydo bears witness,
And wholesome hills full of lustiness,
And many lake and many lusty well.
And there were eke mine auctour ca^ you tell.
Full many a park full fair and fresh to seen,
And many wode and many a medowe grene.
With sundry flowers among ye herbs meynt,
Which on their stalk nature has depeynt,
With sundry hewes within and eke without.
After the season as somer came about.
For fishing fouling for hauking eke also,
For venery and hunting both two,
The place was right inly delytable.
Of corn and grain passingly greable.
And plenteous in all manner thing.
For their men hard the birds freshely sing.
In time of year in their hermonye.
That the noise and soote melodye,
On fresh branches full delycious,
Rejoice would these folks amerous.
Whom loves bronde had fyred to the heart,
And efte adawen of their pains smerte.
That certeynly when that grene Vere,
Ypassed was aye fro year to year,
And May was come the month of gladness,
And fresh flora of flowers Emperesse,
Had cladde the soil new at her deuyse,
This noble place was like to Paradyse.
And Ceres goddess of largess and foyson,
Such plentye gave unto that regyon,
Of flesh, of fyshe, wine, vitaile and corn,
That the lycour of her full horn,
Upon the land so began to rain and snow.
That all astates yea both high and low,
Lad their life in soueraiane suffysaunce.
With all that nature could or might auau^ce.
This little isle with her gifts great,
Like as toforne ye have hard me treat,
For there was ple^tie and there was habundau^ce,
And there was all that might do pleasaunce.
To any heart and all commoditee.
And so befell that to this city,
Jason is come and with him Hercules.
And after them follows all the pres.
Full well arrayed and royally be said.
Their arms enclosed together twain and twain
A people chose as it were for ye nones.
And therewith all of brawnes and of bones,
Eueriche of them of making and facion,
Full well complete as by preportion.
Young of age and of good stature,
Sad of countenance and full demure.
That every wight had great pleasaunce.
To se the manner of their governance.
So young, so fresh, hardy and meke also,
And all at ones they to the paleys go.
With such a chere that eueriche has disport,
To see the manner of their noble port.
So gentylmanly they demeaned were,
That the people prese began every where,
To see these strangers like the greeks gyse.
Demean them self in so thryfty wise.
And of desire the people ne would cesse,
About them to gather and impresse.
And to enquere what they might be,
That of new with such a royalte,
Ben suddenly entered into the town.
Thus eueriche would with his fellow rowne.
They were so rude to stare and to gase,
To gape and look as it were in a mase.
As townish folk done so commonly,
Of every thing that falls sodeinly.
But how Oetes like a worthy king,
When that he hard first of their coming,
Receives them and holy the manner,
If that ye list anon ye shall it here.
When yt the king has sothly understand
How the greeks come were to land,
And how Jason was also there with all,
Borne by dissente of the blud royal,
Of Thesalye and lykely to be heir,
If he by grace have again repeire,
The auentures achyued of Colchos.
The king anon out of his sea arose.
Of gentillesse in all the haste he may,
In goodly wise to mete them on the way.
And them receives with a cheer benign,
And unto them anon he does assygne,
His officers tawayte them night and day.
Chargynge them in every manner way,
That what soever may to them do ease,
Or any thing that may them queme or plese,
That they it have in foyson and plente.
Eueryche of them like to his degree.
Thus he commanded in all manner thing,
And than anon this noble worthy king,
As he that was of fredome a myrrour,
Through many halle and many rich toure,
By many turn and many diverse way,
By many gree made of marbyll graye,
Has them conveyed a full easy pase,
Till he the^ brought there his chamber was.
Where he with them held his daliaunce.
And there anon with every circumstaunce,
Of manly fredome he made unto them chere.
And in his chamber englosed bright and clear,
That shone full shene with gold and with asure,
Of many image that there was in picture.
He has commanded to his officers,
Only in honor of the^ that were strangers,
Spyces and wine and after that anon,
The young fresh the lusty man Jason,
As fast began by license of the king,
For to declare the cause of this coming.
But first the king with great royalte,
Assended is into his royal sea.
Clothes of gold ranged enuyron,
After the custom of that regyon.
That to behold it was a noble sight,
Stondyng about many a worthy knight.
And many a squyre and many a gentylman,
Full well besene and the king right than,
Unto Jason stondyng in presence,
Commanded has of his magnifycence,
With Hercules to sytte a down beside.
And Jason than no longer list abide,
Of his coming the cause for to show.
The effect of which was this in words few.
Save Jason first ere he his tale began,
Full well auised and chered like a man.
Conceived has and noted wonder well,
From point to point his matter euerydell.
And not forgot a word in all his speech.
But even like as rethoryke does teach,
He began his tale so by craft conueye,
To make ye king to that which he would seye,
Condescende and rather to enclyne.
For to assente that he might fine,
Of his coming the knightly hye empryse,
Thus word by word as I shall here deuyse.
RIght worthy prince present in this place,
Only with supporte of your hye grace,
And your goodness most excellent and dign
With patience of your favor benygne,
Displease it not that I may say and show,
And efte declare with words but few,
The fynal ground and cause of my coming.
So that ye list which ben so noble a king,
In goodly wise without more offense,
Of curtesye to give aundience.
To my request and that ye not disdain,
Goodly to grant that I may atteyne,
In this isle if it may me avail,
The flese of gold freely to assail.
As the gods in this mine adventure.
List to ordeyne for my fatal eure.
In whom lies all plainly and fortune,
For to govern things in comune.
In werre and peace conquest and victory,
And of arms the renown and glory.
Discomfyture and bryngyng to outraunce,
All lies in them to hyndre or tauaunce,
Again whose might no mortal man may chese,
But for all this where so I win or lose,
Or life or death be fine of my labor,
If that ye list to do me this favor,
To give me leave and no more delay,
I am accorded fully for to assaye,
Like as the statute makes mention,
Me list to make none acception.
Upon no side favor for to find.
But as the rytes plainly maken mind,
What ever fall I shall them under fonge.
Lowly besechynge that ye not prolonge,
My purpose now nor make no delay,
But of your grace set to me a day,
Mine enterprise that I may achyeue.
For mine abode stant upon your leave.
Says but one word of grauntyng at ye lest,
And than I have the fine of my request.
And when the king had herd ceriously,
Thentent of Jason said so manfully,
He stynt alyte and kept him close a while,
Till at the last he goodly began to smyle,
Toward Jason and said unto him thus.
Jason quod he albe thou desirous,
To vnderfonge this passing hye empryse,
My counsel is like as I shall deuyse.
Full prudently for to cast aforne,
The mortal peril or that thou be lorne.
For in this thing there is a law ysette,
By chauntement that may not be ylette,
Nor remedyed for favor nor for mede.
For death in soth who so takes head,
Is the guerdon platly or they twynne.
Of them that cast the flese of gold to win.
For help is none in manhood nor fortune,
The straight way is so importune,
So dredefull eke and so full of rage,
That save death there lies no passage.
Of victory the palm to conquer.
For sothly Jason as I shall the lere,
Founded of old by meruaylous workyng,
By the statutes of this mortal thing,
So sore bound under my regalye,
That the rygour I may not modifye.
Wherefore Jason or thou this thing attame,
Lest afterward on me were laid ye blame,
Of thy lesynge or thy destruction,
Of faithful heart and true entencion,
I warn the my self for to quyte.
So that no man justly shall me wit.
Though thou of youth and of thy wylfulnesse
Thy life destroy without auysynesse.
Since I Jason of this peryllous case,
From point to point have told the al ye case,
Be now auised and put no fault in me,
For the surplus freely lies in the.
Of all this thing sith thou may chese,
And where so be that thou win or less,
No man to me it justly may arecte.
For that law that Mars him self set,
No mortal man of right may duelye pass.
For hie or low he gets none other grace.
Than the gods list for him ordeyne.
What ever he be that cast him to darrayne,
This diverse thing most furious of dread.
Wherefore Jason how ever that thou speed,
I have to the openly declared,
Holy the peryle and for favor spared,
As fer in soth as reason will and right.
For thou wotest well it lies not in my might,
For to declare or any man to let,
That of manhood knightly cast to set,
Upon this thing as thou have herd me tell.
What should I longer in this matter dwell.
It were but vain for now thou know all,
Beware of her that tourneth as a ball.
For at this time thou gettest no more of me,
Do as thou list I put the choice in the.
And with that word the king rose up anon,
Upon the time when he should gone,
Unto his meat and Jason by his side.
As ye shall here if so ye list abide.
THe time approaches and began to neigh fast,
That officers full busyly them cast,
To make ready with all their busye cure.
And in the halle bordes for to cure.
For by the dyal the hour they began to mark,
That Phoebus southward whirled up his arc
So hye a lofte that it drew to none.
That it was time for the king to gone,
Unto his meat and enter into halle.
And than Oetes with his lords all,
And with his knights about him euerichon,
With Hercules and also with Jason,
It set to meat in his royal sea.
And every lord like to his degree.
But first of all this worthy man Jason,
Assygned was by the king anon,
For to sytte at his own board.
And Hercules that was so great a lord.
Was set also fast by his side.
And the marshall no longer list abide,
To assygne estates where they should be.
Like as they were of hye or low degree.
And after that on scaffolde hye alofte,
The noise began loud and nothing soft.
Of trumpeters and eke of clarioneres.
And there with all the noble officers,
Full thryftely served have the halle.
Like as the season began that time fall.
With all deyntes that may rekened be,
That sothfastly the foyson and plente,
Of kyngly fredom unto hye and low,
So fulsomly began there to reygne and snow,
That through ye hall was ye manhod praised.
Of the king and his renown raised.
That can his gestes sothly for to sey,
When that him lysteth chere and festey.
So like a king and in so thryfty wise,
With all deynte that man can deuyse,
For at this feast and solempnitie,
The greeks might the great nobely see,
Of king Oetes and the worthynesse,
And by report thereof bear witness,
Where so they come after all their live.
I want conning by order to discryue,
Of every course the diuersitees.
The strange sewes and the sotyltees.
That were that day served in that place,
Have me excused though I lightly pass,
Though I can not all in order said,
Mine english is to rude and eke to plain.
For to endite of so hye a thing.
But forth I will rehearse how the king.
To show his gestes his nobley over all.
Has for his daughter sent in special.
And bid she should forth anon be brought,
The which in south though men had sought,
The world thrughout I do you plain assure,
Men might a found no fayrer creature.
More womanly of port nor manner.
Nor more demure nor sadder of her chere.
Whose beauty was not lykely for to fade,
And when she came the greeks for to glade,
The halle in soth she walks up and down,
Of womanhede and pure affectiowne.
To make chere unto these gestes new.
And thus Medea, with her rosen hew,
And with the freshness of the lyllye white,
So entermedled kyndly by delight,
That nature made in her face sprede,
So egally the white with the read,
That the medlynge in conclusyon,
So was ennewed by proportion,
That finally excess was there none.
Of one nor other for both two in one.
So joined were long to endure,
By the empress that called is nature.
For she her made like to her devise,
That to behold it was a paradyse.
In very soth both to one and all,
Of old and young that sytten in the hall.
Thereto she was as by succession,
Borne to be heir of that regyon.
After her father by descent of line.
If she abide and dure after his fine.
Sith he ne had by right to succeed,
One heir male that I can of read.
She was also the book makes mention,
Were unto years of discretion.
Able for age married for to be.
And not withstondynge also eke that she,
Was of beauty and of womanhede,
One of the fairest that I can of read,
Yet none of both have her youth let,
That to clergy was her desire set.
So passyngly that in special,
In all the arts called lyberall,
She was expert and knowing at the best,
It was her ure to konne what her list.
Of such a woman herd I never tell.
At Helicon she drank so of the well.
That in her time was there none semblable.
I found in sothe ne none that was so hable,
As to conceive by study and doctrine.
And of natures to dispute and termine,
She could also and the causes find,
Of althinges formed as by kind.
She had in lernyng so her time spente,
That she knew of the fyrmament,
The true course and of the sterres all.
And by their meuynge what that should fall.
So was she learned in astronomye.
But most she wrought by nycromancye.
With exorsismes and co^iuracions,
And used also to make illusyons,
With her charms said in sondrye wise.
And with rytes of diverse sacrifyse.
Encens and riches cast into the fire,
To show the things like to her desire,
With gootes horns and with milk and blude.
When the moon equat was and stood,
In the fyfthe or in the syxte house.
And was fortuned with lokyng gracious.
To these an hour that were convenient,
And fortunate as by enchauntement,
To make and work sundry apparences,
So well she knew the heavenly influences.
And aspectes both wroth and glade,
For she by them all her things made.
That apperteyne to such experimentes.
For when her list by her enchauntementes,
She could make the wyndes for to blow,
To thondre lighten and to hail and snow.
And frese also to grieve men with pain,
And sodeynely she could make to rain.
And show what wether that her list to have.
And gasten men with sodeyne earth quaue.
And turn the day unawarely unto night:
And then anon make the son bright.
Show his beams full persyng and full shene,
With golden horns to void nyghtes tene.
And reise ye floodes with many a dredful wawe,
And wha^ her list she could them eft wtdrawe.
Eke young trees to sere root and rynde,
And afterward make them again in kind.
With lusty branches blome and budde new.
Also in winter with flowers fresh of hew,
Array the yerth and tapyte him in grene.
That to behold a Joy it was to seen.
With many color showing full diverse,
As white and read grene ynde and pers.
The deysy with her rich perled crown,
And other flowers that winter made frown,
Upon their stalk freshly for tappere.
And sodeynely with a deadly chere,
She could somer into winter turn.
Causynge the day with mystes for to moan.
And old men she could make young,
And efte again or any here was spronge,
She could them show both in head and berde.
Full hoar and graye in craft so was she lerede.
And trees with fruit she could also make bare,
Of rind and leaf to do men on them stare.
Eclipse the moon and the bright son,
Or naturally they had their course yronne,
To them apropred which they may not pass.
For if that Tytanes course by kindly trase.
When so he meueth under the clyptik line,
The clipse mott follow as auctours list diffine
So that there be by their description,
Of both twain full conjunction.
And that the son with his beams red,
Have his dwelling in the dragones head.
And the moon be set eke in the tail,
As by nature than it may not fail,
That there must fall eclyps of veary need,
In sundry books like as ye may read.
Because of certain interfecacions,
Of diverse circles and reuolucions,
That maked ben in the heaven alofte.
Which causen us for to fail often.
Of the fresh and comfortable stremes,
That be us shad from Phoebus bright bemes.
For so the moon has made deuisyon,
By this sodeyne interposicion,
That of our sight the stremes visuall,
May not behold nor yet ysene at all.
Nor to our lust fully comprehend,
How Phoebus in his chair is cheuansende.
As we were wont aforehande for to see.
But of all this the great Ptholome,
King of Egypt tells the causes why.
Within his book and that compendiously.
Both of Eclyps and conjunction.
And why they fall by natural mocion.
But of Medee though this clerk Ouyde,
Tencrease her name upon every side,
List such things in his fables tell,
Though he of poets was the spryng and well,
Yet god forbede ye should give credence,
To such feynyng or do so high offense.
Since of nature it must be denied.
Al such affirmyng and likewise be diffyed,
Of every christien steadfast in believe.
For certainly it would hyghly grieve.
Our conscience in any wise to wene,
Against kind which is so hye a queen.
That any wight or living creature,
Should have power I do you plain assure,
So cursed things supersticious,
To do or work to kind contrarious.
For god almyghtye Judge of Judges all,
Has set a law the which may not fall.
Among planettes eternally tendure.
Before ordained in his eternal cure.
The which may not as clerks list termine,
Upon no side bowen nor declyne.
But as they were from discord or debate,
Eternally yformed and create,
Through the finger of his sapience,
Always to meue in their intelligence,
Like as they be to his lordshyp bound,
For never yet was eclyps yfounde,
The moon not being inconiunction.
As I have told save in the passion.
The which eclyps was tho against kind,
Nature her knot that time list unbind.
When gods son starfe upon the roode,
The son of life was derked for our good.
When heaven and earth with hye compunction,
Have signs showed of lamentacion.,
By earthquakes light turned to derkenes,
And dead bodies upward began them dress.
From their tombs again from death to live,
Stone and rock a sonder began to ryue.
In the temple the veyll was kut a two,
And signs many were yshewed tho,
That for ye wondre and tokens marvelous,
The great worthy Dyonysyous,
Vhiche at Athenes as clekes of him write,
Was called in schools Ariopagyte.
He when he saw this noble famous clerk,
The bright day sodeynely so derke,
Although he were apaynym in tho days,
And was infecte with rytes of their lays,
As he that was most chief and principal,
Of philosophers for to reken all.
Yet that time astoned in his mind,
Said platly other the god of kind,
Suffers the death other out of doubt,
This round world which is so large about,
Shall Be dissolved and ybrought to naught.
By sudden change hasty as a thought,
By his clergy he knew no better skyll,
For god may all chaungen at his will,
And has power of such coaction,
Under whose might and disposicion,
Is law of kind constreyned soth to seye,
From point to point lowely to obey.
In every thing that him list ordeyne.
Of elements he may the course restreyne.
As holy wryt does witness ye may se,
How at request of worthy Iosue,
The bright son stood at Gabaon,
Adays space in one degree and shone.
Showing token to his true knight,
Finally and for to give him light,
That he might by his hye prowess,
His cruel foon manfully oppress.
When that he fought this knight this Iosue,
With five kings reignyng in Amoree.
So long last the pursuit and the chase,
Till they were take and for their hye trespass,
Dempt to be dead the Bible can you tell.
Now sith that god thus hyghly list fulfill,
This his knights request and orison,
What wonder was though in the passion,
Of Christ Jesus incarnat for our sake,
The son beams as tho were waren blak.
Sith he has lordship of the planettes all.
And as him list it must nedely fall.
For of Medea though Ouydyus,
In his fables writes and says thus,
As he that list her name so high exalte,
Yet in the truth somewhile does he halte.
Albe she were a passing sorceresse.
And chefest named of any chaunteresse.
I will pass over again to my matere,
And how she came to meat ye shall en here.
When her father had thus for her sent,
Se came anon at his commandment.
But or she came I find that tofore,
For to make her beauty se men more,
She in her closet took her best array.
For tencrease in all that ever she may,
Natures work with royal apparayle.
For these women gladly will not fail,
Wha^ they of beauty, have ple^teuous largess,
It to embellyshe they do their business.
With rich a tire upon every side.
If ought be mysse they can it close and hyde.
For all the foul shall covertly be wryed,
That no defaute outward be espied.
But she was fair and also well be said,
And in her port so womanly certain,
That at her coming gladeth all the halle.
For it was joy both unto one and all,
To se the manner tho of her entree.
To whom her father bad to take her see,
Beside Jason him for to disporte.
Of womanhede and for to recomforte.
But oh alas here lacked hye prudence.
Discrete auyse of inward prouydence,
Wisdom also with perell cast aforne,
To trust amayde of tender years yborne,
Of light unhappy fond wylfulnesse.
For this king of his gentylnesse,
Commanded has to his confusyon,
To his dishonor and destruction,
His own daughter borne to be his heir,
That was also so womanly and fair,
So suddenly down for to discende.
Considered not the myschyefe of the end.
Alas why durst he in her youth affye,
To make her sytte of his curtesye.
Where as she might by casuell mocion,
Full lightly catch or have occasyon,
To do amysse alas why did he so.
Why list he not take better head thereto.
Nor to auerte in his discretion,
Wisely to cast before as in reason,
The unware change that is in womanhed.
Which every wise man ought for to dread.
For who was ever yet so mad or wood,
That ought of reason could aright his good,
To give faith or hastyly credence,
To any woman without experyence.
In whom is another trust nor sykernesse.
They ben so double and full of brytylnesse,
That it is hard in them to assure.
For unto them it longs of nature,
From their birth to have alliance,
With doubleness and with variaunce,
Their hertes be so frail and so unstable,
Namely in youth so meuynge and mutable.
That so as clerks of them list tendyte,
Albe that I am sorry for to write,
They sayen that change and mutabilite,
Apropred ben unto feminite.
This is affyrmed of them that were full sage,
And specially while they be grene of age.
In their wexyng and when yt they be young,
Whose heart full selde accords with her tongue.
For if the troth inwardely be sought,
With ye surplus and remnaunt of their thought,
Men may anon the true patron find.
Of inconstaunce whose flaskysable kind,
Is to and fro meuynge as a wind.
That Hercules were not strong to bind,
Another Sampson so as I believe,
A woman's heart to make it not remeue.
For as the blase whyrleth of a fire,
So to and fro they flee in their desire.
Till they accomplish fully their delight,
For as nature by kyndly appetyte.
Kyndly seeks to sewen after form,
Till he his course by process may perform.
Even so these women refrain them ne can,
To sewe their lust as fro man to man,
They will not cease till all be assayed.
But would god as nature is apayed,
With one form and holds him content,
When of his bounds he has the term went
And not desire ferther to proceed,
But still abyte and will it not excede,
That by example all sorts women would,
Abide in one as they of duty should.
And hold them paid and stylle there abide,
But fail of foting does them often to slide.
For they be not content with unity,
But fast they sewen to find pluralitee.
So of nature to menynge they be showed,
Although among by signs outward showed
They often pretend a manner stablenesse.
But under that is hyd their doubleness.
So well yreke that outward at the eye,
Full hard it is the treason to espy.
Under curtyn and veyle of honest,
Is closed change and mutabilitye.
For their desire is kept full close in mewe,
Of thing that they had leuest for to sewe.
Only outward for to have a laud,
They can declyne with faynyng and with fraud.
Wherefore Oetes thy wit was to barayne.
That thou before by prudence naddest said.
What should follow of this unhappy case.
Why were thou bold thus to suffer alas.
Thine own daughter inly fresh of hew,
With strange gestes entered but of new,
So folilye for to let her dele.
Where through thin honor worship and thin hele
Was lost in haste and she to mischief brought.
In strange land with sorrow and with thought.
Where as she in sclaunder of thy name,
With misery with sorrow and with shame.
An end made and thou were left sole,
That myghtest well complayn and make^ dole.
Alas the while if by prudent forsyght,
Thou had had grace for to record aright,
And to have cast by discrete purueaunce,
And wisely weyed by measure in balau^ce,
The fraud of women and the frayltye,
In whom full selde is any sykertye,
As in his latin Guydo does express.
Wherefore Oetes of very rychelesnesse,
Thou have at ones in augment of thy woe,
Without recure both the two forgo.
First thy treasure and thy daughter dear,
That was to the so passingly entere.
And eke thine heir for when yt she was gone,
As says mine Auctour other was there none.
After thy day for to occupye,
Thy royal ceptre nor thy land to gye.
But what was worth the great providence,
The waker keeping the busy diligence,
Of mighty Mars that god is of battle,
What might it help defend or ought avail,
Again the wit of woman or the sleyght.
Whose frauds been of so huge weight,
That as them list aye the game goes,
Their purpose bydeth who so be lief or loathe.
They be so slye so prudent and so wise.
For as this storye plainly does devise,
This Medea by her engyne and craft,
From her father has his treasure raft.
Through the working of her sleightie gyle,
As ye shall hear within a litell while.
For as she sat at meat tho in that tide,
Her father next and Jason by her side,
All suddenly her fresh and rosen hew,
Full often time began chaungen and renew.
An hundredth sithes in a litell space.
For now the blood from her goodly face,
Unto her heart unawarely began avale.
And therwithall she waxes dead and pale.
And eft anon who thereto can take heed,
Her hew returns in to goodly read,
But still among temblyshe her color,
The rose was meynt aye with the lyly flower.
And though the rose some dele began to pace,
Yet still the lylye bydeth in his place.
Till nature made them eft ayene to mete.
And thus with cold and eke with sudden hete,
Was Medea in her self assailed,
And passyngly sore vexed and trauayled.
For now she brent and now she ga^ to cold.
And aye the more that she began behold,
This Jason young the more she began desire,
To look on him so was she set afyre.
With his beauty and his semelynesse.
And every thing she inly began inpresse,
What that she saw both in mind and thought,
She all emprynteth and forgets naught.
For she consydereth every circumstaunce,
Both of his port and his governance,
His sonnyshe hair crisped like gold wire,
His knightly look and his manly chere.
His countenance with many noble sign.
His face also most gracious and beninge.
Most acceptable unto her plesaunce.
For as she thought it was full suffysaunce.
Without more as unto her alone,
Well to bethynke and look on his parsone.
For in that time withouten any dread,
Of meat or drink she took but litell head.
For she of food has lost her appetite,
To look on him she has so great delight.
He was so prynted in her remembrance,
Love has her caught so newely in a trance.
And her ymarked with his fyery brond.
That she may not escape from his hand.
Nor yet eschew his stroke in special,
For she was yolde body heart and all,
Unto this Jason platly for to seye.
And ever eft on him she cast an eye,
When that she found a leyser opportune.
But of her wisdom she would not contune,
To loken long lest men dempt amys.
But as the manner of these women is,
She kept her close and wonderly secre,
That by her chere no man could se,
What that she meant by none occasyon.
She put them out of all suspection.
For openly there was no tokens seen,
She cast rather that men shulden wene,
That the encheson of her abstinence,
And why that she abode in thus silence,
How that it was only of womanhede,
Of honest shame and of chaste dread,
That both together in her heart met.
The which twain have so this mayde^ let,
For meat and drink as it would seem.
Thus by her wit she made them for to deem.
And so to cast in their opynion.
And thus she blent them by discrescion.
For so her cheer could every thing excuse,
She gave to fools no matter on to muse.
No chere unbridled that time her asterte,
For there was one thing closed in her heart,
An alder other in her chere declared.
For maidens have often sith spared,
To show out that they desire in deed.
As it falls who so can take heed.
That while they flouren in virgynitye,
And for their youth have no lyberty,
To specyfy that their hertes would,
They keep them close for they be not bold,
To show out the sum of their sentence.
And thus Medea keeping aye silence,
Ne let no word by her lips pace,
But covertly with sobre chere and face,
And what she meant shows with her eye,
In such a sort that no man could espy,
The hoote fire in her breast yreke.
And in her self right thus she began to speak.
As she in sothe that so much good can,
So would god this young lusty man,
Which so fair and semely in my sight.
Assured were to be my own knight.
Which is to me most plesaunt and entyre.
With berde ysprong shining like gold wyre.
So well ylimed and compact by measure,
Well grow on heyght and of good stature,
And lyketh me in every part so well,
That by assent of Fortune and her whele,
I ewred were to stande^ in his grace.
For as me seems upon his knightly face,
It is to me an heaven to behold,
Albe therewith my heart I feel cold.
And yet in sothe it may none other be,
Alas why nill he not do pyty me.
Or at the least he knew in his intent,
How much troth to him that I meant.
Of which alas he takes no manner head.
Albe for him I brenne as does the glede.
And to be dead I dare not me discure.
Alas my piteous woeful adventure,
To rewful is helples my mortal pain,
Thus to be dead and dare me not complain.
To friend nor foo of this my chance alas.
To finds some help or succor in this case.
And trewly nathles as I shall devise,
I nothing mean but that in honest wise.
Like as it shall well openly be found.
For I desire to be knyt and bound,
With him in wedlock and never thens to twine,
So is my meaning clean devoyde of syn.
Grounded and set upon al clenlynesse,
Without fraud or any doubleness.
So clean and pure is mine entencion.
Lo aye the manner and condition,
Of these women that so well can feign,
And show one though they think twain.
And covertly that nothing be said,
With humble chere and with face plain,
Enclose their lusts by such subtyltye,
Under the bounds of al honestye,
Of their intent though the trecherye,
Withal the surplus smothely covered be.
And though that they faith before pretend,
And can their fraud with flourishing defend,
And speak full fair the word forth to ble^de,
With doubleness enclosed in the end.
Yet a deceyte is covertly yment,
Under the sugar of feigned clean intent.
As it were sothe in very existence.
But trust me well al is but appearance.
They can show one and another mean,
Whose blewe is lightly dyed into grene.
For under flowers depeynt of stablenesse,
The serpent dares of newfangelnesse.
So plain they seem with words fair glosed,
But underneath their couerte wiles be closed.
For what thing is dearest to their pay,
They will deny and rathest swearen nay.
THis lyketh Guydo of women to endite,
Alas that he so cursedly would write,
Against them or with them have debate.
I am right sorry in english to translate,
Reprefe of them or any evil to seye,
For me were lever for their love to deye.
Wherefore I pray them to take patience,
I purpose not to do to them offense,
They be so good and perfyte euerychone.
To reken all I trow there be not one,
But that they be in will and heart true.
For though among they chese the^ loves new.
Who wayeth it well they be nothing to blame,
For often time they se men do the same.
They must puruay the^ when men the^ refuse,
And if I could I would them full excuse.
It sytteth not a woman live alone,
It is no store but they have mo than one,
Praying to them for to do me grace,
For as I hope to them is no trespace,
Though my making be the same in all,
As Guido writes in his oryginall.
Where he missayeth do let him bear ye wife,
For it sit well that the vengeance byte,
On him that so these women has offended,
And if I might it should be well amended.
He should receive duly his penance,
For if he died withouten repentance,
I am dispeyred of his salvation.
How he should ever have remission.
But if he were content to do redress.
It may not been as clerks bear witness.
And by my troth and he were alive,
I mean Guido and I should him shryue,
So bitter penance plainly he should have,
That to the time that he were deep ygraue,
He should remember and platly not asterte,
For to repent with all his hoole heart.
That he so spoke to his confusyon,
I will no longer make disgressyon,
From my matter but lets Guydo be,
And tell I shall the workynge of Medee.
That has license of her father nome,
And to her chamber is alone ycome.
When out of hal withdrawn was al ye pres,
And when Jason and this Hercules,
Like as the king after meat badde,
To their chambres conveyed were and lad.
Full royally arrayed and well be said,
For every wall was covered in certain,
With clothe of gold in full stately wise,
And in this while as ye have herd devise,
Was Medea to her chamber gone.
Whereby her self complaining ever in one,
She gave an issue to her pains smarte,
That her so sore has wounded to the heart.
For love has brought her in so sodeine rage,
That was not lykely soon for to aswage,
For in sothnesse the furious god Cupide,
Has such a fire kyndled in her side,
That it was never lykly for to let.
So violent and fervent was the heat.
That more and more increase began her pain.
For in her breast there was atwyxt twain.
A great debate and a strong battle.
So fervently each other did assail.
And this contek in ernes and in game,
Departed was betwixt love and shame.
Metynge together there at unset steven.
Albe the field was not tho parted even,
For love in soth full of hye renown,
Was bold and hardy like a fierce Lyowne.
And was not fereful of spear swerd nor knife
But hot and hasty for to auntre life.
Eke surquidous stout and full of pride,
Chief champyon of the god Cupyde.
That causes often both to free and bond,
Full many peril for to take on hand.
And caused has full many man his death,
And many one to yelden up the breath.
And made there wounds largly for to blede,
For of peril love takes none head.
To get him honor by excellence of fame.
But contrary his enmye called shame,
Like a coward faynte and hertles,
As he that never dare be seen in pres,
For lack of ma^hod draws hi^ ever abacke,
He is so ferd and dreadful of the wrake.
Like to a child young and tender of age.
For he has another heart nor yet courage,
For to assail so feeble is his might,
And yet full often he has stand in the syghte,
Of many lover and let him for to speed,
Through false co^spiring of his brother dred,
For dread and shame when they be allied.
Of one assent have piteously denied,
As unto love both heart and herdinesse.
That he ne durst out a word express.
For wha^ that love of ma^hode wills speak.
The wood fire out of his breast to reke,
Upon the point when he should assaye,
Shame comes anon and utterly says nay.
And causes love his horns for to shrynke,
Tabashe his chere and pitiously to wyncke.
Cowardly his cause tho to appayre.
And thus is shame froward and like contraire,
Through help of dread loves folk to fear.
For doubtless if so be shame naught ne were,
As it is kouthe as well nigh as far,
Love in his laws should often time err.
And wind him out of honestye his cheyne,
Of his bonds both bridell break and reyne.
Right as an horse out of the trayse at large,
For lite or naught lovers would take charge,
To use their will and all their lust tensewe.
But all the while that shame is kept in mewe,
Within his breast so that no wight it know,
Outward in port love bears him full low,
For ne were shame as clekes have compiled,
Out of their hertes danger were exiled.
Al strangeness and feyned false disdeyne,
For ne were shame plainly the wardeyne,
Of these women by writing of these old,
Without assault the castle were yyolde.
It were no need a syege for to layne,
For in such case long treaty were in vain.
For of nature they louen no process.
But now alas dread and shamfastnes,
Have daunted love in full low manner,
And made him humble both of port and cheer.
And they have eke by their vyolence,
For all his manhood put him in silence.
And ben great cause of morning of his pain.
And thus amiddes of either of these twain,
Of love and shame even so upon the point,
Medea stood as tho in great disioynt.
That she ne may the pain not to endure,
So hoote she brent this woeful creature.
Betwixt both I mean love and shame.
For when that love would any thing attain,
Of his desires to declare them out,
Came shame anon and put him in a doubt.
With ready dread her lust for to deny.
And thus she stood in doubtful Ieopardy,
Of love and shame in manner of a trance,
Full euenly vphanged in balaunce.
For shame was great and love was yet yt more,
As well appeared by her syghes sore,
And by her stormy cruel adventure,
For dread and shame durst she not discure,
The fire that love has in her breast enclosed.
Which was full hard for to be deposed.
And thus she hang amyddes between two,
That she ne wist what was best to do.
Till that fortune with her double face,
Unhappily has wrought to get her grace,
With the whyrlyng of her whele about,
That causes wretches full low adowne to loute,
Wha^ they best wene to sitte^ hye aloft.
By plain proof as men may se full often.
By gerinesse of this her revolution.
For so this lady of transmutacion,
Full often time false and full unstable,
Enhasteth things to fools full agreeable.
Which in the end to their confusyon,
Can under sugar shroude her poison.
For aye fortune as her manner is,
To wretches shows other than it is.
By fair semblant and face of flattery,
As she that can with full beninge an eye,
Fully of fools parfourmen the intent.
Where through they be in great mischefe she^t
At the end and can no craft teschewe,
To sodeyne harm that at her tail does sew.
Right as it fell whylome of Medee,
Gynning and ground of her aduersitye.
For this lady that called is Fortune,
Ygraunted has a leyser opportune,
To show Jason holy all her heart,
Which made her after with repentance sinerte.
For on a day after Meredien,
When that Apollo with his beams shene,
From the southe plage began to wester fast,
Oetes her father has ysent in haste,
To Medea to com to him anon.
And bad to her that she should gone,
Unto Jason and to Hercules,
To make the^ chere amiddes of all the pres.
And when she caught has oportune and space,
To her desire and saw eke in the place,
That then her father was most occupied,
As she that thought not for to been espied.
Well apperceiuing his great business,
Toward Jason anon she began her dress.
And he in haste with a full knightly chere,
In curteys wise began to drawn nere.
Toward her again and saw there was no let.
And when that they were thus together met,
This Mede a with syghing first abrayde,
And sith to Jason even thus she said.
How Jason through the only help of Medea Oetes daughter, the king of Colchos
enamored of him he achieued the conquest of the golden flese. Cap. vi.
Jason quod she of thine hye noblesse,
Of thy manhood and of thy gentilnesse,
In thy person assembled both yfeare,
But of thy knighthode first I the requere,
In thy conceit and thine opinion,
Not to arrecte as to presumption,
To doubleness nor yet to inconstaunce,
Of womanhead neither to variaunce,
That I am bold and can for nothing spare,
To you my meaning platly to declare,
Without deceyte in words true and plain,
Beseching first to that which I shall said,
Without more of your goodly head,
Beningnely for to taken head.
And pacyently that to my words ye list,
And what I say to take it for the best.
In your intent and nothing you to grieve,
For things two mine heart sore ameue,
That is to say love and gentylnesse,
What that I mean clearly to express,
To your person and nothing to concele.
Or we depart by proof as ye shall feel.
For as me seems first of curtesye,
In sothfastnes and since of gentrye,
That to strangers every manner wight,
Is bound and hold of very due right,
To maken cheer and trewely as for me,
Because Jason for that I in you se,
So much manhood and so great worthiness,
I will not feign with all my business,
To further you in all that may you like.
And with that word of heart she began to sike,
As for his sake and said thus ouermore,
For you I feel full great anoy and sore.
That mened are without auisenesse,
Only of youth and wilful hardiness,
The flese of gold to getten if ye may.
The which emprise who ever that assay,
More perilous is plainly to achieue,
In very sothe than ye could wene or leave.
For doubtless this I do you well assure,
The final mede of this great adventure.
Is not but death save report of shame.
For there ye wene to getten you a name.
The end plain shall turn into contrayre,
From the ginning so shall the fine varye.
For wit of man no engine force or might,
Though he be never so expert in fight,
Or have in arms passing exercise,
With all ye sleyghtes of old or new emprise,
Or though he be best brethed to endure,
Or what devise there be of his armure,
Or what so ever wepen that he bring,
Harded with stele trenchaunt or persing.
Yet at the last when he has all sought,
Without me avail he may right naught.
Wherefore Jason I have compassion,
On this your youth by pure affection.
That wilfully ye shulden thus be lorne,
That been of blood and line so high yborne.
For certainly it may none other be,
But if that ye your counsel take of me.
For none but I may do you help or ease,
Alas Jason why will ye not appease,
Your manly courage in this case yblent,
And to my counsel been obedient.
Then durst I swear ye should have victory,
Ben remembered and put in memory,
Perpetually and through your knighthod win,
The flese of gold the which is yonde within,
In the isle that stands here beside.
Of which that Mars is governor and gide.
Wherefore at ones in your self assente,
And to my counsel fully do consent,
At few words if so ye list to speed,
And leave your lust and works by my read.
TO whom Jason with full humble chere,
Answered and said mine own lady dear,
I thank it you in all my best wise,
Right thus as far forth as I may suffice,
And as my power platly may attain,
Mine hertes queen and lady sovereign.
Whom ye may holy I you well ensure,
All the while that this my life may dure.
Trusts right well me list not for to feign.
To live or dye shall at your lust restrain,
As him that is your own assured man,
You to obey in all that ever I can,
Without change or any doubleness,
While that I live in very sothfastnes.
For that you list of true affection,
Upon my life to have compassion,
Of gentillesse and that ye list to have,
Such chierte my body for to save.
That in good faith of very due right,
I am ybounde to be your own knight:
Unto mine end and that more specially,
That of your grace ye so beningnely,
Lists your self of my counsel be.
That never erst to you in no degree.
Ne did service to your woman head.
And with your words full of goodliheade,
Your own man lists recomforte.
The which in sothe so as I can report,
A thousand fold be the more plesaunt,
That never erst no merit gat him grant,
Ne no desert request nor prayer,
But rather freely of your heart entere,
List unrequired on my woo to rewe.
And vndisserued be to me so true.
That I ensure upon my faith as fast,
In your service I shall unto my last,
Parseuer sothely that there shall be no sloth,
Nor variaunce and thereto here my truth.
For finally I say withouten wene,
At few words in all right as I mean.
Me list not feign flatter nor delude,
For my beheste with death I shall conclude,
When Parcas shall my lives threde do rend,
This all and some and thus I make an end.
Well tha^ quod she full wisely in your heart,
Ye must before consydre and aduerte,
The adventure that ye shall take on hand,
And prudently the peril understand,
And warely cast and have full well in mind,
The mortal harm at the tail behind.
That is well more then it is credible.
For leave me well it is an impossible,
To ginne in honor and also for to fine.
For thilke flese by hye power divine,
Preserved is and that with Marcys might,
That who so therefore enters in to fight,
It were full hard to him thence to eskape.
The fyery flawme when the bulls gape,
That been of brass trapped all in leven
Ben more to dread the^ lightening of ye heaven.
Tofore the dint of the great thonder.
That severed has full many toure a sunder.
For unto ashes they will a man consume.
Wherefore I read that ye not presume,
The Ram to assail lest ye your labor lose.
yet to withdraw your foot since ye may chese,
By good advise and by discresiowne,
Your honor safe and your hye renown.
Where so ye list of your worthiness,
Only of folly and of hastiness,
To this emprise of head to proceed,
Or where ye list like as I you read,
Save your self from woo and al mischau^ce,
Like as ye shall if to mine ordinance,
Ye you commytte and lowely list obey,
Without fraud there is no more to seye.
ANd Jason there tha^ sitting at the board,
Of Medea emprintynge every word,
Waxed for Ire almost impatient,
And said alas and is this your intent,
Me to counceyle to leave this my emprise,
Certes it were to foul a cowardyse,
To gyn thing that I might not a chyeue.
For every man would me of shame repreue,
And eke report to my confusyon,
That I of pride and of presumption,
Took this on me when I was at large,
So hye a thing and so great a charge,
That I durst not distrustyng of myschyefe,
Accomplish it when it came to the prefe.
Lever me were mine own lady dear,
For to ieoparde and to put in were,
My self at ones and at words few,
On small pyeces to be all to hew.
Rather than I should cowardely forsake,
Thylke empryse that I have undertake.
As ye well know and leave it thus alas.
Let be your counseyle plainly in this case.
For what so ever hap or fall of me,
Trusts right well it shall none other be.
For if that I should of my cowarde heart,
Fro this my purpose by any way diuerte,
Without laud my life I should led,
And shame eternal iustlye by my mede.
Throughout the world noted over all.
In every land spoke of in special.
That Jason has so hyghly undertake,
Whereof for fear he dare none end make.
Thinks right well that it shall not betide,
For life or death what mischief I abide.
And thereupon my troth I you ensure,
That so ferforth as this my life may endure,
I shall parfourme that I have now begone.
And though so be no honor may be won,
But that I must with my death it beye,
I will not leave for bett were me to deye,
Than live ashamed of cowardice and sloth.
For as me seems it is to high a routhe.
A man tappere or dare do show his head,
When he has ones his honor vyllanede.
And after time when yt his name is slain.
For every man should coueite rather feign,
To dye in honor than live as a wretch.
And though this thing to my death stretche,
Welcome beit I shall it well abide,
This all and some what so of me betyde.
Jason quod she than sith it stands so,
That ye algates desire to have a do,
There is no more by ought I can espy,
But ye had lever shortly for to dye,
Rather than live and have ye say a shame,
And yet it is an ernest and no game,
With such monsters unawarely for to deal.
Like as in deed hereafter ye shall feale.
And therefore I am meued of pytee,
And greatly steered that ye of volunte,
Without advise or by discresion,
Counsel or else deliberation,
List take on you this marvelous voyage.
For both your youth and also your courage,
Governed ben chiefly in this matere,
All after lust for both the two I fear,
Inparded ben if ye your purpose sewe.
For impossyble is that ye eschew,
A sodeyne death for another free nor bond,
By craft of man has power to withstonde.
Wherefore I think of heart and good intent,
To cast for you yea yet or ye be shent,
And to your turn to shape a remedy.
Such routhe I have that ye shulden dye,
For to my father whom I love most,
Rather then ye should in this wise be lost,
I shall offend and utterly displease,
And all my friends so it may do you ease.
For I shall find such a mean weye,
That at the least I will not se you deye.
For in this case I think to be your gyde,
So that for you I shall do set aside,
First my descent as of the stock royal.
And over more mine heritage withal.
Likewise my honor shall I put abacke,
You for to help that there shall be no lack,
Yfounde in me so ye be to me kind,
And that ye list for to have in mind,
As I deserve goodly me to quyte.
Consyderyng first that it is not alite,
To save your live that stant in Ieopardye,
More peryllous than ye can ought espy.
But for all this I shall it so ordeyne,
All by my craft only atwyxe us twain,
That or we part I hope all shall be well,
Upon this point if so that I may feel,
Faithfully for joy woo or smarte,
With full accord of body will and heart,
To my desire that ye condescend.
I undertake to make thereof an end.
This sothly lady said this Jason tho,
I am assented without words mo,
For to fulfill with every circumstaunce,
What ever thing may be to you plesaunce.
THan quod she there is no more to saine,
But first of all with faith and heart plain,
With all your might and your busy cure,
And meaning hole that ye do me assure,
Hereafter for to take me for your wife,
To hold and keep by term of your life.
So that your deed accord may with your hest.
This is the fine and sum of my request.
Except only that ye shall ordeyne,
In your repair to your fathers reign,
That faithfully ye shall me with you led,
And after that when so ye shall succeed,
As by his death into your heritage,
With heart aye one and with like courage,
Ye shall to me always be founden true,
And cherishe me for change of any new.
Like mine estate without varyaunce.
And while ye live have in remembrance,
My gentleness in this your great need.
For there is none alive that may ought speed
What so he be that lives here mortal,
For to assail the forces marcyall,
Of both the dragon and the bulls yfeare.
But it so be of me that first he lere,
Holy the manner how he shall him gye,
Like as to you I think to specifye.
When so it happeth that we mete again,
For none but I may help herin certain,
As in this case which platly ye shall find,
And I naught ask but ye ayene be kind.
SOthly quod Jason all this shall be do,
As ye deuyse I will that it be so.
And here my faith thereon I you assure,
Oh goodliest of any creature.
That ever yet I saw unto my pay.
And fairest eke in soth it is no nay.
And of bounty ye ben incomparable,
For of my death ye ben so marciable,
That while I live I say you by my faith,
Mine heart meneth as my tunge says.
I will be found your aldertrewest man,
For life or death in all that ever I can.
So that of grace it be to you pleasant,
For to perform your hestes and your grant.
And fully work to my salvation,
As ye have said in full conclusyon.
For truly ye of all that bearen life,
In beauty have such prerogatife,
Passing echone me list not for to gloss.
Among flowers as does the read rose.
Which in somer amyd the leaves soote,
After that Vere has made out of the root,
The humidyte kyndly to ascend,
The barrayne soil to clothe and to amend,
And them whom winters blastes have shaken bare,
With sote blosmes freshly to repair
And the meadows of many sundry hew,
Tapited been with diverse flowers new,
Of sundry motlees lustly for to seen,
And wholesome bawne is shad among ye grene.
Right as the rose is fairest of echone,
Right so has nature set you all alone.
When she you made first at her devise.
Above all other for to have a pryse.
As ye that been of bounte spring and well,
Thereto in beauty sothly ye excelle,
All that bear life for no comparyson,
Ne may be made so of discrescion,
Ye passen all as every man may se.
And with all this I find you unto me,
The goodlyest that ever yet was borne.
Without whom I were as now but lorne.
Of help and succoure fully destitute,
Ne were that I had found in you refute.
From who^ al fredom to meward does habou^d,
So passingly that I am ever bound,
As far forth as my sely life may stretche,
That for your sake of death I ne reche,
If unto you it might a pleasure been,
That to my help so goodly list to seen.
For if that I of neclygence should,
In Any thing refusen that ye would,
I might of reason full well merked be,
And noted eke of wilful nycetye.
So folylye to void away my grace,
It were a rage aman from him to chase,
Wilful fortune when she is beninge.
Wherefore as now holy I resign,
Heart body my life and eke my death,
Into your hand while ye me lasts breath,
With all the oaths that I affirm may,
For to parseuer to mine endinge day,
Your true spouse as I have said and sworn.
And you behested plainly here toforne.
And there upon in every thing obey,
That may you please till such time as I deye.
This all and some what should I longer tarry,
From this behest I shall me never varye.
Thus when Medea saw his stedfastnes,
She was supprised with so hye gladness,
With so great joy pleynly in her heart,
That she was void of every woe and smert,
For he so lowly to her lust obeyed.
That or she went thus to him she seyde.
Jason quod she than shall I well ordain,
A mean way whereby we both twain,
May eft again at leisure mete sone.
For to perform all that is to done.
In this matterlike to our intent.
Where shall be made a final sacrament,
Of our desire that no man shall unbind.
Though now thereto we may no leisure fi^de.
And that toward eve it shall not me eskape.
Trust me right well a time for to shape,
Right secretly that we may mete yfeare.
For I shall send a privy chamber,
To you of mine which shall you do conuye,
Unto my chaumbre by a prive wey.
A certain hour withouten any fable,
To our intent that shall be most greable.
Upon the point when Phoebus with his light,
Ywestred is and eke the dercke night,
Has with his dimmesse of his shadows black,
Our Hemisperye fully overtake,
That often gives by favor of fortune,
Unto these lovers a leysour opportune.
For to perform their lusts and achieue.
And right anon as it shall draw to eve,
I shall for you unto my closet send,
Of every thing there for to make an end.
Where we together shall at leysur speak,
Euerich with other and our hertes break.
And eft declare the sum of all our will,
And when we have spoken all our fill,
By good leysur I fully you byhete,
We shall ordeyne when so us lust to mete,
To set a time who ever that say nay,
Always by night when passed is the day.
For mighty Jove as wisely me succor,
As hence forth I will be holy your,
While that I live both wakyng and a sleep,
If it so be that ye your hestes keep.
TO whom Jason lowly began enclyne,
And said as far as man may ymagine,
Or any wight may clearly comprehend.
I will to you unto my lives end,
As servant true faithfully me quyte.
And though that I can not say but lyte,
My faith to you shall be nerthelesse.
And though I can not paynt nor compass,
No gay process my sovereign hertes queen,
Till I be dead I shall but trewly mean.
Have here my troth while I have life and mind,
As in the end ye shall hereafter find.
And of their speech an end thus they make,
And Medea shope her for to take,
Her leave anon among all the prese,
First of her father sith of Hercules.
No longer bode but forthwith that anon,
In haste she is unto her chamber gone.
Where up and down she made many went,
None of her meine wetyng what she meant.
Casting ways her purpose to achieue,
And in her wits began busyly to meue,
As she thus rometh in her habytacle,
On any side if let were or obstacle,
Or other thing which would her sore grieve,
This was her study till it drew to eve.
Where I her leave complaining in her woe,
With many a thought walking to and fro.
The midday hour is gone and ouerslide,
Tytan so fast does in his chair ride.
The days arc from east to west compassed,
His fyry stedes have almost over passed,
Our orizonte and drowen down full low,
His golden waine that no man might know,
Where as he hid his fyery beams bright,
In his discence full far out of our sight.
And Hirenes with her copes myrke,
The evening begone for to dirke.
In the Twylight when the day began faide
And Hesperus with her beams glade,
That been so fresh so lusty and so merye,
Began recomforte all our Hemisperye.
When thus Medea by her self alone,
Of high desire began to make her moan,
That she so long abode after her knight.
Always accountyng the hours of the night,
So full of trouble and of busye thought,
Which has full streitly serched out and sought,
A ready way well setting her purpose,
Albe that she kept it in full close,
Amyd her heart quapping as a wawe,
For dread and fear till hope began adawe,
And bad she should be right merry and glad.
Till dread again it made sobre and sad.
Lest her desire troubled were or let,
And thus she was at abay yset.
Amyd hope and fearful dread also.
That she ne wist what was best to do.
For her desire and high affection,
So hoote they brent in her opinion,
Of lust she had to mete with this Jason,
And there against dread come in anon,
And made her fearful lest she were espied.
But all her ill was help and remedyed,
Only by fortune and the derke night.
By which she was made full glad and light,
For recomforted only those two.
And with good hope that made her glad also.
She began anon to casten and deuyse,
When that the moon on heaven would arise.
And when that she with her horns pale,
Would shed her light upon the hylle and vale,
She began acounte and cast well the time,
And found a quarter passed after pryme.
As she that was well knowing in that art,
And saw in soth that the fourth part.
Of the moon was shadde with new light,
And passed was in her course aryght,
After the time of conjunction,
Three signs full by computacion.
And days seven complete were of her age.
At which time she brennyng in her rage,
As one through darted with cupides arowe,
Began for to look and behold narowe,
At every door and listen busely,
If any wight that she might espy,
Of all the court other walk or go.
Or any man romyn to or fro.
So sore she dradde going up and down,
When so she herd noise or any sown.
Or wha^ she hears whisperyng any where,
It was venim sothly in her ere.
She wished all had slept fast a bed.
This pytyous life the long night she led.
without respite though no wight could know,
Till hye mydnyght that the cocks crow,
At which time when al was bushte and still,
For taccomplyshe the remnau^t of her will,
And every where made was silence,
She cleped anon unto her presence,
And aged vecke fer in years yronne,
That in such craft so mikle help kon.
Thriftly to bring this thing about,
For they before can casten every doubt.
Of years passed old experyence,
Has give to them so passing hye prudence,
That they in love all the sleyghtes know,
And she was made as dog for the bow,
To whom Medea discureth al her thought,
Fro poi^t to poi^t and has forgot right naught,
And charged her in release of her smerte,
And recomforte of this her troubled heart.
To haste her anon upon her way,
Unto her chamber Jason to conuaye,
And she anon not rekles in that case,
Is gone for him forth an easy pase,
As she that was of new not to lere,
And has him brought as ye shall after hear.
VVha^ that the cock common Astrologere,
The midnight hour with his voice clear,
Began to sown and did his busy pain,
To beat his breast with his wings twain.
And of the time a mynute will not pace,
To warn them that weren in the place,
Of the tides and season of the night.
Medea to awayte upon her knight,
Full ready was the enter for to keep.
As she that list full little for to sleep.
For that ne was no parcel of her thought.
And wha^ Iaso^ was to his chamber brought,
Without espying of any manner wight,
Than she anon conueyeth him full right,
Into her closet in all the haste she may.
Full well besene with great and rich array.
Where by her side she made him take his see.
And first of all this ylke lease of three,
By her that most expert was in this case,
All suddenly was turned to a brase.
For the old vecke to stare upon the moon.
Is walked out and has them left alone.
And when Medea the doors had fast shet,
By Jason down anon she has her set.
But first I find with all her busy might,
About the chamber that she set up light,
Torches of great and cyerges full royal,
About on pyllers and on every wall.
Which gave a light like ye son shene.
And to a cheste wrought of crystal clean,
First of all she takes her passage.
Out of the which she took a rich image,
Of pure gold full lusty to behold,
That by their custom of the rytes old,
To mighty Jove eterne and increat,
Yhalowed was and also consecrat.
The which Image devoutly as she ought,
With humble heart to Jason first she brought.
And made him lowly thereon take his oath,
Unto his last other for lyef or loathe,
That he her should take unto his wife.
Fro that day forth during all his life.
With heart unfeigned and faith inuyolate,
And cheryshe her like to her estate.
Fro till that time I find how that she,
Had ever floured in vyrgynitye.
And as mine Auctour well rehearse can,
Aye kept her clean from touch of any man.
In thought and deed and never did amys.
For she of heart all holy given is,
Unto Jason and that for ever mo,
And he anon has put his hand unto.
And swore fully as ye have heard me say,
All her requests without more delay,
To keep the^ aye while that his life may last.
But oh alas how soon he ouercast,
His hest his faith with which he was assured,
And had his fraud with flatterye y^ured.
So covertly that both her innocence,
Her true meaning and her diligence,
And all that ever she deuyse can:
Deceived was by falshed of this man.
And though ye troth apparent was above,
Yet doubleness so slyghly was in shoue,
As though he had sothely be allied,
With true meaning so yt nothing espied,
Under fair chere was faining and fallaces,
for what might she have wrought more i^ this case.
Tha^ for thy sake ceptre and regallye,
And all the lords eke of her alie,
Forsook at ones and took of them no head,
And of pitye and of very goodly head,
Lost her friends and her good fame,
Only Jason to save the this fro shame.
And yet moreover forsook her heritage,
She that was borne of so hye parage,
And should have be by succession,
Heir by dissent of that Region.
But womanly for she would her quite,
Of all yfeare she has not set a mite.
But in one hour all she has forsake,
And unto the she has her holy take,
Only for trust thou should have be kind.
Riches and honor she has ylefte beynde.
And in exyle has chose with the to gone,
From all her kynne this sely maid alone.
Alas I weep for thine unkindness,
What has she not fro death and fro distress,
Preserved the? and yet thou take none head
That should have died ne had she be thy read.
Of thy conquest she was the very cause,
That I may not shortly in a clause,
Write her bounty nor briefly comprehend,
Effectually performed to the end.
At words few ne may it not be told.
Through whom you have the rich flese of gold,
Manly conquered which withouten doubt,
Unlikely was that to have brought about.
For when thou were of help tho destitute,
She was thine only comfort and refute.
And with all this thou may it not deny,
All erthly honor how she began defye,
The to conserve out of all heuinesse.
And eke her father has of his richesse,
So enpeyred that pity is to here.
By whose example women may well lere.
How they should faith or trusten on any man.
Alas Medea that so mykle can,
Both of sterres and of astronemye,
Yet saw she not before her destinye.
Love has her put so out of gouernayle.
That al her craft ne might her not avail.
She was to slow by calculation,
To cast before the constellation,
Of her birthe and eke her woeful fate.
For rekleshed she saw it all to late.
But I suppose her connyng was fallyble,
And doubtless as me seems incredible.
For if she had wiste of it toforne,
So piteously she had not now be lorne.
As ye shall se hereafter hastily.
So as the story teaches by and by.
How it befell of Jason and Medee,
But first ye shall the manner holly see,
How she began wirche for after he was swore,
The same night alas she has forbore,
Her maydenhead and that was great pity.
And yet she mente naught else but honestye,
As I suppose she went have be his wife,
But touching that I hold as now no strife,
And yet one thing I dare afyrme and said,
That both so the meaning of these twain,
Ne was not one but wonder fer atwene.
For all that she truly began to mean,
Of honest thynkyng no outrage,
Like as a maid all innocent of age,
He to perform his fleshly false delight,
And to acheue his fylthy appetite,
Wrought every thing to her intent contraire.
Alas that she was tho so debonaire,
As for to trust upon his curtesye.
Or to acquit her of her gentery,
So hastily to rewe upon his smarte.
But women ben so pytefull of heart,
That they will gladly shown petie all.
When in mishappe they se a man is fall.
And save his life rather than he should dye.
And so Medea shortly for to seye,
Castyng no peril after that shall fall,
But his desires and his lusts all,
Holy obeys with all her full might.
And that so long almost that the night,
Has his course round about gone.
At which time thus spoke to her Jason,
And lowly said my lady it is time,
That we arise for soon it will be pryme.
Ye may see well the day begins to spring.
For we may here how the birds sing,
Prayinge to you in all my best wise,
How I shall work that ye list deuyse.
And ceriously in every thing dispose,
I you beseech o goodly fresh rose.
Mine enterprise to bring unto an end.
And than at erst fro hense will I wind.
Save that I think first with you to treat,
In what manner ye shall this country let.
And into Greece repair again with me.
Which is a land of great felicity.
For trusts well and be nothing adrede,
Into that reygne with me I shall you led.
After my conquest if so be that I win.
Wherefore I pray you goodly to begin.
How I shall work in all the have we may,
For in good faith anon it will be day.
To whom she spoke saying as ye shall here,
Mine own Jason and unto me more dear,
Than is my self as in conclusyon.
I am assented with full affection,
Of all my wits and with my hole heart,
You to enfourme how ye shall asterte.
Every danger of that little isle,
If it so be ye list bide a while.
And up she rose in all the haste she may,
And to a cofer where her treasour lay,
She went anon and brought him in her ho^de,
A rich image of silver that she fond.
Which sothely was of meruaylous entayle.
Whose power was and virtue to avail,
Effectually to her both intent,
Again all magik and enchauntement.
And to with sit the force of Sorcerye.
For it was made so by Astronomye.
In hour chosen equat for the nones,
By clerks old that full long agone is.
Whilom wha^ they were flouring i^ their ages,
That they used to make such images,
As did the king called Thelomee,
And so to Jason wylled has Medee,
To bear this image on him pryuely.
As ye have herd to work effectually,
In every thing as she did assygne,
And then she took to him a medycine,
Made as in manner of an ointment,
Him to enoynt that he be not brent.
That was more rich and precious tha^ bawme
Again the malice of each fire and flawme.
And after that she took to him anon,
A rich ring wherein was set a stone,
That virtue had all venym to destroy.
That on no side it might him not anoye.
The which stone had furthermore this might
That if a man could it bear aright.
Within his hand next the skyn enclosed,
The strength of sight should be deposed,
Of them that would gasen or behold.
For who so ever in his hand it hold,
By such virtue as was infallyble,
The storye says he was inuysible.
The which stone these prudent clerks call.
Achates most virtuous of all.
And it is found sothly in Cecile.
Of which stone whylom wrote Virgyll,
Now that Venus it to Eneas sent,
First when that he into Cartage went.
And after this she to Jason took,
A certain byll written like a book.
That to his Journey might much avail.
And bad him wisely that he not ne fail,
If he bethought him graciously to speed,
First of all the scripture that he read,
Or he the Ram touch in any wise.
Him charging eke before this hye empryse,
With humble heart and great devotion,
That he knelyng say that oryson,
That up and down was written on the bill.
Praying the gods lowely to fulfill,
His request and mercy for to have,
Of very pitye from mischief him to save.
And after that for his chief socoure,
She took to him a vyoll with lycoure,
And bad him manly without fear or dread,
When that he come unto the bulls read,
If he him cast knightly to escape,
That as fast as he sees them gape.
Into their golles that he the lycour cast.
Than him need but little of them gaste,
For their jaws together it shall glyewe,
That on no side they shall not eschew,
To bide his lust in what him list constreyne.
For doubtless maugre al their busye pain,
He shall them daunte and therwt make so tame.
That where him list in earnest or in game,
He might them make louten and incline.
And do them bowen both in back and chyne,
The lycour shall their jaws so coharte,
That lightly they shall not a sundre part.
For to offend or noyen any wight.
And when she had thus said unto her knight,
In every thing and give instruction.
Plain doctrine and informacyon,
How he shall escape the dangers by and by,
If he take heed and work auysely.
And thus agreyd they thought it for ye best,
For to part or men out of their rest,
Awaked were for it drew toward day.
As they well saw by the morrow graye,
And lest men had to them suspicio^,
Of hye prudence and discrecion,
Atwene the twelight and the rody morrow.
They took their leave with saint John ye borow.
With often kyssyng as lovers when they twinne.
And so he went and she is left within.
Being in hope to mete again some day,
And Jason than as fast as ever he may,
Began ordain him his Journey to achieue,
And thought he would ano^ go take his leave,
And in that wise wtin a litel while,
After the manner of my rude style,
My purpose is sothly and not to spare,
With your supporte plainly to declare.
When that the rows and the rays read,
Estward to us full early gonnen sprede,
Even at the twelyght in the dawning,
When that the lark of custom gynneth sing,
For to salve in her heavenly lay,
The lusty goddess of the morrow graye.
I mean Aurora which before the son,
Is wont tench^se the black skies done,
And the derkenesse of the dymmy night.
And fresh Phoebus with comfort of his light,
And with the brightness of his beams shene,
Had ouergylt the hye hills grene.
And flowers eke again the morrow tide,
Upon their stalks ga^ plain their leaves wide.
When that Jason with all his company,
Toward the king full fast began him hye.
Whom than he fond like to his estate,
With scepter in ha^deful pompous and elate.
Hye in the sea of his regally,
Sittyng full kyngly amid his cheualrye,
And his lords about him enuiron.
At why ^he time this young champion,
Under a vow standing of the Ram.
With stern face tofore the king in came.
Besechyng him of his magnificence,
The same day to grant him license,
To do his arms and make no mo delays.
Concluding plainly that at all assayes,
He will that day in the field be found.
For to achieue like as he was bound,
Of old behest and not a point declyne.
For life nor death till he parfourme and fine.
Holy the auntres that to the flese belong,
The king requyryng no longer him prolo^ge,
But goodly grant the fine of his empryse.
And than the king in full sobre wise,
Consydering the sum of his demand,
To Jason spoke and said he shall commau^d,
That his request performed were in have.
Albe quod he I am full sore aghast,
Of wylfulnesse thou should destroyed be,
Lest men thy death arected unto me.
And thereupon would a blame set,
Of royal power that I not ne let,
Thy manly youth from such Ieopardy
Which were in sothe a great vylany,
And prejudice to my estate and name.
That afterward men should put me i^ blame,
Through false report and wrong opinion.
That I withstode not thy destruction.
Wherefore I read that you be yet bet auysed,
And my counsel let not be dispysed.
For better it is with honor in certain,
Into thy country to repair again,
Than wilfully for to take on hand,
A mortal thing that no man may withstand.
That is my read and fully mine advise.
Take heed thereto sith ye aren wise.
Lest thou repent when it is to late,
And if so be that thou will algate.
Thy purpose hold and not do as I read,
Almighty Mars I pray to be thy speed.
The for to gyde whatsoever shall befall,
And eke I pray to the gods all,
Safe and sound thy body to restore,
This all and some on me thou gettest no more.
And when Jason thus had herd the king,
Not dismayed nor stoned in no thing,
In knyghtly wise did him reverence.
Thankyng highly his royal excellence,
That of his grace and beningnytye,
Upon his death him list to have pytye.
Fully concluding touching his battle
That another read nor other counsel,
In no wise his purpose should withdraw.
But like the statute plainly and the law,
Right so far forth as fortune will him eure,
What so beside of this his adventure,
Setting aside every fear and dread,
He platly said that he will proceed,
For to parfourme that he has undertake.
It were in idle mo skylles for to make.
Or to allege more there again.
And Jason than full openly and plain,
Touching ye surplus of this dreadful thing,
At his departing thus said to the king.
In audience tho of his lords all.
What so of me hereafter now be fall,
Or who so ever of malys thereon muse,
To all the world first I you excuse.
And to the gods platly you acquyte.
That though I deye ye be nothing to wit.
Ne no man shall arecte it you of skylle,
For that I work is freely at my will.
Again the advice of your hye prudence,
And life or death here in your presence,
Holy of heart and never for to flytte,
Unto the gods and fortune I commytte.
So as them list for me to ordain.
Again whose will I shall never plain.
Nor them nor you ne shall put in no blame,
What so betide honor, joy, or shame.
And of this thing thus an end I make,
And for this time of you my leave I take.
And of all tho that you about stand.
And one by one he took them by the hand.
And in what wise forth he began him dress,
To you anon I thyncke it to express.
When that Titan had with his fervent hete
Drawn up the dew fro the leaves wete,
Toward myd morrow as I can diffine,
Upon the hour when the clock is nine.
Jason full manly and full like a knight,
Armed in steel of cherefull glad and light,
Began dress him forth what hap that ever fall.
And said a dieu unto his feres all.
He in the boot and they upon the stronde,
And all a lone when he came to land,
And in the water had his vessel lafte,
He first of all remembryng on the craft,
Of Medea with all the circumstaunces,
And how he should keep his obseruaunces,
In every thing and had it well in mind.
And than anon full manly as I find,
He shope him forth and went a knyghtly pase
Toward the bulls that forged were of brase.
But at the point when he his journey began,
For him Medea wexed full pale and wan.
So sore aghast that nothing might her glade.
A ruthe it was to see what woe she made.
For so her tears on her chekes twain,
Full pyteously began to destylle and rain,
That all fordewed were her wedes blake.
And aye this sorrow she made for his sake.
Like a woman fearful and in doubt,
While he his arms full ma^ly brought about.
To sobbe and syghe she can not be in a peace,
Lest he for have were ought rekles.
Fro point to point to do as she him bad,
This was the life that she has for him lad.
And for to se how he should him defend,
She began anon by greces to assende,
Of a Touret in to an hye pynacle.
Where as she might have tho none obstacle,
Nor lettyng another for to have a syghte.
Of him that was her own chosen knight.
And ever among with words out she brake
And stoundemell thus to her self she spoke.
O thou Jason my sovereign hertes heal,
If thou ought knew what woe for the I feel,
Sothly I trow it should the not asterte,
For to be true with all thy hole heart.
And god I pray this journey at the least,
May this time tournen for the best.
And keep ye saulfe and sound in every membre,
And yefe the might fully to remember,
As I the taught and in the same form,
Every thing fully to perform.
Only this day thine honor to anaunce.
Which for to se were all my hole pleasaunce.
For certes Jason if the fylle ought amiss,
Fare well my health and all my worldly bliss.
And fare well than my mirthe and my solace,
And my welfare, my fortune, and my grace,
And all at ones my hearts suffisaunce.
Lo this for him was her governance.
First fro ye time that he the land has nome.
And first of all when he was thither come,
Where as the bulls fell and dispiteous,
Out cast their fire and flawme furious,
Fro out their mouths wonder large and huge,
Again the which for his chief refuge,
Him for to save that he were not brent,
He was enoynted with an oyntement,
On his body that kept him from damage.
Of thilke fire that was so full of rage.
And the smokes dark and full horrible.
Which to escape was almost impossyble,
For any man of what estate he be,
Without comfort and counsel of Medee.
By whose doctrine Jason can so work,
That he is escaped from the mistes dark.
Of the sire with the blases blake.
That all the air so cloudy has do make.
She had him made so discrete and sage.
By virtue only of thilke same image.
Which that he about his neck bare,
Whereby he was so prudent and so ware,
That when ye bulls have most feersly gaped
He has their malice so auysedly escaped.
For the enfection of their troubled air
He has vanquished and was in no dispeire.
For in effect again the foul fume,
That would a man unto the death consume,
The image was a full preseruatyfe.
Him to diffend and to save his life.
And more surely to keep him out of dread,
Full often sithe the writ he did read.
For the virtue of thilke same oryson,
Was unto him a full protection.
That he not fell thereby in no distress.
And after that for rather sykernesse,
Him to preserve in this his mortal case.
He took the lycoure that in the vyall was,
And therwithall full like a manly man,
That all at ones he took the bulls than.
And naught forgot so warely it to cast,
That therwtal their jaws were closed fast.
And by the virtue so mightily englued,
That he there through has utterly eschewed,
The hole enfection of the smoky leven.
And when the air began clear and al ye heaven,
And that ye mystes were wasted him toforne,
With ma^ly heart he raught has by the horn,
The stern bulls and by his vyolence,
He drew them forth in whom was no defense.
And yo^keth them so as the manner was,
And with the plough he made them go a pase.
Now up now down and so to ear the land,
And at his list so buxom he them fond,
That the soil smothe bare and plain,
They ready made to bearen any grain.
And on renges it turned up so down.
For tho in them was no rebellyowne.
But humble meke and ready at his will,
All his desires plainly to fulfill.
And Jason than like a champyon,
Began him enhaste toward the dragon,
That was a beast right great and mo^struous,
Foul and horrible and deadly venomous,
And was armed in scales large and thick,
Of whom the breath more perilous and wicke,
Was then the eayre of any pestylence.
His venim was of such a vyolence,
That it full deadly was and eke mortal,
And at his throat there issued out with all,
A flawme of fire as of a fournes mouth,
Or like the leven that down by the south,
Out of the East is wont in tempest smite.
Right so this dragon sothely for to wite,
Out at his mouth had a flawme blased.
Whereof Jason a little first amassed,
Was in his heart of that dreadful thing.
But wha^ that he remembered on his ringe,
All fear and dread was laid aside and gone,
For in that ringe there was set a stone,
Full rich noble and right virtuous.
Of which as teaches great Ysydorus.
And in mine Auctour also as I find,
Most comenly comes out of ynde.
And must be kept chaste and wonder clean,
And of color surmounteth every grene.
Whose virtue is all venym to destroy.
And to withstand that it may not anoye.
Of dragon serpent of adder and of snake.
And specially if so that it betake,
And be yholden in the opposyte,
Of any worm even again the syte,
Without abode in sothe he may not chese,
Of his venym the force must he lose.
How strong it be or vyolent of rage,
But to the stone it does full great damage.
For when he has his virtue do as blyue,
On pieces small it gynneth all to ryue.
And in it self abides whole no while,
For in the land that called is Cecyle.
There is a worm yt Bufo bears ye name.
And when men of malice make him tame,
And his venym utterly express,
They take a quil mine Auctour bears witness,
Wha^ they will work or a large can,
And in the end this stone they set than,
And line right again the worms head,
They holden it till that he be dead.
For that is sothly his virtue of nature.
That no venim last may nor endure,
In the presence of this rich stone.
And as I find this Bufo right anon,
Through might thereof brusteth eue^ a twain,
Only by kind that no man may restrain.
For the goddess that called is Nature,
Which next her lord al thing in cure,
Has virtue give to herb gras and stone,
Which no man knows but her self alone.
The causes hyd be closed in her hand.
That wit of man can not understand,
Openly the might of her workyng.
And so Jason by virtue of this ring,
And through his ston yt might hi^ most auau^ce
Has the dragon brought to vttraunce,
In whom he fond no manner resystence.
Him to wythstand force nor diffence.
Neither by venym nor none other strife,
Wherefore he has beraft him of his life.
In manly wise and in the field outrayed,
And Jason then full glad and well apayed,
Has with his sword spent on him many a stroke.
And laid on him as men new on an oak.
His bright skales were so hard and dure.
That well uneath he ne might endure.
Him to dysmembre and smite of his head.
And then anon in the stead of sede,
He began his tethe out of his head arace,
And right forth with in the self place,
He began them sow right as men do corn.
Upon the land that eared was aforne.
Of which feed there spra^ge a wonder grayn,
Bright armed knights standing on ye plain.
The which anon with sharp swerdes ground,
Eueriche began other for to hurt and wound.
Till each his fellow has cruelly yslawe.
This of their fate was the fynal law.
That none of them should by vyctorye,
The death rejoice of other by memory.
For all yfeare thus have they made an end.
And after this Jason began to wend,
Unto the Ram with all his dylygence.
In which he fond no power nor defense.
No manner strife nor rebellyowne,
And mightily the Ram he draws down.
And set an hand upon eueryche horn,
And slew it first and than he has it shorn.
Out of his flese of gold so passing rich.
That in this world there was no treasour lich
And after that he makes no delay,
To take his boot in all the have he may.
And roweth forth into that other isle,
Where Hercules all the mean while,
Upon the bryncke with many other mo,
Abode Jason till he had ydo.
And euerychone I find that as blyue,
Only for joy when he did aryue,
They began to thank to their gods all.
So gracyously that it has yfall.
And that the flese he has so knyghtlye wo^ne,
That shone as clear as the somer son.
Which that he brought with him unto lord,
His fears all abydyng on the stronde.
ANd when Apollo of his days arc,
Had in ye west almost yronne his mark,
And fast began downward drawn and declyne,
And on the wawes full watery began to shine,
Yet or that he was passed the Occian,
Jason is come with many a manly man,
Of his coferes in presence of the king.
As he that had acheued every thing,
Which that longs to conquest of the Ram.
And than Oetes as soon as ever he came,
To make him chere outward has hi^ pained.
Albe in heart sothely it was but feigned.
For he full sorry was withouten dread.
Of the exployte and of the happy speed,
Of this Jason that he the flese has won.
But like in sothe as the feyners koune,
When that them list craftily compace,
To show outward a faithful meaning face,
Albe the venym closed hole within,
As in meaning there was no manner syn.
Right so the king with look and forhead clear,
Made unto Jason outward right good chere
And began to him to speak in words few,
Of friendly head and many signs show,
As though his conquest hole and every dele,
From poi^t to point did like him wonder well.
And be full glad that he was so fortuned.
Unto the end that he has so contuned.
And ioyeth both in speech and countenance,
That fortune list so far forth him auaunce.
And to his paleys began him fair conueye,
And day by day full rychely him festeye.
Albe that it was nothing done of heart.
For this no les he felt full great smerte,
That of his treasour he was despoyled so,
And that he has the rich flese forgo.
To his damage and his confusyon.
And thus there was a great dyuysyon,
Atwirt his chere and meaning of his thought.
Often as it fares if yt be dewlye sought.
That many man in meaning false and double,
Can with the calm cover so the trouble,
Of high malice hyd in his desire,
And rake falsely the wicked covert fire,
Full hot brennynge inward of envy,
So well were him that cowd them out espy.
And knew their meaning false and fraudele^t
Where through alas full many an innocent,
Deceived is that wot not what they mean,
And namely such that not but truth wene.
And every cheer that men to them make,
Of innocence they for the best take.
And in no wise think not but well,
Right so certain this Jason every dell,
Has take in gre what ye king has wrought.
Not aduertyng ye grutchyng of his thought.
For doubtless tho it sat the king full sore.
That he the Ram has lost for evermore.
But when that he has utterly ysayne,
Though he still grutche that therein was no gain.
But finally as of necessety,
As at that time it might none other be.
And plainly saw that he may not chese,
But that algate the flese he must lose,
Whether it were that he were lyef or loathe,
He fayneth chere as though he were not wroth
For only he as of his gentilnesse,
No sign outward of grutching does express.
But day by day of very curtesye,
He cheareth Jason and his company.
At which time about enuirowne,
From every party of his regyowne,
The people came to staren and to gase,
Upon the Ram as it were on a mase.
They look wonder and deem what the^ list.
On whose domes is but little tryst.
They often vary and turn to and fro,
That who that wisely takes head thereto,
The common people changes as a phane.
To day they wexe and to morrow do they wane
As does the moon they be so flaskesable.
Who trusts the^ shall find the^ full unstable.
For some were glad that Jason sped so well,
And some sorry and like it never adell.
Some other said they wonder how he might,
Again the dragon or the bulls fight.
Or how that he against the force of Mart,
Out of the isle alive might astert.
Some other said that perauenture,
By craft was wrought all this dyscomfeture.
Other by charm or some sorcerye,
Thus each of them after their fantesye,
Began deem of him all the long day.
But at the last bout making of delay.
Full glad and light Medea down desce^deth,
From her chamber and outwardly pretendethe.
Sadness of chere as she nothing ne knew.
For naught could men conceive as by her hew,
Her secret meaning so has she womanly,
Demened her and eke so prudently.
That she avoided by discrescion,
All fantesye and all suspection.
That no man could as of her working deem,
Nothing but well for as it should seem,
By port and cheer there was no cause whi.
And so by process drew her pryuely,
Toward Jason for she was not to lere,
And secretly she bad him in his ere,
In any wise that he not ne leave,
To her chamber for to come at eve.
For matter they hadden for to treat.
Which he shall know at leisur when they mete.
And so anon when entered was the night,
Sole by him self without torche or light,
To Medea he has the way take.
And she abode sleples for his sake.
Wonder devoutly desyryng as I guess,
With him to treat of some holiness,
Touching matters of contemplacion.
For she was smitte with such devotion,
Of fresh Venus to hold a memory,
With him alone in her oratorye,
Not openly as ypocrytes pray.
In diverse angels joining on the way.
Of the people for to be commended,
But they have not the night so dispended.
For vain glory nor none other laud,
But by them self thynkyng on no fraud,
Secretly this ilke twayn alone.
Without light of either son or moan.
The long night have led without rest,
For as them thought it was not for the best.
To speak of sleep till that it was pryme.
For they them cast to lose as tho no time.
And thus the night together they dispende,
That I am dull for to comprehend,
The obseruaunces of such relygyous,
Prolyx in workyng or compe^dyous,
Demeth your self ye get no more of me.
For well ye wot in every faculte,
Who so has knowing and experyence,
Men will to him rather give credence.
Wherefore I say ye that be wise and can,
Are not me which am so rude a man,
To deem a thing and namely when that it,
Passes my knowing also and my wit.
Fordulled is mine imagynatyfe,
To deem in practike or in speculatyfe,
Wherefore I pass and let it over slide.
And forth I think if ye list abide,
Plainly to tell of Jason and Medee.
The which accorded and assented be,
That she with him should into Greece we^de,
When that he goes shortly this the end.
Vnwyst her father and every other wight.
Save he alone that has his troth plyght,
For to be true both in well and woe,
Unto his last to her and to no mo.
How Jason after this conquest with Medea and felowshyppe returned again into
Thesalye. Cap. vii.
ANd when Jason after his Iournee,
Full rychely like unto his degree,
Refreshed was in Colchos of the king,
Withal that might be to his liking,
And a month passed was and gone,
He with his Greeks assented into one,
Purposed has shortly if he might,
With Medea to stele away by night.
Taking with him great treasour and ye rych flese,
With full assent also of Hercules.
But O Medea thou hastest all to fast,
Thou were to slawe wisely for to cast,
What should befall when you thy journey took.
For how that he in mischief the forsook,
And how that he was false and eke unkind,
For all his oaths to the whereof I find,
And how that thou both at eve and morrow,
Thy fatal chance and thy pyteous sorrow,
By weptest after and began thy self to rende,
Till death of all made a woeful end,
It were but vain to maken rehersayle.
I wot nothing how it might avail.
Nor how Jason unkind for the nones,
Received has penam tallionis,
Of the gods for his disnaturelnesse.
For he in mischief and in wretchedness,
Made eke an end, though the cruel hate,
Of fell Mars loo here the mortal fate,
Of these twain that made their end so.
But I suppose like as writes Guydo,
For their gynnynge was not virtuous,
An end follows full contagious.
Alas if they had taken head aforne,
Than had they not in mischief be forlorn.
But who will not before this mischief se.
May not eschew to have adversity.
In the end platly to deuyne.
For even like right as a medicyne,
Avails not when the sick is dead,
For what may help the stomach or the head,
Lectuarye emplaystre or pocyon,
Or any receite or confection,
Herb or stone or that the leches know,
When that the corpse is laid in earth allow.
Or when a beast is turned to careine,
Mine auctour says that it is but vein,
For his recure to seken any halowe,
Or to his ere for to leyne a salowe.
For verily after his fantasye,
It helps not nor does no remedy.
For thing performed in his due date,
More virtue has tha^ wha^ it comes to late.
Right so in case verily semblable,
Of worldly trust false and full mutable,
Who cast no peril till that it be fall,
Instead of sugre often tastes galle.
Blended with lust which tho is present,
And of the future slouthe and necligent.
That them ne list before no mischief cast,
Till in the snare they be englued fast.
For to provide they be graceles,
Full indiscrete and wilfully richeles.
To cast the peril or that it be tide.
They sewe their lust their reason goes aside.
As it befell whylom of this two,
Of Medea and of Jason also.
But how so ever of Jason that it be,
I find plainly the harm alone had she.
The great damage and the fynall smerte,
For lack of wisdom she ne would aduerte,
What should be fall wha^ she her journey took.
And then her father folyly forsook.
But sith she wrought only of wylfulnesse,
Without counsel or auysenesse,
Me list no more her harms to bewail.
For lyte or naught it might now avail.
Let her alone complainyng her damage,
For well I wot touching her passage,
It was not take in good plyte of the moon.
Of hastynesse she began to soon.
Chesynge an hour which was not fortunat,
For she alone of friends desolate,
Colchos forsook and is to ship gone.
And in all the haste be bidding of Jason.
Hercules and all his company,
That with him common out of Thesalye.
Without tarying forthwith at a word,
Yentred ben within ships board.
Only for cause that the wind is good.
And every thing tho at their lust stood.
And thus assented stale away by night,
With all the treasure that they catch might,
And with them ladde plente of vitayle,
And forth anon they began to sail.
By many coast and many sundry isle,
Toward Greece and all this mean while,
Was Medea glad and of good chere.
She and Jason sitting both yfeare,
And Hercules of very gentylnesse,
Her to comfort did his business,
Al faynyngly for the manner sake.
As these lovers full queynte can it make.
Till they have had holy their pleasaunce,
Their lust fulfilled than vttreth varyance.
As it by Jason was preued utterly.
That has forsaken full unkindly,
This Medea in pain sorrow and woe.
Of her Guydo ne write no words mo.
Nor makes of her none other mention,
Because I trow in mine opinion,
That her sorrows end and every deal,
Rehearsed be full openly and weal,
Methamorphoseos and written there full plain.
Where as Naso records in certain,
Her death not only nor her heaviness,
But percell eke of the unkindness,
Of this Jason and tells plainly how,
Medea has both her sons slow.
For they were like their father of visage.
And tells eke that put her most in rage,
How falsely he I can him not excuse,
Loved an other that called was Ceruse.
Eke in his pistelles who so takes head,
Her deadly sorrow there may behold and read.
And how that she her troth aboughte sore,
Of Medea ye get of me no more.
In all this book nor of her adventure,
But I will now do my busy cure,
Holy to turn my style to Jason.
And of the werre he made on Lamedon,
Like as in Guydo is openly described,
After that he in Greece was aryued.
FIrst when Jason and Hercules also,
Ylonded were with many an other mo,
Within the land and reygne of Thesalye,
King Pelleus with all his chiualrye,
Cast him plainly that he will not fail,
To mete his neuewe at his ariuayle.
And when they met in countenance and chere
Made it outward as hoole and as entere,
As he had had soueraygne gladness.
Of his knighthode and his high prowess.
Of his renown and his manlyhede,
Of his expleyte and of his good speed.
And that fortune to increase his name,
Has caused him with so noble fame,
Out of Colchos with honor to repair.
Albe his chere was utterly contraire.
To his intent that ever he came again.
But for all that with face hole and plain,
He welcomed him but al against his heart.
Full sore astoned that he ever asterte,
The auentures of Colchos peryllous,
And is returned so victorious.
But covertly his treason for to hyde,
All delay he began to set aside.
And to Jason with chere full benyng,
His heritage first he began resygne.
Septre and crown and kingdom at ye lest,
For to perform the sum of his beheste.
Like as he was assured by his bond.
And Jason took all into his hand.
And began his uncle in full low manner,
First to thank with all his heart entere.
And after that full knightly began him pray,
Goodly to here what that he would say.
Of a mattere that fret his heart sore,
From day to day encreasyng ever more.
Besechyng him to grant him audience,
Touching a wrong and a vyolence,
Done unto him when he no harm ne meant.
In Troy land to Colchos as he went.
This is to say the king of Troy town,
Within the bonds of his region,
When I and mine in great aduersitye,
With wind and wether fordryuen in the sea.
Us to refreshe to land did aryue.
Not in purpose with him for to strive.
But for to rest us after all our woe,
A little while and forth anon to go.
For we in sothe no manner harm ne thought,
But he vnkyngly of very malice sought,
Against us to find occasyon.
Byddyng in haste to void his region.
Notwithstanding that we come in peace,
Like as my brother knows Hercules.
Unto no wight doing no distress,
Wherefore we pray to your high noblesse,
To our purpose for to condiscende.
Of which platly this the fynall end.
That we be set in full conclusyon,
Holy to work to his destruction.
Like our auowe when we thense went.
If it so be ye goodly list assent.
And all at ones, strongly and not spare,
Maugre his might to Troy for to fare.
So that we may find in you favor,
Us to refreshe with gold and with treasure.
And only eke of our curtesye,
Us strength also with your cheualrye.
And Pelleus without more abode,
Anon as he this matter understood,
Assented is of heart and will also,
In this voyage with them for to go.
And all the worthy of that regyowne.
Kings, Dukes, and Lords of renown.
Be accorded there is not one says nay,
To go with them and help what they may.
And of this journey chief solicitour,
Was Hercules the worthy conqueror.
And he in haste his retenewe to make,
Toward Spartos has the way take.
Which is an isle to Greeks pertinent.
Fully obeying to their commandment.
In which Pollux and Castor eke also,
The worthy kings the mighty brothern two,
Were as I find that time governors.
And bare their crown like noble werreours.
And brothern weren also unto Eleyne.
And as poets lyketh for to feign,
That Jupiter for all his deyte,
Upon Leda begat them all three,
That in beauty all other did excelle,
And as for Eleyne like as books tell.
Conceived was in Tyndarys the isle,
Unto the land ioynyng of Cecyle.
Therefore of some I find that she is,
After the isle called Tyndaris.
Of their birth me list no more to endite,
But forth I thyncke of Hercules to write.
That has besought these noble kings twain,
With mighty hand to do their busy pain,
Only to grant with him for to wend,
To Troy ward shortly this the end.
And to assente they say not ones nay.
With all the power that they catch may.
Again what time that him list assygne,
And Hercules with chere full beninge,
Thanked them of that they him behyght,
And forth he went in all the haste he might,
Toward Messene the strong mighty land,
Within which the noble king he fond,
The knightly man the worthy Thelamon,
Lord and prince of that region.
That in arms was one the manlyest,
That was a live and egall with the best.
And when he knew that Hercules was com,
For joy he has him in his arms nome.
And him received in all manner thing,
Like as it sat to a worthy king.
And when he wiste sothly what he mente,
Without more anon he did assente,
With him to gone Troyens for to grieve.
And Hercules goodly took his leave,
And him enhasteth to Thesalye again.
To Pelleus and tells him certain,
How he has spedde besechynge him also,
In all the haste that it may be do,
Letters to send and all his lords call,
And to assemble his worthy knights all,
Thrughout his la^d yt were both nigh and far.
Such as he knew yt were expert in werre.
And them also that were of counsel sage,
For wit of them that be yronne in age,
Is more than force without experience.
But when manhood is mente with sapience,
Who looks well it may double avail.
And they that long have used to travail.
Like as it is plainly to suppose,
May help most our journey to dispose.
For unto age experience and wit,
To youth force and hardiness sytte.
And when that both be of one intent,
Fully accorded to worken by assent,
With a quarrel grounded upon right,
Through help of grace yt has treble might,
The^ need not dread with spear nor with shield,
In knyghtly wise for to hold a feilde.
For of knighthode the fame and the glory,
Nor in arms conquest nor victory,
Be not assured upon multitude.
But on manhood so grace list conclude.
Therefore let us for to avenge our wrong,
First with right make our self strong,
And efte our force manly for to show,
Of knights chose taken out a few,
And so avoid encombraunce of number.
And so we shall our foes best encombre.
And of all that that Hercules has said,
King Pelleus was tho right well apayde.
For as him thought his counsel was right good,
And Hercules without more abode.
Is in great haste with his meine gone,
To a province that called is Pilon,
In which there was a duke of noble fame,
And as I find Nestor was his name.
Full renowned and strong of chiualrye,
And he was eke of kindred and allye,
To Hercules and of the same blood.
And when that he plainly understood,
The purpose hole and cause of his coming,
He granted him without more taryinge,
To go him self with him in this voyage.
With all the worthy of his baronage.
And to be ready again a certain day,
And Hercules as fast as ever he may,
Repaired is again to Thesalye.
Where gathered was holy the nauye,
Of the lords full ready apparayled,
Well enarmed and rychely vitayled.
And Pelleus has taken first the sea,
And every lord like to his degree,
Yshypped is and ready for to gone,
With Hercules and also with Jason,
Their behestes manly to fulfill,
Toward Troy the City for to spylle.
And after that sothly as I find,
They not abide but upon the wind.
Now Jason, Hercules, and all the princes of Greece, assembled to aduenge ye
vncurtesy done to them by Lamedon in this expedicion toward Colchos. Cap.
viii.
When that the sote storms of Apryll,
Unto the root full low began destille,
His lustye licour with many wholesome shoure,
To reyse the virtue high upon the flower.
And Phoebus was ascendyng in his sphere,
And on the breast smote his beams clear.
Of the Ram full colerike at all:
Halowynge in veer the Equinoctial.
When Mayes kalendes entren in for sothe,
And zephirus with sweet breath and smothe,
The tender branches enspireth and does spryng
When every bushe is fresh and blosomynge.
And from the hylle the water is reuolued,
Of snowes white yt Phoebus has dissolved.
For than the bawme vapoureth up a lofte,
Into the air from the herbs soft.
The rotes virtue by cold of winter hid,
Has full his might and his force ykydde.
Out of the earth in herb and every tree,
Shade in the branches his humiditee,
Araysed only with the sons heat,
And with the moyster of the raynes sweet.
When silver wells sheden out their stremes,
In ryuers gylte with the son beams.
And for he had with new green again,
Her largess shad upon every plain.
And nightingales that all the wodde ronge,
Full amorously did welcome in their song,
The lusty season fresh and desirous.
Namely to hertes the which ben amorous.
And when the sea calm is and blaundishinge,
Fro trouble of wind or wawy boylynge.
And is from tempest sure to escape.
The same season Greeks forth them shape,
Toward Troy, Earls, Dukes, and kings.
Their ships stuffed with all manner things,
That to werre might them most avail,
And right anon they began to sail,
When all was ready without more abode,
Each ship by other on the water rode.
And when the wind at their lust began blow,
A joy it was to se them go by row.
Which made the^ have and speden on their way,
That in short time they comen ben to Troy.
And in the haven called Symeonte,
When Phoebus fer under their orisente,
I westred was that men no might him se,
Greeks been past all peril of the sea,
And cast their ancrees thynking for the best,
In their ships the same night to rest.
ANd in ye morrow when the lark song,
The worthi Greeks so ma^ly and so strong
Began to land in all the haste they might.
On Troy ground and their tents pighte.
Before the town with great dylygence,
For they ne found no manner resystence,
And all this while they set good awayte,
On every side lest there were deceyte.
Till on the hour that the son bright,
Had in the morrow shade his rody light,
Amyd the field upon every tente,
At which time all of one assente,
The Greeks were assembled euerychone.
And by the byddyng of the king anon,
Jason first and with him Hercules,
With many worthy being in that prese,
Ben to the tente of Pelleus ycome.
And wha^ these lords of greece both al and some
Assembled were and in that place met,
And each of them in his degree was set.
Than Pelleus when al was whist and still,
Right thus began ye sentence of his will.
O noble and worthy of hye estate and low,
whose knightly fame throughout ye world yknow,
Reported is as fer as shines son.
That Greeks yet never thing begone,
That they ne had the victory at end.
For with ye lawrer so fer as men may wend,
They crowned ben of what they took on hand.
Such is their hap both on se and land.
Wherforeye lords most worthi of renown
Ye can remember of king Lamedowne,
And of the wrong yt he upon you wrought,
When harm to him none of you ne thought.
Which must be quit shortly this the end.
For we be come to stroie them and to shende,
Wherefore anon in all the haste we may,
Let us set on without more delay.
But first I read that we taken head,
To three things most helpyng in this need.
First by advise and good discretion,
For our defense and good salvation,
So prudently our wards for to make,
That none of ours be at mischief take,
This ylke day for lack of providence.
The second is to do our diligence,
With all our might and hole entention,
So to labor that full destruction,
Come to our foes and to our selves glory.
And this the third that we may victory,
Inioye of them platly at the last.
And over this ye may before well cast,
If we of knighthode through our hardiness,
May vanquishe them we shall so hye richesse,
Conquer of them to our possessyowne,
For it is known how that Troy town,
Of all plenty as it shall be found,
Of gold and tresour does passingly habounde.
That our ships sothly as I wene,
For to receive ne shall not mow sustain,
The habundaunce that is yonder within.
If it so be that we the City wyn.
As god us grant if so it be his will.
And also fast as the king was still,
The noble knight the strong Hercules,
In the presence of that worthy prese,
Said his counsel was highely to commend.
For wise beginning is preysed by the end.
But to effect our purpose for to bring.
My counsel is that in the morning,
Tofore or we discured been by day,
That we us arm in all the haste we may.
And on this field that we do our pain,
For to deuyde our main into twain.
And of the tone shall king Thelamowne,
Be governor of his hye renown.
And of the other king Pelleus shall have,
The governance wisely them to save.
And I my self and Jason here my brother,
Shall secretly go with all the other,
Under the City or the son shynes.
And in the bushaile and the thick vynes,
We shall us hyde and keep us there full koye.
For Lamedon that is king of Troy,
Anon as he may here or may espy,
Of the Greeks with his cheualrye,
Out of the City will issue out anon.
With us to fight and venge him of his fone.
But when he comes to our ships ward,
Nestor the duke shall in the first ward,
Mete with him and Castor shall also,
When he sees time knightly have ado,
To help Nestor if that it be need.
The third ward Pelleus shall led,
And whiles ye do thus him occupye,
Jason and I shall us as fast hye,
Unto the City vnwist of them echone.
I doubt not we shall it wyn anon.
Does by counsel and it will you avail,
And here my troth that ye may not fail,
For to conquer the City yonde tofore.
This all and some ye get of me no more.
And they accord with al their strength and might
Enarme them in steel yt shone full bright,
Again the son at morrow when he rises,
And wrought at all as Hercules deuiseth.
Of the battle betwixt the Grecians and the Trojans, wherein the Troyans were
discomfeted, their king slain, and after their City taken, rased, and
destroyed. Ca. ix.
King Lamedon when that he herd tell,
Of their coming him list no longer dwell,
But out he went with many a noble knighte,
Flouryng in youth and desirous to fight.
And all tho that mighten arms bear,
Or that could shote or handell durst a spear.
And when they were assembled in the field,
Eueryche his arms depeint upon his shilde,
Brouded or beat upon his coote armure,
Than Lamedon with all his busy cure,
Set them in order and his wards makes,
And in the field forth his way he takes,
Toward the Greeks as any line right.
Fully purposynge there to abide and fight.
He was not ware of the^ that were behind,
He not aduerteth or casts in his mind,
The great sleyght nor the treachery,
That him was shape he could it not espy.
But forth he went with his wards set,
And the Greeks anon with him has met.
With heart bold astoned not at all.
Duke Nestor first sturdy as a wall,
In whose manhod was never founde^ lack,
Full knightly than upon his horse back,
To heart his men and his knights eke,
Began prese in with many worthy Greek,
With Lamedon sturdely to mete.
At which time they felt it full vnswete.
For in the frounter many manly man,
With sharp speres first together ran.
And eft with swords sharp and kene ygrou^de
Was thilke day given many a wound.
Where as they met thus on every side,
Through plate and maile their wounds bledde wide,
And basenettes they riue to ye crown,
The noise of strokes in the air began sown.
And of the blood that tho was shad of new,
The grene soil changed has his hew.
For it was dyed plainly in to red.
Upon the which full many man lay dead.
And many worthy lost their his life,
And certainly than in this mortal strife,
The Greeks had discomfyted be echone,
Ne had Castor socoured them anon,
The folk of Troy so manly have them bore,
That many a knight of greeks was ylore.
But after Castor enters in bataile,
With his knights so sore he did assail,
The worthy Troyans yt with spear and shield,
Greeks again recovered have the field.
That many one lies slain upon the grene,
Through girt the body with sharp speres kene.
That they of Troy in this mortal stoure,
Were drive a back till there came socour,
To them in have of worthy Lamedowne.
Which entered in like a wodde lyowne,
And made a way upon every side.
And where as he made his sword to glyde,
There was but death so manly he him bare.
That well uneath was there none that dare,
Abide his stroke for riding up and down,
He made way about him enuirowne.
In the renges he has his foen out sought,
That dai i^ arms meruailes has he wroute.
Than by his manhod and his worthiness,
He the greeks has brought in such distress,
That they his sword flyen as the death,
Marciles so many of them he sleeth.
Of which slaughter the greeks were confuse,
Till Pelleus came to their rescuse,
Irous and wood as he were fall in rage.
He thought he would ye great pomp aswage,
Of them of Troy and so he did anon.
For he vnhorseth of them many one.
And felly slough all that stood him aforne,
And many harueys he has yt day to torn.
And made sheldes for to ryue a sonder,
That to behold it was a very wondre.
Til Lamedon his people saw go back,
For Pelleus brought them so to wrack,
Whereof in heart he felt full great pain.
Beseching them efte to repair again,
And kyth their might and like as men endure,
And so the field he made them to recure.
Till duke Nestor knew that Lamedowne,
Amid the field was king of Troy town,
And right anon without more abode,
Against him a full great pace he rode.
And when the king did him first espy,
Of hye dispite of rancour and envy,
In knightly wise began to turn again.
Nothing aghast but of hye disdain,
With yrons heart enbolned all with pride,
His horse fyersly smytyng in the side,
That from ye prick out ran the red blood.
And forth to Nestor like as he were wood,
He rode anon and he his spear brake.
But he full knightly kept his horse back,
And full delyuerly him again to quite,
With spear full sharp whette for to byte,
Through sheld and breast gave him such a wound
That fro his horse he field hi^ down to ground.
Of which fall the king nothing a ferde,
Vprise ayene and knightly drew his swerd,
So anger fret him at his heart rote,
That he unhorsed fight must on foot.
Whereof he was in partyfull confuse,
Till one Cedar came to his rescuse.
That was made knight ye self same year,
Young fresh and lusty and of noble chere.
Syttyng that time on a noble stead,
And when that he began to take heed,
And saw the king on foot at mischief fight,
Began forth to pryke in all the have he might,
Toward Nestor and with a spear him hytte,
From his sadell that he made him flytte.
Down to the ground before king Lamedon,
But he anon full like a champion,
Recured up and himself defends,
And many a stroke each on other spends,
With sharp swerdrs kene for to byte.
Eueriche at other began foyne and smite.
Till Lamedon with a dispyteous chere,
From of his face rased his viser.
And by that strype he of at ones sinet,
A rich cercle from his basenet.
Of large perle going enuyrowne.
With creste and all he fyersly beat a down.
That whiles Nestor thus before him stood,
His face was all depeint with his blood.
That certainly the soth to conclude,
Had not Greeks with great multitude,
Rescued him he had of Lamedowne,
Be slain as fast for he was bore a down,
Unto the earth among the horse feet.
But Castor thought that he ne would let,
To be his help as he beheld yfeare,
And yrously he took a mighty spear,
And to Cedar that I spoke of late,
He began to ride and prick in deadly hate.
But or he came and took him there doubtless,
A Troyan knight called Segnerides,
Cosyn to Cedar when he has this seen,
On a courser rode anon between,
And with a spear he smote Castor so,
That with the stroke it broken is a two.
To whom Castor withouten more areste,
Has with a spear amyddes of the breast,
Segnerides give a mortal wound.
That lykely was never for to sound.
Wherefore Cedar caught has such envy,
That he anon of fell melancolye,
And of dispyte boylynge in his heart,
Segnerides when he behold so smerte,
Maugre who grutcheth amiddes of ye field,
Of very might from Castor took his shield.
And through vyser of rancour and of rage,
He wounded him amyddes of his vysage.
And eke his horse fro him also he caughte,
And to his squier manfully it raught.
That certainly he stood in such disioynt,
This worthy Castor that he was in point,
To have be taken of them of Troy tho.
For he on foot with him must have go,
Ne had Pollux with many manly knight,
Mo then.vii. hundred in steel armed bright,
The rather come Castor to rescue.
Which after them so sore began to sewe,
That maugre them Castor when he fond,
Of force he rest him from his enemies ho^d,
And to his horse restored him again.
And after that this Pollux in certain,
Of very anger and of fervent Ire,
Again Trojans with rancoure set a fire,
That al at ones he upon them set,
And in his mode by fortune as he met,
A Trojan knight called Eliatus,
In arms young fresh and desirous,
Wonder semely and yet of tender age,
The kings son also of great Cartage,
And neuewe eke unto king Lamedon.
Whom Pollux has like a fierce Lion,
Without compassion pytye or mercy,
Within the renges slain full cruelly.
That Lamedon when he began take heed,
Of inward dole felt his heart blede,
When he him saw in point upon the death,
Full pyteously yelden up the breathe.
Upon the plain as he lay him beforne.
For which anon he made sown a horn,
At which time there came in rich array,
Seven.M. knigh tin all the haste they may,
Upon his death avenged for to be.
Which merciles of their great crueltye,
The Greeks have here and there confounded,
Here lies one dead and here another wounded.
So that they might with them hold no tacke.
So mortally they made them go abacke,
That all began turn to their confusion.
And finally that day with Lamedon,
The triumph had and the field ygone,
Save that alas out of the town anon,
Unto the king there came a messengere,
That has him told with a full piteous cheer,
How the Greeks have his City take.
Then for to se the woe he tho did make,
It would have made a piteus heart as bliue,
Of very dole a sundre for to riue.
So sore he began within him self to mourn.
He wist not to what party he may turn.
But in a weuer he abiding long.
Before him saw the mighty Greeks strong,
And in the City another host behind,
Almost for woe he went out of his mind.
And suddenly backward as he beheld,
Toward the City he saw come in the field,
First Hercules and with him Jason.
That by their sleyght wonnen had ye town.
And in all have this cruel Hercules,
The mighty giaunt of force pereles,
Like a Lion wood and dispiteous,
Or a Tygre ramage and furyous,
Began of new them of Troy assail.
And with his sword perce plate and mayle.
Which of labor were full mate and feynt,
And of long fight with werinesse atteynt.
And he came in lusty fresh and grene,
That they his force might him not sustene,
For as he rode among them here and yonder,
In cruel wise he severed them a sonder.
And put them holy in this high mischaunce,
Out of rule and from all governance.
So that the king oppressed al with dole,
Out of his wards destytute and sole,
At mischief left and all unfortunate,
And of comfort fully disconsolate.
This Hercules with full dispiteous look,
With sharp spores his stead felly took,
And cruelly rode forth to Lamedowne,
And to the earth fiersly bare him down.
And upon him in all the have he might,
Down of his horse sodeinly alighte,
And mightily rent of his Basenet.
And with a swerd sharp ground and whet,
Smote of his head there was no other grace
And cast it forth in the self place.
Among the horse by cruel violence.
Without pytye or any reverence.
And in arage raught his horse again,
And like a Lion renning on the plain.
Bare down and slough what so ca^ in his weye.
And many Troyan at yt time made deye.
That like to sheep were forskatered wide,
All destitute of governor or guide.
Ne can no read shortly to conclude,
For the Greeks with double multitude,
Began them enchase to the death full blyue.
That well uneath there left was one alive.
The field they have and ben that day victours.
And with triumph like as conquerours,
To the city they took their way after,
And rende adowne both wall sparre and rafter.
And all the treasour and riches of the town
They took anon to their possessyowne.
Who ever grutche or be lefe or loathe,
What they found there plainly with them gothe.
And in the temples did great violence.
There to the gods doing no reverence.
For all they spoil without dread or fear,
And unto ship every thing they bear.
And mercyles on crooked old and lame.
Their swerdes they made cruelly to tame.
And children soukyng at their mother breast.
They kill and sley withouten more arest.
And young maidens weeping in distress,
Full gentyl borne and of great semelynesse,
With them they led and may not them excuse,
Their fresh beauty falsely to misuse.
They waste bren and consumen all,
And round about they brake adowne ye wall.
And Exyone the kings daughter dear,
That was to him so passingly entere,
By his life I mean to Lamedon,
Meke and bening of her condition.
This Hercules has anon her take,
That in her dreadful pyteously began quake.
And her delivered unto Thelamowne,
For that he entered first into town.
And he his gift received has at gree,
Because she was surmounting of beautee.
And treated her after as he would,
Not like as he a kings daughter should.
For sith he has her won by victory,
For his worship and his own glory,
Having regard to her high degree,
He should rather of knightly honestee,
And of knighthode wedded her therefore,
Since that she was of blood so gentill bore.
Than of false lust again all goodlihead,
Used her beautye and her womanhaede,
Dishonestly and in such sinful wise.
Of royal blood not like the high empryse.
Nor the doctrine of natures right.
Nor like to nurture of a gentil knight.
Considered first her birth and her kinrede,
Her grene youth and eke her maydenheade,
So good so fair so womanly thereto,
A kings daughter of birth she was also,
To have her wed it could have be no shame.
Now Thelamo^ in sothe thou were to blame,
For through the error of thy governance,
There kindled was of full high vengeance,
So hot a spark after of envy,
That through ye world ye fire began multeplye.
Which was not like to quench of his hete,
For hatred old to bren can not let.
With new flawme who so takes head,
If it not smoke it is the more to dread.
As in this storye hereafter shall be know.
and wha^ this town was bre^t and brought so low,
Both toure and wall with ye soil made plain,
And nothing stood of all that might be sein.
So utterly the Greeks them oppress,
Making all waste like a wyldernes.
For good treasour and riches infynyte,
With many jewel full pleasing of delight,
To their ships out of the town they led,
And in short time homeward do they speed.
With treasour stuffed and habu^dau^ce of good.
And when they saw that the wether stood,
The wynd also at their lust they had.
They ga^ to sail and with the^ home they lad,
Young Exione and many a maid mo.
That out of Troy into Greece go.
And sailing forth within a litell space,
They be escaped fro the sea by grace.
And unto land aryued merely.
At whose coming the Greeks utterly,
So joyful be of their good speed,
And specially in Guido as I read,
Their ships were with gold and treasour lade.
Whereof in heart they wexe wonder glade.
And for they had outward so well the^ borne,
To overthrow and have so few ylorne,
Of their meyne they thank their gods al.
And of the grace that to them is fall.
For with ye treasour yt have they home brought,
Full many pore was made up of naught,
Throughout yt la^d there was such habu^dau^ce
So much good and so great suffisaunce.
That no wight had among them need,
And many day this blessedfull life they led.
From year to year by reuoluciowne,
And for their manhod and their high renown,
Their honor ran round the world about.
That them toffende many land has doubt.
For their knighthod and for they were so wise.
Until the storye last again devise.
In this matter ferther to proceed,
With the favor of your goodlyhead,
I will me rest for a little space.
And tha^ vpborne with supporte of your grace,
For taccomplishe as I you undertook,
And here an end of the first book.
I make now with quakyng hand for dread,
Only for fear of you that shall it read,
Lest ye alas of hasty mocion,
Ne will not have no compassyon,
Pytye nor routhe upon my rudeness.
Lowly besechyng to your gentilcesse,
Of mercy only both nigh and far,
Where ye find that I fail or err,
For to correct or ye further flyt.
For to your grace I holy all commit.
The Translatour complains the misfortune of the Trojans in the loss of
their City, lively describyng the tykle estate of Fortunes governance,
beginning in the same chapyter his secound book persewing the matter of the
said historye. Ca. x.
THe envious order of fortunat meninge,
In worldly thing false and flikerynge,
Nil suffer us as in this present life,
To live in rest without werre or strife.
For she is blind fikel and unstable,
And of her course false and full mutable.
Who sits highest she ca^ him down incline,
When he least weneth and bring him to ruin.
With the awaytes that gladly ben sudden.
And with her face that parted is in twain.
Show most hole wha^ she is lest to tryst,
That well were him that her deceytes wist.
And her engines and her trappes knew.
That in her court every day be new.
Of which in sothe I well affirm dare,
No mortal man may in this life beware.
For she uneven peysing in balaunce,
With counterfete and feigned countenance,
With lo^ing plain and cheer of flatterye,
Unawarely can do blere a man's eye,
And him begile this the very sothe,
With a face blandishing and smothe.
When she has him from high degree made low,
Full falsely smile and make to him the mow.
And yet somewhyle most varyaunt of hew,
She unto some pretends to be true.
For she whylom to some is favorable,
And to some false and like deceiuable.
She can reise one and bring another down,
This false lady of transmutacyowne,
To some she gives renown and victory,
And does them flower in honor and glory.
And some she can appayre with false fame,
And giltles perde put a man in blame.
To some she is goodly and beninge,
And of disdeyne she can also malygne,
Again an other and make him lowte low,
And from their see she can great kings throw
And them avail for all their high toures,
And she can plonge worthy Emperors.
From the hill of hye prosperetye.
Into the veil like of aduersytye.
The rich emprishe of rancoure and dysdayne,
And eft the pore she can enhau^ce again,
This false goddess with her eyes blind,
Set one before another goes behind,
And does one run and makes another halte,
And one she can high in riches exalte,
And an other plonge in pouertye,
In whom no man may have securytye.
To some sugar and honey she distilleth,
And to other some she the bottel fylleth,
With bitter gall mirre and aloes.
And thus this lady wilful and rechles,
As she that is froward and peruers,
Has in her seller drinks full diverse.
For she to some of fraud and of fallas,
Ministers piment bawme and ypocras.
And suddenly when the soote is past,
She of custom can give him a cast,
For to conclude falsely in the fine,
Of bitter eysell and of egre wine.
And corrosynes that fret and perce deep.
And Narcotikes that cause men to sleep.
Thus she to them that her can aproche,
After sweet the bitter can a broche.
Thus in her reygne this queen of varyaunce,
Whose joy always fineth with mischaunce.
Who trusts her she will him ouercast,
And him deceive plainly at the last.
Of what estate soever that he be,
This double lady of mutabilitye.
Se here example of king Lamedon,
Whom she has brought to confusion.
For litel cause and for a thing of naught,
Her crueltye he has to dear abought.
Wherefore I read every man take heed,
To gin a quarrel where as is no need.
For litell fire under ashes reke,
So may be kindled that it will out break,
Into such flawme men may it not apease.
Who best can suffer most shall have his ease,
Therefore ye kings and lords euerychone,
Make you a myrroure of this Lamedone,
And be well ware to do no violence,
Unto strangers when they do none offense.
When they come fer into this region,
Ne suffer them by none oppression,
Within your bonds for to have no wrong.
For in your own though that ye be strong,
And mighty eke among your lieges all,
Another day perauntre may befall,
That when that ye full little think on it,
Of sodeyne case thus may ye be aquyt.
And ythanked in another place,
Of adventure where ye may fail of grace.
Therefore when ye may any such espy,
Do them good cheyre of your curtesye.
And prudently consider in your wit,
That to a lord of gentilnesse it sit,
To every stranger goodly him to have.
There is nothing may more his honor save.
Than to refreshe them freely and disporte,
Than may they after good of him report.
By whose contrary has much woe be wrought
Before this time if so it be well sought.
The first Troy thus utterly destroyed,
And the people in sorrow and woe acloyed.
Lad into exyle a far from their City,
Living in thraldom and captiuitye.
And Exyone as ye have herd me tell,
Led into Greece with Thelamon to dwell.
For who^ there was as Guido ca^ you teach,
After take so great vengeance and wreche.
On either part that in very truth,
For to hear it is to great a routhe.
As in this book ye may hereafter read,
Ceryously if that ye list take heed,
For gladly aye by reuolusyon,
Of fatal thing by disposicion,
So enuyous is and always meynt with woe,
That in this world where so that we go,
We truly may aduert as in our thought,
That for the value of a thing of naught.
Mortal causes of werres first begone.
Strife and debate here underneath the son.
Were meued first of small occasyon,
That caused after great confusyon,
That no man can the harms half endite,
And for a cause dear enough a mite.
Each one is ready to destroy other.
A man for litel strive will with his brother.
Blood is unkind which greatly is to dread,
Alas why ne will they take better head,
For old Troy and after that the new,
Through small encheso^ who the troth knew,
Were finally brought to destruction.
As old books make mention.
And many worthy and many noble knight,
Slain in the field by duresse of that fight.
Kings and princes at the siege ben dead,
Wha^ Attropos list break their lives threde.
That for to tell the mischief and the woe,
I want connyng and I feel also,
My pen quake and tremble in my hand.
List that my lord dradde on sea and land,
Whose worthiness through ye world does sprede
My rude making shall behold and read,
Which of color full naked is and bare.
That but if he of his mercy spare,
For to disdain and list to have pytye,
For fear I tremble that he should it se.
But only mercy yt does his heart embrase,
Bid me presume fully in his grace,
Seeing in him most virtuous and good,
Mercy annexed unto royal blood,
As to a prince longs nigh and far,
Aye to fore right pytye to prefer.
For through the support of his high noblesse,
As now I will ayene my style dress,
To write forth the storye by and by.
Of new Troy in order seryously.
As mine auctour in latin Guydo wryt.
Praying ye reader where as my words missit,
Causyng the meter to be halte or lame,
For to correct to save me from blame.
Let him not wait to have curyosytye,
Since that in rhyme English has skersytye,
I am so dull certain that I ne can,
Guido ensewe that clerk and curyous man.
Which in latin has by rethoryke,
Set so his words that I ca^ not be like.
To sewe his style in my translation.
Word by word like the construction.
After the manner of gramariens.
Nor like the style of rethoriciens.
I took but on me this storye to translate,
For me to further Clio came to late.
That in such craft has great experience,
I leave the words and follow the sentence.
And truth of meter I set also aside,
For of that art I had as tho no guide.
Me to reduce when I went a wrong,
Taking small head either of short or long.
But to the troth and let curiosite,
Both of making and of meter be,
Not purposyng to much for to varye,
Nor for to be diverse nor contrary,
Unto Guydo as by discordaunce.
But me conform fully in substance.
Only in meaning to conclude all one.
Albe that I ne can the way gone,
To sewe the flowers of his eloquence.
Nor of peyntyng I have none excellence.
With sundry hewes noble fresh and gay,
So rich colors byggen I ne may.
I must proceed with sable and with black,
And in ennuyng where ye find a lack,
I axe mercy or that I fro you twyn,
And with your favor I will now begin.
And in all haste my style forth right direct,
And where I err I pray you to correct.
THe same time when that Troy town,
Destroyed was and yt king Lomedowne,
Was also slain through the crueltye,
Of Hercules and that tofore his city.
He had a son the storye tells us,
Which was his heir ycalled Priamus.
Wonder manly discrete eke and prudent,
Which at that time from Troy was absente,
When so his father lost has so his life.
For at that time with Hecuba his wife,
And with his sons about a castle lay.
And all his knights to get it if they may.
That has on them mightily werreyed,
For they his father falsely disobeied.
And unto him be rebel wonder long.
Albe Priam with sautes huge and strong,
Them had assailed often and many sith.
His strength on them like a knight to kyth,
To get in arms worship and honor,
And them to daunt like a conqueror,
He cast him fully or that he depart,
For day by day his life he began Ieoparte,
Tofore their walls for to preue his might,
With many baron and many worthy knight.
For he was flowing yet lusty blood,
And was of age flouryng in knighthode.
And at assautes and such manner strife,
On with the first adventure his life.
To heart his men him list not be behind.
For dread of death sothly as I find.
Before the castle high and thyck ywalled,
And by his wife that Hecuba was called.
This Pryam had full worthy of degree,
Five sons and young daughters three.
Of which the eldest Hector called was,
Which also fer as Phoebus in compase,
A natural day his cercle goes about,
So fer of him withouten any doubt,
Reported was the renown and the name,
The worthynesse and the noble fame.
For like as books of him specifye,
He was the root and stock of chiualrye.
And of knighthod very soueraygne flower,
The sours and well of worship and honor.
And of manhood I dare it well express,
Patron and myrrour and of high prowess,
Ginning and ground and with all this yfeare,
Wonder benynge and lowely of his cheer.
Discrete also prudent and virtuous,
Of whom the deeds and acts merueilous,
Remembered ben of so long a gone.
For he alone excelled euerychone.
In old Auctours read and ye may find,
Of his knighthod how yet they make^ mind.
The next brother called was Paris,
To whom nature gave to her deuys,
Of shape and form beautye and semelynesse,
That to record his excellent fayrnesse,
He in his time withouten any dread,
Far passed all that I can of read,
And he was eke a full manly knight.
But most he used when so he should fight,
In his hand to bear a mighty bow.
For such an archer no man coud know.
None might be found to seek both fer and nere,
That of shoting might hardely be his pere.
As he was found when he had a do,
And Alexsandre called he was also.
The third son hight Deiphobus,
A worthy knight and a chiualrous.
And had in arms a full great renown,
And was a man of high discresciowne.
And wife of cou^sail min auctour says thus.
The fourth brother called was Helenus.
Sad and discrete and of high prudence,
And was also a man of great science,
And renommed therewith in special.
In all the arts called lyberal,
For he in them was full expert a right.
The fyfth son was a worthy knight.
Fresh and lusty and youngest of them all,
And as says Guido Troylus men him call.
A manly man valiant in battle,
And fearsely hot his fomen to assail.
One of the best in his time yfounde,
For called he was Hector the secound.
For his manhood throughout Troy book,
Within the werre full often upon him took.
Of his knighthode many high empryse,
As the storye like after shall deuyse.
And in his book like as write Vergile,
The poet old with soueraintye of style.
How that the king Pryam had also,
By Hecuba other sons two.
And by record of this Vergelius,
The one was named Pollidorus.
Whom Priamus in his grene youth,
When that ye cominge was of Greeks kouth,
To Troyewarde in all the haste anon,
With gold treasour and many rich stone,
Has sent him forth beside unto a king,
Of full great trust to have him in keeping.
Till time he saw what conclusyowne,
There should befall after of the town.
And eke what fine the werres shoulden take,
That upon them the Greeks tho did make.
But thilke king of false couetyse,
Of his treasour that ye have herd deuyse,
When that he saw fortunes varyaunce,
Toward Pryam and his unhappy chance,
Like a tyrant and murderer also,
The childs throat made do cut a two.
And after that he full of crueltye,
Made his men to burye him priuelye,
That no man might his treason understand.
Beside a sea deep under the strond.
The other son also that I of read,
In Vergile called was fair Ganimede.
Whom Jupiter has in a forest hente,
Upon a day as he on huntinge went.
And bare him up above the sterres clear,
And in the heavens made him butlere.
Eternally with him to wonnen there,
Instead of Hebes his own daughter dear.
The first daughter of king Pryamus,
Was hoote Creusa as says Vergilius,
In his Eneydos sothely as it was.
And she was wedded unto Eneas,
And eke this storye says that this Enee,
Was wonderful in his natyuytye.
Of whom the father as I find doubtless,
Was in his time called Anchyses.
That him begat on Venus the goddess.
For after her he was of such fayrnesse,
That to no wight could never yet be se,
A man that was more passing of beautye.
Of whom this storye touching his workyng,
Shall you declare many wonder thing.
For it is he to whom so great a loos,
Vergyle has give in his Eneydos.
For he that book in worship of Enee,
Compyled has like as ye may se.
Of his knyghthood and many strong batayl,
By him acheued before he wan Itayle.
Full long time after that the royal town,
Of Troy was brought to his confusiowne.
And of his conquest if ye list take heed,
In this poet ye may by order read.
And how in arms he wrought in all his age,
And of his coming also to Cartage,
Fro Troywarde within a litell while,
All this ye may behold in great Vergile.
Another daughter also it is found,
King Pryam had of birth the secound,
Called Cassandra of full great sadness.
And was in manner a diuineresse.
And in each art had experience,
Of things future fully the prescience,
To tell before what that shall betide.
Of whom the fame sprang in costs wide,
Which kept her chaste aye in virginitye,
And eke in prayers and in honestye.
She led her life and in devotion,
After the rites and the religyon,
Of Pagynisme used in tho days.
The obseruaunces keeping of their lays.
The third daughter hight Pollicene,
Youngest of all and still a maid clean,
She kept her self and honest in her law.
Unto the time that Pirrus has her slawe.
Of shape of fortune was never by nature,
Wrought to behold a fayrer creature.
Eke as I find this noble king also,
Had thirty sons the book says and no mo.
Hardy in arms and noble found at all,
That called were his sons natural.
And they were all exceptinge never one,
Worthy knights and manly men echone.
And their names who so list to know,
He shall them find write upon arowe,
After in story eueryche after other,
Beginning first at the eldest brother.
And whiles Pryam at the syege lay,
Tofore the castle to get it if he may,
And therabout has many way sought,
The woeful tidings be unto him brought,
How the greeks have taken Troy town.
And slain his father worthy Lamedowne.
And how the City of old foundaciowne,
Full piteously was turned up so down.
The worthy lords and gentle men echone,
Taken and slain and ylefte not one,
Of them a live through Greeks cruelty.
After the ruin alas of their City.
And Exion his own sister dear,
Lad in exyle with her eyes clear.
Wherefore the king in heart astoned so,
For very sorrow he nist what to do.
His sudden woe began him so constrayne.
He sobbeth wepeth that of mortal pain,
He thought his heart would a sondre breast.
Of hye distress for he might have no rest.
And into tears he began him self destylle,
That for to deye was finally his will.
And fortune that can so falsely varye,
With drery heart began bytterly to warye.
That she to him was so deceyuable.
So inly cruel and vnmercyable.
So dispyteous and so stern of face,
So vengeable and so deuoyde of grace.
For of envy with a raged thought,
She has her worst of malis on hi^ wrought.
And felly showed what she might do.
That in this world was never wight so woe.
As I suppose of no manner of age.
To reaken all her harms and damage.
For which anon in all that ever he may.
In have he changes all his rich array,
Tryste and heavy with deadly face pale,
So astoned with this mortal tale,
That his desire was to have be dead,
With countenance inclined and with head.
This life he lad and clad him all in black,
And suddenly he the syege brake,
And would as tho no longer there abide,
But with his folk anon he began to ride,
That pyteously began likewise with him morn,
And toward Troy attones they efte return.
And when that he has the Cyty found,
Plain with the soil and even with the ground,
The hye walls whylom thick and long,
Ybeate down that made were so strong,
And his toures and paleys pryncypall,
That was in buildyng so excellent royal,
So famous rich and of great noblesse,
He found turned into wilderness.
His people slain, his sister ladde away,
For very woe he ne wyste what to say.
For the constraynt of his aduersytie,
And for his harms that will not cured be.
For in that time he was right fully sure,
Upon no side there found might be recure.
Wherefore he can naught do but sobbe and weep
And fro his breast with syghes sought full deed,
Broken out with pale and dead visage,
And thus alas in this furious rage,
Full pyteously all his hooste and he,
Without respite continued days three.
Till at the last the dark skies black,
Began of their woe in party for to slack.
And the tempest some deal began withdraw,
And of their weeping bla^dyshe began ye wawe.
And when the floode of woe is over paste,
The ebb of joy follow must in haste.
To sorrow ever it would their hertes shende.
And at a term every woe must end.
for though for fre^des me^ may weep and wayle,
After their death their tears may not avayle.
Wherefore the king after all his care,
Has sought a way the City to repair.
And cast him fully if it would so be,
To make a virtue of necessytie.
And manfully after all his tene,
When that the air began to wexen clean,
Of the mystes of his cloudy sorrow,
And that some deal adawe began the morrow
Of heaviness after the derke night,
Chaced away with a son bright,
Of new joy for aye the fine of woe,
Must be gladness when sorrow is ygo.
And so Pryam after a certain space,
When his sorrow began lyte and lyte to pass,
And of wisdom in all his pytious smerte,
Began prudently to plucken up his heart,
And of his eyes the wawes began to clear,
Anon he wroughte as ye shall after here.
How Pryam son to Lamedon and succedynge his father, builded the City
again. Cap. xi.
THe sorrow aswaged and the syghes old,
By long process like as I you told,
This worthy king called Pryamus,
In his heart is now so desirous,
Upon the plain that was so waste and wild,
So strong a town of new for to build,
At his deuyse a City edifye,
That shall the assautes utterly defye,
Of enmyes all and the mortal foone.
With rich toures and walls of hard stone.
And all about the countries enuiron,
He made seek in every regyon,
For such workmen as were curyous,
Of wit inuentife of castyng meruaylous,
Or such as could craft of geometrye,
Or were sotyll in their fantasye.
And for every such as was a good deuysour,
Mason, hewer, or crafty quarreour,
For every wryghte and passing carpenter,
That may be found either far or nere,
For such as could grave groupe or carue,
Or such as were able for to serve,
With lime and stone for to reyse a wall,
With bataylyng and crestes marciall.
Or such as had conning in their head,
Alabaster other white or read,
Or marbell gray for to pullyshe plain,
To make it smothe of veins and of grain,
He sent also for every image our,
Both in entayle and every portreyour,
That could well draw or with color peynte,
With hewes fresh yt the work not feynte,
And such as could with countenance glad,
Make an image that will never fade.
To counterfeate in metal tree or stone.
To sotill work of him Pygmaleon.
Or of Appollo which as books do tell,
In ymagerye all other did excelle.
For by his craft and workyng curyous,
The tomb he made of king Daryus.
Which Alixsandre did on heyght reyse,
Only for men should his fame preyse.
In his conquest by Perce when he went.
And thus Priam for every master sent,
For each caruer and curious ioyner,
To make knottes with many a queynt flower.
To set on crestes within and eke without,
Upon the wall the City round about.
Or who that were excellyng in practike,
Of any art called mecanyke.
Or had a name flowryng or famous,
Was after sent to come to Priamus.
For he purposes this noble worthy king,
To make a City royal in buildyng.
Broad, large, and wide, and lest it were assailed,
By werre about proudely enbatayled.
And first the ground he caused to be sought,
Full deep and low that it fail naught.
To make sure the foundaciowne,
In the place where as the old town,
Was first ybuylded he the walls set.
And he of land many mile out met,
About in compass for to make it large.
As the masters that took on them the charge
Devised have the setting and the scyte.
For wholesome air to be more of delight.
And when the soil defouled with ruin,
Of walls old was made plain as a line.
The workmen began this City for to found.
Full mightly with stones square and round.
That in this world was none unto it lyche,
Of workemanshyp nor of buylding rich.
Nor in craft of curyous masonrye,
I can no terms to speak of geometrye.
Wherefore as now I must them set a side,
For certainly I never read Enclide.
That the master and the foundour was,
Of all that work by square or by compass.
Or keep their measure by level or by line,
I am to rude as clearly to diffyne,
Or to discriue this work in every part.
For lack of terms longyng to that art.
But I dare well of troth affyrmen here,
In all this world ne was there never pere.
Unto this City and write it for a sothe.
As in his book my master Guydo does.
And that it might in his prosperity,
In high honor and in felicity,
From all assaut perpetually contune,
It raised was in worship of Neptune.
And named Troy as it was tho toforne,
Like the first that was through greeks lorne.
The length thereof was shortly to conclude,
Three days iourne and like the latitude.
That never erst I herd make mencyon,
Of such a another of foundation.
So huge in compase nor of such largess,
Nor to count so passing of fayrenesse.
So edifyed or lusty to the syghte,
And as I read the walls were on heyght,
Two hundred cubytes all of marbell gray.
Magecolled without for sautes and assaye.
And it to make more pleasant of delight,
Among the marbel was alblaster white,
Meynt in the walls and round ye town about
To make it show within and eke without.
So fresh so rich and so delectable,
That it alone was incomparable.
Of all Cities that any mortal man,
Saw ever yet sith that the world began.
And at the corner of every wall was set,
A crown of gold with rich stones yfrette.
That shone full bright again ye son shene.
And every tower bretexed was so clean,
Of chose stone that were not far a sonder,
That to behold it was very wonder.
Thereto his City compassed enuirowne,
Had gates.vi. to enter into town.
The first of them and strongest eke withal,
Largest also and most principal,
Of mighty buildyng by him self perelesse,
Was by the king called Dardanydes.
And in story like as it is found,
Tymbrya was named the second.
And the third was called Helyas,
The fourth gate hight also Cetheas.
The fifth Troiana the syxth Antinorydes,
Strong and mighty both in werre and peace.
With square toures set on every side,
At whose corners of very pomp and pride,
The workmen have with stern and fell visages,
Of rich entayle up raised great images.
Wrought out of stone and never like to fail,
Full curiously enarmed for battle.
And through the wall their fomen for to let,
At every toure were great gonnes set.
For assautes and sudden auentures.
And on each tourettes were raised up figures
Of savage beasts as Bears and of Lions.
Of Tigers, Bores, of Serpe^tes and Dragons
And Hertes eke with their broad horns,
Of Elyphauntes and large Unicorns.
Bugles, Bulls, and many great Gryffon,
Forged of brass of coper and laton.
That cruelly by signs of their faces,
Upon their foon made fell menaces.
Barbycans and also bulworkes huge,
Before the town made for high refuge,
When need should be early and eke late.
And portekoles strong at every gate.
That of assautes they need take no charge,
And the locks thycke broad and large.
Of al ye gates well wrought of shyning brass.
And eke within the mighty shytting was,
Of yren bars strong square and round.
And great bars pytched in the ground,
With huge cheynes forged for diffence.
Which ne would break for no violence.
That hard it was through them for to win.
And every house that builded was within,
Every paleys and every mansyowne,
Of marbell were throughout all the town.
Of crafty buildyng and working most royal.
And the highte was of every wall,
Sixty cubytes from the ground accounted.
And there was none yt other has surmou^ted.
In the City but of one hight aliche,
In very soth both of pore and rich.
That it was hard of hye estate or low,
House or paleys a sonder for to know.
So egally of tymbre and of stone,
Their houses were raised euerychone.
And if I should rehersen by and by.
The corn knottes by craft of masonry,
The fresh enbowi^g with verges right as lines
And the housyng full of backewines,
The rich coining the lusty tablementes,
Vinettes ronning in casementes,
Though ye terms in English wolden rhyme,
To show them all I have as now no time.
Ne yet language picked for the nones,
To tell the sotyll ioynyng of the stones,
Nor how they put instead of mortere,
In the ioyntoures coper gylte full clear.
To make them join by level and by line,
Among the marbell freshely for to shine.
Against he son when his shene light,
Smote on the gold that was burned bright.
To make the work glister on every side,
And of this town the streets large and wide.
Were by craft so prudently provided,
And by workmen set so and divided,
That wholesome air amyddes might enspyre,
Erely on morrow to them that it desire,
And zephirus that is so comfortable,
For to nouryshe things that been vegetable,
In time of year throughout every street,
With sugared savor lusty and so sweet,
Most pleasauntly in the air began smite,
The Citezeynes only to delight.
And with his breath them to recomforte,
When they list walk them self to disporte.
And through the town with crafty purueiaunce,
By great auise and discrete ordenaunce,
By compase cast and squared out by squyers,
Of pullished marble upon strong pyllers,
Devised were long large and wide,
Of every streate in the fronter side,
Fresh alures with lusty hye pynacles,
And mou^stryng outward costly tabernacles.
Vauted above like to reclynatoryes,
That called were deambulatoryes.
Men to walk togithers twain and twain,
To keep the^ dry when it happed to rain,
Or them to save fro tempest wind or thundre
If that them list shroude themself there under
And every house covered was with lead,
And many gargoyle and many hydous head,
With spoutes thorough and pipes as they aught
From the stone work to the canell raught.
Voydyng fylthes low into the ground,
Thorough grates made of iron perced round.
The streets paued both in length and bread,
In cheker wise with stones white and read.
And every craft that any manner man,
In any land deuyse or reken can,
King Pryamus of hye discreciowne,
Ordained has to dwell in the town.
And in streates severed here and yonder,
Eueryche from other to be set a sonder.
That they might for there more commodity,
Each by himself work at his lybertye.
Goldsmythes first and rich Iewelleres,
And by them self crafty brouderers,
Weuers also of woollen and of line,
Of clothe of gold damask and satyn.
Of velvet sendell and double samyt eke,
And eueryche clothe that men list to seek.
Smythes also that coulden forge well,
Pollaxes, swerdes, and speres sharp of stele.
Darts daggers for to mayme and wound,
And quarelheades sharp and square ygrounde.
There were also crafty armerers,
Makers of bows and also these fletchers,
And such as could make shaftes plain.
And other eke that did their busy pain,
For the werre to make also trappures,
Baners beat and royal cote armures,
And by diverse Standards and penouns,
And for the fyelde fresh and gaye getouns.
And every craft that may reckened be,
To tell shortly was in this City.
And through this town so rich and excellent,
In the mids a large river went,
Causynge to them full great commodity.
The which on twain has parted the City.
Of course full swyfte with fresh stremes clear,
And hight Xantus as Guydo does us lere.
And as I read that upon this flode,
On each a side many a mylle stood.
When need was their grain and corn to grind,
Them to sustain in storye as I find.
This river eke of fyshe full plenteous,
Divided was by workmen curious,
So craftily through casting sovereign,
That in his course the stremes might attain,
For to areche as Guydo does coniecte,
By arches strong his course for to reflecte.
Through condite pypes large and wide withal,
By certain means artifyciall,
That it tho made a full purgacion,
Of all ordure and fylthes in the town.
Wasshyng the streets as they stood a row,
And the gutters in the earth be low.
That in the City was no fylthe ysene,
For the cauell scoured was so clean.
And eke deuoyded in so secret wise,
That no man might espy or deuyse,
By what engyne the fylthes fer nor nere,
Were borne away by course of the river.
So covertly every thing was coured.
Whereby the town was utterly assured,
From engendryng of all corruption.
From wicked air and from infexion,
That cause often by their vyolence,
Mortality and great pestilence.
And by example of this flode there was,
Made tybre at Rome and wrought by Eneas
The which also departs Rome a two.
Mine auctour says. I note if it be so.
And tenhabite this royal chief City,
King Pryam has about in each country.
Made for to search with all his hole intent,
And in provinces that were adjacent,
In borowes towns and in smales vyllages,
Ygathred had out of all manner ages,
And of thropes folks full diverse,
Of such as were vacant and dispers,
About Troy in any regyowne,
He made has to enter into town.
Great multitude what of young and old.
It tenhabyte as ye have herd me told.
And those that were before to him foreynes,
He has in Troy made them Citezeynes,
Full discretly like as it is found.
And when they began with people to abound,
King Priamus of hye affectiowne,
After the buyldyng of this mighty town,
Has in his heart caughte a fantasye,
His new City for to magnifye,
And it to put the more in remembrance,
He fully cast to do some obseruaunce,
To mighty Mars stern and ferse of hew.
And specially with certain plays new,
On horse and foot in many sundry wise,
To give his men in knyghthode excercyse.
Eueryche to put other at assaye.
In iustes lystes and also in tourney.
To preue their force wha^ they hap to mete,
The which plays were founded first in Crete
And in that land of hye and low estate,
In Martys honor they were dedicate.
And in palastre on wakes on the night,
Were other plays as men tassaye their might,
Only on foot with many sotyll point,
And some of them were naked and enioynt,
To win a pryse they did their full intent.
And there was found by clerks full prudent
Of the chesse the play most glorious,
Which is so sotill and so meruaylous,
That it were hard the matter to discryue.
For though a man studied all his live.
He shall aye find diverse fantasyes,
Of wards making and new inparties,
There is therein so great diuersytie,
And it was first found in this City.
During the syege like as says Guydo,
But Iacobus de vitriaco,
Is contrary in his opinion.
For like as he makes plainly mention,
And affyrmeth at full in his advise,
How Philometer a philosopher wise,
Unto a king to stynte his crueltee,
Found first this play and made it in Caldee.
And into Greece from thence it was sent.
Also in Troy by great auisement,
The play was found first of dyce and tables,
And casting the chances deceyuables,
That cause have been full often of great debate,
For if that one be now found fortunate,
To win a while by favor of his chance,
Or he be ware with sodeyne varyaunce,
Unhappily he is put clean a back.
And other folk that stood upon the wrack,
And by their loss were plonged in distress,
They raised have in haste to hye richesse.
Gladness of one is to an other rage,
A deuaunt of hasarde and passage.
If one have joy a another suffers woe,
Like as the bones ronnen to and fro,
An hundred sith in a day they varye.
Now blandyshing and now they be contrary,
No man with them assured is in joy.
And first also I read how that in Troy,
Were song and red many fresh comedies,
And other dities that called ben tragedies.
And to declare shortly in sentence,
Of both two the fynall difference.
A comedye has in his gynnynge,
A pryme face a manner complaining,
And afterward ends in gladness.
And it the deeds only does express,
Of such as be in pouerte plonged low.
But tragedye who so list to know,
It still begins in prosperity,
And ends likewise by aduersytie.
And it does also of the conquest treat,
Of rich kings and of lords great.
Of mighty men and old conquerours,
Which by fraud of fortunes sodeine shoures,
Be over cast and whelmed from their glory.
And whylom thus was hallowed ye memory,
Of tragedyes as books maken mind.
When they were red and song as I find.
In the theater there was a small altar,
Amyddes set that was half Circuler,
Which into East of custom was direct,
Upon the which a Pulpet was erecte,
And therein stood an ancient poet,
For to rehearse by rethorykes sweet,
The noble deeds that were hystoryall.
Of kings and princes for memoryall.
And of these old worthy Emperors,
The great empryse eke of conquerours.
And how they gate in Martes hye honor,
The lawrer grene for fine of their labor.
The palm of knighthod disserued by old date
Or Parchas made them passen into fate.
And after that with chere and face pale,
With style enclyned began to turn his tale,
And for to sing after all their loose,
Full mortally the stroke of Attropose.
And tell also for all their worthy head,
The sodeyne breaking of their lives threde.
How piteously they made their mortal end,
Through false fortune yt al ye world will shende.
And how the fine of all their worthynesse,
Ended in sorrow and in high tristesse.
By compassynge of fraud or false treason,
By sudden murder or vengeance of poison.
Or conspyryng of fretyng false envy,
How unawarely that they dydden dye,
And how their renown and their mighty fame,
Was of hatred suddenly made lame.
And how their honor dawnward ga^ decline,
And the mischief of their unhappy fine.
And how fortune was to them vnswete,
All this was told and red of the Poet.
And while that he in the pulpet stood,
With deadly face all deuoyde of blood,
Synging his ditees with muses all to rent,
Amyd the theater shrouded in a tent,
There came out men gastfull of their cheres,
Disfygured their faces with viseres,
Playing by signs in the peoples sight.
That the Poet song has on heyght,
So that there was no manner discordaunce,
Atwene his ditees and their countenance.
For like as he a lofte did express,
Words of joy or of heaviness,
Meaning and chere beneth of them playing,
From point to point was always answering.
Now triste, now glad, now heavy, and now light,
And face ychaunged with a sodeyne sight.
So craftily they could them transfygure.
Conformyng them to the chante plure.
Now to sing and sodaynely to weep,
So well they could their obseruaunces keep.
And this was done in Apryll and in May,
When blosmes new both on bushe and hey,
And flowers fresh gynne for to spring.
And the birds in the wood sing.
With lust supprysed of the somer son,
When these plays in Troy were begone,
And in the theater hallowed and yholde.
And thus the rytes of tragedyes old,
Pryamus the worthy king began,
Of this matter no more tell I can.
But I will forth of this storye write,
And on my matter boystously endyte,
How Pryamus was passing dylygent,
Right desirous and inwardly fervent,
If so he might among his works all,
Do bylde a palace and a rich hall.
Which should be his chose chyefe dungyon.
His royal see and sovereign mansyon.
And when he began to his work approach,
He made it build hye upon a roche.
It for to assure in his foundation,
And called it the noble Ylion.
The sight of which justly circuler,
By compass cast round as any sphere.
And who that would ye content of the ground
Truly acounte of this place round,
In the theater first he must enter,
Taking ye line yt carueth through the center.
By geometrye as longs to that art.
And trebled it with the seventh part,
He find might by experience,
The measure hole of the circumference.
What land also plainly eke with all,
Contained was within the strong wall.
The crest of which in place where lowest was,
Vpreysed was full six hundred pase.
Builded of marbell full royal and full strong.
And many other rich stone among,
Whose toures were raised up so hye,
And who that list by greces up assende,
He there might se in his inspection,
The fair bounds of many regyon,
And provinces that stood round about.
And the walls within and eke without,
Endlonge were with knottes graven clean,
Depeynt with asure, gold, cinople, and grene.
That verily when so the son shone,
Upon the gold meynt among the stone,
They gave a light withouten any were,
As does Apollo in his midday sphere.
And all the windows and each fenestrall,
Wrought were of beryle and of clear crystal.
And high amiddes this noble Ylion,
So rich and passing of foundation,
Which clerks yet in their books praise,
King Priam made an hall for to raise.
Excelling all in beauty and in strength,
The latitude according with the length,
And of marbyll outward was the wall,
And the tymbre noble in special,
Was half of Cedre as I rehearse can,
And the remnaunt of the rich Heban.
Which most is able as I dare specifye,
With stone to join by craft of carpentrye.
For they of timber have the soueraynte.
And for to tell of this Heban tree,
Like in books sothely as I find,
It comes out of Ethiop and ynde.
Black as is geate and it will wax anon,
When it is korne as hard as any stone.
And evermore last will and endure,
And not corrupt with water nor moisture.
And of this hall further to diffine,
With stones square by leuel and by line,
It paued was with full great dilygence,
Of masonrye and passing excellence,
And all above raised was a see,
Full curyously of stones and perre.
That called was as chief and pryncipall,
Of the reygne the seat most royal.
Tofore which was set by great delight,
A board of Heban and of yuerye white.
So egally yioyned and so clean,
That in the work there was no ryft ysene.
And sessyons were made on every side,
Only the states by order to divide.
Eke in the hall as it was conuenable,
On each party was a dormaunt table,
Of yueree eke and of this Heban tree.
And even again this kings royal see,
In the party that was thereto contrayre.
Yraysed was by many crafty stayre,
High in the hall in the other syte,
Right as line in the opposytr,
Of pured metal and of stones clear,
In bread and length a full rych aultere.
On which there stood of figure and vysage,
Of massy gold a wonderful image,
As to be honored in that high seat,
Only in name of Iupyter the great.
And the statue for all his huge weight,
Fyftene cubytes compleyt was of heyght.
A crown of gold high upon his head,
With heavenly sapphires and many ruby red,
Fret enuyron with other stones of Inde,
And among were meddled as I find,
White pereles massye large and round.
And for most chief all dirkenesse to confound,
A Carbuncle was set as king of stones all,
To recomforte and gladden all the hall.
And it to enlumine in the black night,
With the freshenes of his ruddy light.
The value was thereof inestymable,
And the riches plainly incomparable.
For this image by division,
Was of shape and of proporcion,
From head to foot so maysterly entayled,
That in a point the workma^ has not failed,
It to parfourme by crafty excellence.
Whom Priamus with dread and reverence,
Honored has above the gods all,
In all mischief him to clepe and call.
For in him was his hole affection,
His soueraygne trust and chief devotion.
His hope also and his affyaunce,
His wealth his joy and his assurance.
And his welfare and his prosperytye,
He has committed to his deyte.
Wening in heart wonder sykerly,
To be assured from all mischefe thereby.
And diffended in each aduersytye,
And hold his reygne in high felicitye.
And in honor contynually to shine,
While Iupyter through his power divine,
Him and his has in protection.
This was his trust and full opinion.
And thus this work to the end achyeued,
Whereof Pryam with joy full releued.
That he his City and noble Ilion,
Has fully brought unto perfection,
Like his intent wha^ he thereof began.
And thus Pryam this king this worthy man
Full many a day in this new Troy,
With his lyeges lad his lefe in joy,
Where I him leave in his royal sete,
Soueraygnly reygning in quyete.
Procedyng forth if so ye list to hear,
Unto the effect anon of my matere.
How king Prya^ send Anthenor into Greece to have restored again his sister
Exion. Ca. xii.
O Hateful harm which most is for to dred
Kindled so long o spark of old hatred
Root and debate ground of envy and ire,
With new flawme hertes for to fire.
O grain of malice causer of all offense,
Of rancour rusted of impacyence.
Which have of new made festred sores smert,
When thou art ones raked in an heart.
Which for disdain of mercy may not let,
A man no while to live as in quyete.
But deluest up malice manyfolde,
Debates new that buried were of old.
And falsely quyckest strifes to restore,
That envious serpent that was slain of yore,
Which felly has this addre enuyous,
Out of his rest awaked Pryamus.
And with his venim so persyng and so ille,
Made him weary to live a life tranquille.
And meued him of his iniquitee,
Upon the Greeks avenged for to be.
For where as he in peace held his reygne,
With his lyeges in joy souereygne,
Without anoye or any perturbaunce,
This serpent has with new remembrance,
Without advise or discrete areste,
So hot a flawme kindled in his breast,
Of old envy with fresh rancour meynte,
That lykly is never to be queynte.
For Pryam now in his entenciowne,
Cast and compasses reuoluing up and down,
How strong he was of riches and meyne,
How noble and mighty was his new City,
And habundaunt shortly to conclude,
Both of plentye and of multitude,
Of men of arms and of chyualrye.
Which stered him to have a fantesye.
Alas the while to his unhappy chance,
That to be dead he take will vengeance,
Upon his foon the fire of hot envy,
So brent him inward by melancolye.
Standing in purpose yt no man change may,
Of his domages avenged be some day.
And of iniuryes yt they on him have wrought.
And when that he had a time out sought,
To his purpose most convenient.
Anon he has for all his lords sent.
And his knights called euerychone,
To come in haste excused was not one.
Namely of them that were of high degree.
And they obeying with all humylitye,
His bydding holy and made no delay,
To come echeone again a certain day,
And his sons were also tho present,
Hector except that was that time absent.
In the strong and mighty regyon,
Of Panomye which in subjection,
King Pryam held through his worthynesse,
And to amend things and redress,
Hector was gone into this Panomye.
Certain causes for to iustifye.
As in his reason he thought for the best,
To settle them in quiet and in rest.
For he was aye so just and so prudent,
So well aduysed and so pacient,
And so demeaned in his governance,
That him was loathe for to do vengeance,
Where as he might in easy wise treat.
For to reform things small and great.
For loathe he was this noble worthy knighte,
For any haste to execute unright.
Or causeles by rygour to condemn.
And in this while full worthy and solemn,
King Priamus of lords great and small,
Within Troy held a court royal,
As he that list for no cost to spare.
And ceryously his meaning to declare,
He in his see his lords enuyron,
Began to show his hertes entention.
O worthy lords assembled here present,
Faithful and true of heart and of ente^te.
It is well known to your discrecion,
The great domages and foul oppression,
Which that ye Greeks have upon us wrought
Without cause for a thing of naught,
This other day as who says yet but late.
That as I trow so new is yet the date,
That it is fresh remembered in your mind,
Unto your blood if so that ye be kind.
For I suppose no foryetfulnesse,
May put away the mortal heaviness,
Of harms old which aye renew again.
As in my mind I say you in certain.
And as I trow plainly in your thought,
It yet is grene and ne dies naught,
How they have slain our old progenitors,
That whylom were so noble werreours.
Our City brent and brought unto ruin,
And robbed it falsely by rauyne,
And turned all into wilderness,
And into Greece carried our richesse.
My father slain that hight Lamedon,
Without cause or just occasyon.
And raught from him his gold and his treasour,
Which as me seems is a foul error.
We might of right amends well challenge,
And eke desire to be fully aduenge,
Before the gods of full high offense,
Only of reason and of conscience.
And passing all their mortal crueltee.
There is one thing that most greueth me,
That they ungoodly against all gentyllesse,
Without regard as to the worthiness,
To the birth ne the royal blood,
Of her that is so fair and eke so good,
I mean my sister called Exyon.
Whom they alas to their confusyon,
Disuse and keep not like to her degree,
From day to day in such dishonestee,
Where through her honor and her name is lorn
Co^sideri^g naught of what stock she was born
For they are blind for to take heed,
Or to aduert the root of her kindred,
Of surquidrye they be so indurate.
And sith that she borne of so high estate,
Ytreated is like as ye may se,
We may coniecte that those of low degree,
Governed be passing dishonestly.
For ye may think and demen truly,
How wives and maidens in that company,
With other eke that be of your allye,
Yhaunted be and used at their lust.
On the Greeks I have no better trust.
For they ne spare another blood nor age,
And thus they live in torment and seruage.
Without routhe mercy or pitee.
The which touches you as well as me.
And as me seems of equite and of right,
Ye ought echone with all your full might,
Of the wrongs with which ye be offended,
To seek a way how it might be amended.
And that we work all by one assent,
And sins proceed like to our intent.
Of their malice and cursed crueltee,
All at ones avenged for to be.
And that we be in heart will and thought,
Of one accord and ne varye naught.
For then our force is doubled and pouste,
For right and reason and good equite,
Require vengeance on him yt does ye wrong,
Though it so be we differ it long.
I trust also the gods rightwisenesse,
That they shall help our harms to redress.
And favor us in our innocence,
To chastise them that wrought this offense.
Also ye know how that this our City,
Is strong mighty and of great suertye.
With toures high and walled for the werre,
That also fer as shines son or sterre,
There is none like for to reken all.
That may in force be thereto peregall.
Ye know also as it shall eft be found,
With cheualrye how that we habounde,
Except in arms and of old assayed,
That yet for dread never were dismayed.
And we have plenty also of vytayle.
Of frendshyp eke that ne will us fail,
With all their might to do to us succor.
Wherefore I read without more soiour,
To set upon them since we be well able,
And time is now me seems couenable,
For manhood bid to make no more delay,
To venge a wrong hap what so ever may,
For in differring is often drawn in damage,
To work in time is double advantage.
For to our purpose lacks never a dele,
And through our manhod we be assured well,
But that we be not hold to hasty,
Or to rakell to worken wilfully.
And werre also stant in adventure,
For aye of Mart doubtous is the eure.
I read first to Greeks that we send,
To wit if they our harms will amend,
Without strife werre or more debate.
Then may we said that we be fortunate.
And if they be contrary of reason,
To condiscende to this conclusyon,
To grant our askyng of equite and right,
Then have we cause for to preue our might.
But are that we proceden by rygour,
We shall assaye them first measure,
As fer as right and reason eke requere.
And of disdeyne if them list not here.
Than our quarrel deuoyde of wylfulnesse,
Yrooted is upon good sykernesse.
And if that we of their great offense,
Demand amends first in patience,
God and fortune I hope will not assent,
That in the end we should the same repent.
And it is better by peace to have redress,
Than gyn a werre without auisenesse.
Therefore let us our woeful adventure,
Patiently aye suffer and endure.
And in our port both humble be and plain,
Till they to us their answer send ayene.
For though so be in mine entencion,
I meaued am by just occasyon,
In Irous sort proceadyng to vengeance,
I will put all out of remembrance,
And letten slide by foryetfulnesse,
The wrongs do and void all heaviness,
Toward greeks and axe of them no more,
But that they will Exiona restore.
To us again which is to me most dear,
Only to stynte hatred debate and werre.
For the surplus of our mortal eure,
We shall dessymule and prudently endure,
Our harms old forth in patience.
If ye accord unto my sentence.
Say here upon as ye be full auysed.
For if this sonde be of them despised,
And that them list to reason not obey,
Than we may justly seek a another way,
To have redress for now there is no more.
Save I purpose to senden Anthenore,
Which is a man discrete and well auysee,
And specially in matter of treatee,
For he is both wise and eloquent,
As ye well know and passyngly prudent.
And when the king had told his tale anon,
To his counseyle they consent echone,
That Anthenor this journey undertake.
And he in have began him ready make,
Without abode and will not ones deny,
To take on him this embassadrye,
Full well auised in his discrecion,
Took or he went informacion,
From point to point of this great charge,
For he him cast to stand at his large,
Without error as he that could his good,
For he theffecte full plainly understood,
And every thing he prynted in his thought,
Or that he went and has forgot right naught.
For of a word he cast him not to fail,
To ship he goth and began to sail,
And in short time he and his company,
Aryued be up into Thesalye,
At a city called Monosyus,
Where by fortune was king Pelleus,
The same time and Anthenor anon,
Unto the king the right way is gone.
Of whom he was as Guydo has conceived,
At pryme face right beningly received.
But when he knew the cause of his coming,
He bad in have without more tarying,
To Anthenor with a fell visage,
Shortly to say theffecte of his message.
THis Trojan knight astoned never adel,
But full demure and auysed well,
Not to hasty nor rakle for to said,
But abydyng with look and face plain,
To Pelleus with a manly chere,
Said in effect right thus as ye shall here.
The worthy king called Pryamus,
So wise, so noble, so manly and famous,
And of knighthod passing excellent.
Has first to you in goodly wise seyt,
Out of Troy his royal chief Eitie,
His full intent and message here by me,
As I shall say to you in words plain.
If it so be that ye not disdain,
Patiently to give audience.
Remembryng first in your aduertence,
Of the harms not full long ago,
And the wrongs that ye wrought also,
Full cruelly with other eke of yours,
In Troy land on his progenitors.
What iniuryes and what destruction,
Causeles without any occasyon,
Ye showed have of very cruelty,
And mercyles destroyed his City.
Slain his father named Lamedowne,
And his city brent and beat adowne,
And another left paleys house nor toure,
And lad away his richesse and treasour,
And another spared as I rehearse can,
In your slaughter woman child nor man.
There might none from your sword astert.
And yet one thing yt most he has at heart,
That his sister called Exyon,
Is hold and kept of king Thelamon,
Dishonestly again all gentrye.
To great dishonor and great vyllanye,
Of her kindred like as ye may se.
Treated nor cherished like to her degree.
Wherefore sith ye be so wise a knight,
Ye ought aduert and to have a sight,
To such things of just affection.
And consydre in your discrecion,
Of gentilnesse and of equite,
How such wrongs might amended be.
Wherefore Pryam of great auisenesse,
As he that fully with all his business,
Of heart and will desires peace and rest,
Sends to you beseching for the best,
That ye will do your busy diligence,
To make to him this litell recompense.
That he may have the restytucion,
Through your knightly mediacion,
Of his sister withouten longer space.
And the remenaunt he will let pace,
Strife and werre only to eschew.
For he desires fully for to sewe,
Peace and quyete of hole affection.
And to pursue measure and reason.
And finallye like as ye may se,
All occasyon of werre for to fle,
Consider this that holde^ be so sage,
For this the fine fully of my message.
When Pelleus him plainly understood,
Of sudden ire in heart he waxed wood,
Of cheer and look fell and furyous.
And of rancoure right melancolyus.
That he ne might attempre nor appease,
The hasty fire that began his heart sease.
For he anon in full dispytous wise,
Began Pryamus threten and despise,
And of malice set his sond at naught,
With all the means yt Anthenor has sought.
And began also this Trojan knight manace,
And bad in haste that he avoid his place,
Upon peril that after fall might.
And he anon went out of his sight.
And in all haste he and his meynee,
Without abode taken have the sea.
And began to saylen out of Thesalye,
And in their way so fast they began them hye,
That in short time they aryued be,
Up at Salerne a mighty strong City.
Where by fortune in this royal town,
This Anthenor fond king Thelamowne,
And to his paleys he has the way nome.
And first I find that when he was come,
He was accepted unto his presence,
Beningly without all offense,
For Exyone was present in that tide.
Of adventure standing by his side.
And at reverence of her womanheade,
Of Anthenor he took the better head.
Albe of custom that king Thelamon,
Had hye despyte and indignacion,
Of every Troyan that he could espy.
For specially to them he had envy.
Of rancour only through the bitter rage,
Which in his heart might never yet aswage.
But for all that he in patience,
To Anthenor has given audience,
The which anon in full sobre wise,
His tail began as I shall devise.
Sir quod he with supporte of your grace,
So ye me grant oportune space,
For to declare the cause of my cominge,
I will rehearse without more tarying,
My matter hole brefely in sentence.
To make it kouthe to your magnificence.
Signifying without displesaunce,
That Priamus which has the governance,
Of Troy town has unto you sent,
Of faithful meaning and of clean intent,
Besechyng first to your goodlyheade,
All other wrongs forgotten and eke dead,
That ye only of your high noblesse,
Of equite and of gentilnesse,
Ye will restore Exyona again.
Which that ye hold to speak in words plain,
In very sothe not like to her estate.
Wherefore he prays to stinten all debate.
And every harm to put from memory,
Of knightly honor for your own glory,
To send her home and make delyueraunce,
Goodly of her withouten varyaunce.
Whom ye have hold so many long days,
Ne tarieth not nor sets no delays,
Ne let in you be founden any slouthe.
For sothfastly it is to great a routhe,
As to record how ye have her abused,
It may of truth not goodly be excused.
Which we shall let lightly ouerslyde,
So that ye beningly list provide,
To send her home like as I have said.
Lo here the charge that was on me laid,
Without more abiding in certain,
What goodly answer ye will send again.
When Thelamon herkened had his tail,
For hasty ire he began to wexen pale.
The fyery collor has him made so wood,
That from his face aualed is the blood,
Within his heart and began to frete and bite.
With look askoye and turned up the white.
Of hye disdain with face dispytous,
With pale smilyng and laughter furyous.
Began rake out the fearful mortal fire,
Of fretinge hate that brent in his desire.
And shortly made in conclusyon,
To Anthenor put this ilke objection,
And said friend what ever that thou be,
I wonder greatly for marvel is to me,
What adventure or sudden new thing,
Vnprudently meueth now thy king,
Unto me to make such a sonde.
Thou were a fool wha^ so thou took on ho^d,
Either unhappy or else unfortunate,
To me to bring this proud embassete.
For I with him will nothing have a do,
Nor he with me and look thou say him so.
For we ne be aqueynted but a lyte,
Nor I nothing platly me delight,
At short words if thou list to hear,
To do for him nor ought at his prayer.
For I ne have delyght joy ne feste,
To do the thing whereof he makes request.
This wot I well that but a while a go,
I was at Troy my self and other mo.
For to reform a thing that was amys.
Through your offense shortly thus it is.
For certain thing wrought by Lamedowne,
And by our manhod wonne^ there ye town.
And slew the king and all that with him held,
In knightly wise him meting in the field.
And for that I as every man might se,
Did ieoparde first to enter that City,
It was to me granted for memory,
In only sign of mine high victory,
Withouten any contradiction,
By all the Greeks to have possession,
Of her that is to me the most entere,
Exiona whom now thou claymest here.
But be well syker thine asking is in vain.
For trust me this and be right well certain,
Thou gettest her not at one word if I may.
For there shall first be made full great affray.
Or I her leave during all my live.
Who ever grutche or there against strive.
It were not sittyng me to leave her so,
For whom I had whilom so great a do.
Or I her gat with spending of me blood.
For who so wroth be therewith or wood,
I will her keep as it shall be found,
For whom I had so many mortal wound.
At Troy town or that I her thense wan.
And in good faith as fer forth as I can,
She shall not lightly fro my hands pace.
For she alone so stands in my grace,
For her beauty and her semelyheade,
For of her bounte and her godlyheade,
That if I shall my reason shortly fine,
She is in sothe the most feminine,
That ever I saw and without dread,
Of port and conning and of womanheade,
She has alone in very existence,
The souereynte and perfect excellence.
That Priamus for ought that thou ca^ said,
While that I live gets her not again.
But he her bye with many deadly wound.
With sharp swerdes and square speres ground.
For there shall first be raised such a strife,
That it shall cost many man's life,
Or she to him again restored be.
Take this forsothe you gettest no more of me.
And when him list he may well begin,
But I supose he shall but litell win.
None otherwise but as I have the told.
And wotest you what a great fool I the hold,
The to put thy self so far in Ieopartye,
To execute this his embassadrye.
The manly Greeks so boldly to offend.
Beware therefore that he no more the send.
Upon thy self for rancoure nor for pride.
Now go thy way for if that thou abide,
Any longer sothly in my sight,
Thou wotest ye pryse yt I have the hight,
Thou scapest not who that be liefe or loathe.
Than Anthenor anon to ship he goth.
And forth sayleth him list not to delay,
Toward an isle that called is Achaye.
And when that he taken has the land,
At his ryuayle of adventure he fond,
The worthy kings Pollux and Castor.
And right anon this Troyan Anthenor,
Without abode to the court is fare,
Unto them his message to declare.
And together when they were present,
Right thus he said as in sentement.
The noble king of Troy the City,
Has unto you sent his will by me.
Besechyng you in full low manner,
That she vouchesafe as unto his prayer,
Of equity for to condescende,
And goodly help a certain wrong to mende.
Touching his sister called Exion,
That he may have restitucion,
Of her again by your discrete advise.
For sith ye be so manly and so wise,
It lykely is in his oppynion,
That ye by your good medyacion,
May easily again restored be.
For to cheryshe peace and unity.
Wherefore he prays with all his heart entere,
In goodly wise to done your deuere,
That hold been so knyghtly and so sage,
And he will plainly all the surplusage,
Of wrongs old put as in suspense.
For he desires of knyghtly high prudence,
To stynte war and to nouryshe peace.
For he is another rakle nor rekles.
But evil auysed in his works all,
To cast before what that shall after fall.
And things future aduertynge from a far,
And sees what peril that there is in werre.
Will him conform unto peace and rest,
For he conceyueth that it is the best.
For every man unite to sewe,
And prudently also to eschew,
Of all debates the hole full occasion.
Lo here the fine of this entencion,
Which I commyt unto your judgment.
This Castor then of ire inpacient,
For hastiness ne might not abide,
His cruel heart so swolen was with pride.
Brake out anon with right despiteous face,
And said friend I know of no trespace,
That ever greeks did unto thy king,
To axe amends it is a wonder thing.
Of us that never did him none offense.
Save that we made a manner recompense,
Of a wrong wrought by Lamedon.
The which fyste sought occasyon,
Against greeks in ungoodly wise,
That caused us upon him tho to rise,
All at ones and manly on him set,
Of due right for to quyte our debt.
Like his deserte we have him plainly served,
And nothing wrought but as he has deserved
To axe amends he gynneth now to late.
For we coueyte more his mortal hate,
His utter malys and his enmyte,
Then outher peace accord or unite.
As in effect hereafter he shall feel,
If so he dare hereafter with us deal.
The bargayne shall full dear ben abought,
And we his frendeshyp sothly set at nouhgt.
And ouermore I speak now as to the,
It lykely is as seems unto me,
That Pryamus they loved but a lyte,
Not as I think, the value of a myte,
When he the sent forth on this message.
And thou of folly dyddest great outrage,
To take on the so high a peryllous thing,
Unto greeks to bryngen such tydynge.
Where through thy life is put in inpartye.
But I the counsel fast that thou the hye*
Out of my sight lest that thou repent.
And Anthenor forth to ship went,
And with the wind began to sail anon,
Toward an isle that called was Pylon.
And in all have when he did aryue,
He shope him forth to the court as blyue,
Where duke Nestor in all manner thing,
His household held royal as a king.
And Anthenor full sad and auysee,
Tofore Nestor syttyng on his see,
When that he was admytted for to said,
His tale he told full openly and plain.
From point to point as ye herd before,
It were but vain for to rehearse it more.
For he always concluded has in one,
As ye have herd touching Exion.
But duke Nestor with face nothing red,
But of hew of any ashes dead,
Fret with collor so inwardly was he,
That his blood from each extremitee,
Withdrawn is down allow unto his heart.
Which for his ire so sore made him smerte,
That he began quake in every joint and vain.
That he his hand uneath may restreyne,
For melancolye a venged for to be.
Like a Lion so wood and wroth was he.
Fer from him self he was so alyenate,
And inwardly of rancour passyonate,
With look reserved and furious of syghte,
That tho to rule him self uneath he might,
He felt of anger so great aduersytie,
And sith amyddes of all his cruelty,
Of sodeyne haste at ones he out brake,
And even thus to Anthenor he spoke.
O thou quod he with all thy words white,
As I suppose that thou wottest full lyte,
Tofore whom thou haste thy tale told.
For I marvel how thou art so bold,
Thus to presume mine ears to offend.
And for Pryam so proudely to pretend.
A manner title in thy kings name,
The worthy greeks for to put in blame,
And unjustly of foul hardynesse.
Requere of them for to have redress,
Of Iniuryes wrought by Lamedon.
Boldly affyrmyng of false presumpcion,
Upon greeks wronkes outrageous.
Which in mine eres be so odyous,
So fretyng eke so bytyng and so kene,
For to list that I may not sustain,
In my hearing so hateful is the sown.
That ner the honor of my hye renown,
Refrayned me I should in cruel wise,
Execute full hastily Justice.
Through the rygour of my mortal law,
With bestes wild first to do the draw,
And thereupon for thy feigned tale,
Dismembre the all on pieces small,
In despyte of Pryamus thy king.
To teach other to bring more tydyng,
Presumptuously or any tales new,
To any lord but he him better knew.
Thus should thou have for thy presu^pcion,
Thy last mede and fynall guerdon,
Without mercy like as I have behyght.
And in all have bego out of my sight,
For utterly it does to great offense,
Unto mine eye to have the in presence.
For through disdeine it causes mine vnreste.
Than Anthenor thought as for the best,
It was not holsom longer to abide.
But cast wisely for rancour or for pride,
That it was best for to bear him fair,
And to his ship he began anon repayire,
And in all haste by possybilitee,
Without abode he taken has the sea.
And began to sail and homeward fast draw,
But suddenly to boylen began the wawe,
The seas to rise and the clouds black,
For to appear and the wind a wake,
Wonder gastfull also was the heaven,
With dreadful fire of the bright leven,
The thonder smote. so began the tempest drive,
That top and mast asunder gynneth ryue.
Now alofte and now in point to drown,
The fell wether began so on them frown,
That naught they awayte but on the death.
Even at the point of yeldyng up of the brethe.
For they ne saw none other remedy,
Still among they began to clepe and cry,
Unto their gods and auowes make,
And devoutly for to undertake,
Each of them as he was grown of age,
If they escape to go on pylgremage.
Like the rytes of their paynym wise,
To the gods to do their sacrifyse.
So as they were of substance and of might,
And sodeinly the wether derke as night,
With new light by grace began adawe.
The sea ware calm and smothe^ began ye wawe.
So that of hap among euerychone,
For all the tempest perished not one.
But tofore Troy within a little space,
They be aryued euerychone by grace,
Eschaped safe from every ioypardye.
Both Anthenor and all his company.
And to the temple he took the right way,
And in his prayer there full long he lay.
With many another also for his sake,
Thankyng their gods yt lysten so to slake,
Every peril and tempest of the sea.
And after this unto the king goes he.
That with his lords about him full royal,
In his paleys and dongyon pryncipall,
Sat and abode full solempnelye.
To hear report of this embassadrye.
And this knight of all that has him fall,
Has told the king tofore his lords all.
THis Anthenor has first made mention,
Tofore the king by just relacion,
Of his exployt by order by and by,
And in what wise and how discourteously,
He was received of king Pelleus.
Of the thretes, and words despyteous,
That he had suffered of king Thelamon,
As ferse and cruel as a wood Lion.
And afterward he began also complain,
Of the despyte of the brethren tawyne,
Of his rebuke and his great dread,
And at Nestor how he happed to speed,
That with his life he might uneath escape,
All this he told and began an end make,
Of his journey and eke of his repair.
Whereby Pryam was fully in despair,
Outher by force or yet by adventure,
That he his sister never might recure.
For he conceyueth in his aduertence,
By clear report of expert euydence,
That aye the more he was to them beninge,
The more ungoodly again him they malinge.
and where he shows him self most debonayre,
There he ayeneward fond the^ most co^trayre.
So frowardly ever they them quite.
Showing by signs that they set but lyte,
By his frendshyp for ought he could aduerte.
Whereof he was full sorrowful in heart,
That he constrained right of very need,
Was tho compelled justly to proceed,
To have redress only by rygoure:
For proffered peace might have no favor.
To be admitted by title of rightwysenesse,
Through high despite of hasty wylfulnesse.
For every mean of measoure was in vain,
Save only werre engendered by disdain,
Began and caused all of old hatrede.
Which began anon such a broyle to bread,
Of new envy within the king his breast,
That Priamus without more areste,
So inly Irous and with rancour fret,
And with disdain so sore ground and whet,
That where so be that he must lose or wyn,
Upon Greeks he will a werre begin.
And therein Ieoparde manly as a knight,
His life and death because he had right.
And cast him first a nauye for to send,
In have to Greece his fomen to offend.
And like a knight his force there to haunte,
In knightly wise he cast him for to daunt,
The pomp of Greeks and the sturdinesse,
And finally their pride to oppress.
But say me Priam what infelycitye,
What new trouble, what hap, what destiny,
Or from above what hateful influence,
Descended is by unware violence,
To meue ye thus thou can not live in peace.
What sudden sort what fortune gracelese,
What chance unhappy without auisenesse,
What wilful lust what fond hardiness,
Have put thy soul out of tranquilitye,
To make the werye of thy prosperitye.
What sauourest you in bitter more the^ sweet,
That can not live in peace nor in quiet.
Thou art trauayled with wilful mocions,
And over maystred with thy passions.
For lack of reason and of high prudence,
Derked and blind from all prouydence.
And full barayne to cast before and se,
The harms following of thine aduersitye.
Thou were to slow wisely to consydre,
For want of sight made the thus to slydre.
Through mist of error falsely to forueye,
By paths wrong from the right weye.
To void reason of wylful hastynesse,
Where was thy guide where was thy maystresse,
Discrecion so prudent and so sad,
Auysely that should the there have lad,
From the traces of sensualitee.
Though it full selde in man's power be.
By sufferaunce him self to refrain,
When sudden ire does his heart strain.
thou should before better have cast thy chance
Wrought by counsel and not put in balaunce,
Thy sykernesse alas why did thou so.
And have symuled some dele of the woe.
And cast thy change well before the prime,
To have forgotten wrongs of old time.
And thought before as in thine aduertence,
That often it falls in experyence,
That whiles men do most their business,
Vengeably old wrongs to redress,
With double harm or that they beware,
They fall again in a new snare.
And domages that were forgotten clean,
By false report of rumor fresh and grene,
Renewed be through the swyfte fame,
That flees fer to hurt a lords name.
Namely when so they to a purpose wend,
Only of head and not forsee the end.
For of pride and of sudden heat,
They void them self out of all quyete,
Aduertyng not to work auysely,
Nor the proverb that teaches commonly,
He that stand sure enhaste him not to meue,
For if he do it shall him after grieve.
And he that walks surely on the plain,
Where if he stumble it is but in vain,
Unless so be he list of his folly,
Be neclygent to put him wylfully,
In adventure and of him self to reche,
To eschew peril I hold he be a wreche.
For sothly Pryam thou were to rechelese,
For to commytte thy quyete and the peace,
So dredfully during by no date,
To cruel fortune or to fykell fate.
Whose manner is of custom commonly,
That when a man trusts most suredly,
Of this goddess blind and full unstable,
Then she to him is most deceyuable.
Him to abate from his royal stalle,
And suddenly does make him down to fall.
And with a tryp throw him on the back,
Who that gain strives shall have little tacke.
She is so slyely with her gylefull snare,
That she can make a man for his welfare,
With her pantre that is with fraud englewed
Wha^ he least weneth for to be remewed.
Therefore no man may hope affyaunce,
In fortunes rule so full of varyance.
Ne let no wight his ease more Iuparte,
Then he ne recke how she the game depart,
To turn his chance outher to well or woe,
For selde in one she does the game go.
As ye may see example of Pryamus,
That of his folly is so desirous,
To work of head and follow so his will.
That troubled is the calm of his tranquille.
As in the book hereafter shall be found,
Him and his city platly to confound.
And utterly to his confusyon,
That afterward by long succession,
It shall be red in story and in fable,
And remembered with dytees delytable.
To do pleasaunce to them that shall it here,
That by this sample they beware and lere,
Of hasty lust or of rash voluntee,
To gyn a thing wherein no suretee,
Depends aye as strife werre and debate.
For in such play unawarely comes check mate
And harm ydone to late is to amend,
Whose fine is often other then they wend.
In this story as ye shall after see,
And let Pryam always your myrrour be.
Hasty error by times to correct,
For I anon my poyntill will direct,
After the manner of his traces rude,
Of this story the remnaunt to conclude.
THis worthy king ever of one sentence,
Aye more and more fyred with feruence,
Has his breuettes and his letters sent,
For his lords to hold a parliament.
And them commanded in all the have they may
To come anon at their assygned day.
From every ward and party of the town,
For to assemble in noble Ilyowne.
Chief of his reign and when they were echone
With him present this noble king anon,
Tofore them all as shortly as he can,
His will declares and thus he than began.
Syres quod he because ye be so wise,
It needs not long process to deuyse,
For to rehearse of your coming the cause,
But for to tell shortly in a clause,
What I mean and makes no more delay.
Ye wotte how I now this other day,
Sent into Greece by counsel of you all,
A knight of mine that Anthenor is call.
To have recured Exiona again,
Whose message tho was not but in vain.
For of greeks full vncurteysly,
He was received and dispyteously,
Threte and rebuked in point to have be dead.
Uneath he might escape with his head.
They put on him such high offense and blame,
That much redoundeth to our alder shame.
And day by day it must increase the more,
But we ordeyne some remedy therefore.
For there as we all measure have them offered,
They have to us werre and strife yprofred.
Of high despyte of rancour and of heat,
And of malys cruelly us threate.
And where as we would peace of the^ purchase,
For wrongs done they felly us manace.
And for ye harms yt they have to us wrought.
They not purpose plainly in their thought,
Other redress nor amends make.
But utterly with werre us to awake.
Whose joy is fully increase of our greuaunce
So would god they were with repentance.
Contryte in heart to stynten all myschiefe,
That lykely is to fall and eke the grefe,
On outher part that it might over slide.
But they alas with rancour and with pride,
Are swole of new to threaten more and more.
But god defend half deal of the sore,
By infortune that ever should be fall,
As they purpose to every of us all.
But sith they have devised thus for us,
We must resyste their will malicious,
Through might of god as of necessity,
In our deffence it will none other be.
And best I hold unto our intent,
To work and do all by one assent.
So we our purpose sonest shall achieue,
Where is discord there may no quarrel preue.
For on that part where hertes be not one,
Victory may no way with them gone.
Chief of conquest is peace and unity.
Right as discord is of aduersytie.
Wherefore I read that of a will and heart,
Let us set on to do the greeks smerte.
For sothfastly if so ye list to se,
I dare affirm that we far stronger be,
Than be the greeks upon every part,
And have of arms parfytly the art.
And be accounted of knighthod crop and root,
And plenty have of horsemen and on foot.
Arrayed well eueryche in his degree,
And therewith also strong is our City.
For to withstonde our fomon euerichone,
You counsayling, and sith ordain anon,
First tassemble holy your nauye,
And stuff them strongly with our chiualrye,
And into Greece hastily them to send,
The proud greeks manly to offend.
And of just cause and by title of right,
On them to werre with all our force and might.
Their towns bren and their fyeldes waste,
With heart unfeigned also us enhaste,
To quite them as they deserved have,
For by my read we shall none of them save.
But cruellyf to do on them vengeaunee,
Ne has no ear ne let be no greuaunce,
Though they tofore by fortune were victours
And slew our fathers and progenitors.
For he that was of unhap first put down,
Remounteth often and that to high renown.
As by the charge and duble varyance,
Of werre and strife that aye is in balaunce.
For he that this day is assured well,
We see to morrow cast down of the whele.
The victor often likewise in adventure,
And vanquished as by discomfyture,
Of him that had before the victory.
Now up sith down in arms stant the glory.
In Martes chance no man may him assure,
But as it comes so must he take his eure.
For gery Mars by sudden influence,
Can give a man whylom excellence,
To win a pryse like a conqueror,
And suddenly as falls the somer flower,
He can his honor make for to fade.
For when that he all his aspectes glade,
From any man lysteth for to wrythe,
His old renown goth away as blythe,
As after floode the ebb follows aye.
As men deserve praise them for the day.
For though to day Phoebus merry shine,
To morrow he may his bemes down decline.
Through the thickness of the mistes trouble,
Right so of Mars are the chances double.
Now up, now down, now low, and now alofte,
As fortune will which that changes often,
List on her whele make a man assende,
And unawarely down again descend.
Stounde mele his honor to auaunce,
And with asweigh throw him to mischaunce.
Now with favor set him up full hye,
Erst him auale with twyngling of an eye.
Her play unstable tourneth as a ball.
While one goes up an other has a fall.
She reyseth one and does another loute,
For every man when it comes about,
Must take his turn as her play requires.
Who is expert and her frauds lereth,
Shall with her sugre find gall ymeynt.
And her honey aye with bitter spreynt.
In peace and werre in honor and in fame,
In dignities in renown and in shame,
Be at her lykyng as her list to grant,
Therefore no man his hap to much auaunte.
For though greeks whylom were a lofte,
It may them hap hereafter full vnsofte.
Wherefore echone show your worthynesse,
That so are named of strength and hardiness.
And to fortune plainly you commytte,
And let no fear your manly hertes flytte.
But stand hole and be in meaning plain,
And thereupon let se what ye will said.
And at ones their voice they began reyse,
And his sentence hyghely for to preyse.
And of one heart manly began express,
They will at ones despende goods and richesse,
And their bodies put in Ieopardye,
There was not one that would it tho deny.
And of this grant he thanketh them echone,
And gave them leave where them list to gone.
For he dissolved has his parliament,
And every man on his way is went.
And repaired to his mansiowne,
The king alone left in Ilyowne,
Sole by him self inwardly musing,
How he his purpose might about bring.
For he in soth on nothing else thought,
And thereupon in fine thus he wrought.
King Pryamus making thus his moan,
As I you told in chamber all alone,
Many ways castyng up and down,
For to perform his conclusyowne,
And to fulfill the fine of his intent,
He first of all prudently has sent,
For his sons to come to him in haste,
As well for them that were borne in baste,
As for the other tassemble there yfeare.
For this purpose like as ye shall here.
To have a counsel for nedeful purueaunce,
Against greeks to maken ordenaunce.
First by them self alone pryuely,
And when they were in order by and by,
Eueryche of them set in his dew see,
Like as they were of age and of degree,
And Hector first flower of chyualrye,
Repaired home out of Panonye,
Most acceptable in every wyghtes grace,
Next his father taken has his place.
And when Pryam his leyser did espy,
With syghes sore castyng up his eye,
To them echone syttyng enuyron,
Began to declare his hertes mocyon.
But first or he might ought his will expowne
In salt tears he began him self drown,
So inly was his woe outragyous,
That for weeping and sobbyng furyous,
Uneath he might with any word out break.
Nor unto them for distress speak.
Nor openly his inward meaning show,
Till at the last he in words few,
Began to abrade in all his pyteous fare,
Even thus in sentence gynnyng to declare.
My dear sons so loving and so kind,
As I suppose that ye have in mind,
And remember discretly and aduerte,
And eke imprente full freshly in your heart,
How the greeks again all right and law,
With cruel sword mundred have and slawe,
Our auncetours whylom of high renown,
And destroyed brent and beat down,
The first Troy with his walls old.
And how ungoodly also they withholde,
Mine own sister called Exion.
To full great shame and confusyon,
And high repryfe to your worthynesse,
That me seems of very kyndenesse,
And of nature ye ought be agreued,
And inwardly in heart sore amened.
To suffer her in hyndring of her name,
So to be treated for your alder shame.
Alas why nyl ye do your business,
This high despyte knyghtly to redress.
You for tauenge upon their cruelty,
Recure to find of her iniquity.
Since that ye be so mighty and so strong.
Certes me seems ye byden all to long,
From day to day that ye so differ,
In knyghtly wise to gyn on them a werre,
Your force and might manly to assaye.
I am pure sorry that ye list delay,
You to confyrmen unto my desire,
That in their hate bren as hoote as fire.
And upon them like as ye may see,
Of frettynge ire avenged for to be.
Like their desert to quyten them their mede.
And ye alas that lysten take no head,
While your renown does so freshly shine,
Unto my lust your hertes to declyne.
Consyderyng like as it is well kouthe,
How I my self from your tender youth,
Y fostred you and brought you forth echone,
Fro thilke day that first ye coud gone,
As tenderly as I could or might,
To which thing in your inward sight,
Ye should aduert always new and new,
And of nature on my sorrows rewe,
To remedy this mine aduersytee.
Which touches you also as well as me,
Since that ye wot how sore it does me grieve,
Ye shulden shape mine harms to releue.
And sodeinly as he thus began mourn,
Toward Hector he began his face turn.
And said Hector my trust and all my joy,
Mine heir also, like to reygne in Troy,
After my day and be my successoure,
And named art the very sovereign flower,
Of worthynesse and of manhod the well.
And al thy brethren in knighthod do excelle.
And in arms like a conqueror,
Called the stock of worship and honor,
I hertely pray though thou syttest still,
Be wyllinge now my purpose to fulfill,
To execute that I desire so.
For finally in the and in no mo,
Is full my faith to bring this thing about.
Now take on the and be nothing in doubt.
To be chefetayne and also governor,
Of this purpose and utterly socour,
Into thine hand this Journey I commit.
Holy of heart so that thou ne flytte,
The to confourme by good auysement.
Up to perform the fine of mine intent.
For of reason best to the it sit,
Which art so prudent and so full of wit,
Strong and deliver flouryng eke in youth,
Of whom ye fame through ye world is kouthe.
Young of years old of discreciowne,
Eurous to love, passing of renown.
Unto whose will thy brethren shall obey,
And stand with the both to live and deye.
Now co^desce^de to accomplish my request,
And what thou felest answer at the least.
And when the king has showed his se^te^ce,
Demure of cheer humble of reverence,
This worthy Hector example of gentry,
With soft speech as teaches curtesye,
His answer gave with sobre countenance,
The effect of which was this in substance.
Mine own lord and my father dear,
Beningly if so ye list to hear,
After the force and the great might,
And after eke the sum of natures right,
Which every thing by kind does constrain,
In the bonds of her large chain,
It sytting is as she does enspyre,
And to that end that every man desire,
Of wrongs done to have amendment.
And to her law right convenient,
Namely to such that with nobylytye,
Kind has endewed and set in high degree,
For to such great reprefe is and shame,
When any wrong be do unto their name.
For each trespass must considered be,
Justly measured by the qualyty,
Of him that is offended and also,
After the parson by whom the wrong is do,
Be it in werre in conteck or debate.
For greater grefe is to high estate.
To suffer harm of case or adventure,
Or any wrong unjustly to endure,
Or iniuryes compassed by malice,
Is more offense by discrete advise,
To them that be famous in manhod,
Well renoumed and borne of gentyl blood,
Than to such one that hold is but a wretch
Wherefore we must greatly charge and retch
Only of knighthod our worship for to eke,
Of wrongs done a mendes for to seek.
Our state considered and our high noblesse,
And in what plyte we stand of worthynesse,
When that beasts of reason rude and blind,
Desire the same by just instinct of kind.
And for my part trusts in certain,
Ye have no son that would half so feign,
Upon Greeks avenged be as I.
For here my truth I say you faithfully,
For ire of them I bren as does the glede,
I thurst their blood more than other mede.
For right as I eldest am of age,
Among your sons so am I most with rage,
I fret within justly of knighthode,
With my right hand to shed the greeks blood.
As they shall feel peraunter or they wene.
When time comes the sothe shall be seen.
But first I read wisely in your mind,
To cast before and leave not behind,
Or ye begin discretly to aduert,
And prudently consydre in your heart,
All only not the gynnynge but the end.
And yt the mids what way in they will we^d.
And to what fine fortune will them led,
If ye thus do amiss ye may not speed.
For that counsel in mine opinion,
Is worthy little by discrecion,
To have a pryse that cast not by and by,
The course of things by order ceryously.
What way they trace to woe or to delight.
For though a ginninge have his appetite,
Yet in the end plainly this no fable,
There may thing fall which is not co^me^dable.
For what is worth a ginninge fortunate,
That causes after strife and great debate.
Wherefore in sothe begynninges are to dread,
But me^ well know what fine shall succeed.
For a ginninge with grace is well fortuned,
When end and mids a like be contuned.
But when that it in well ne may conteme,
It is well better rather to abstain,
Than put in doubt that stands in suerte.
For who so does has aduersitee.
But humble this to your estate royal,
Of heart I pray let not offend at all,
That I am bold to say my mocion.
For in good faith of none entencion,
I nothing meue to do to you offense,
But only this that your magnificence,
Proceed not of head to wilfully.
Ne that no have you meue to folly.
To gyn a thing that after will you shende,
For lack that ye se not tofore the end.
Nor take heed in your aduertence,
To consydre by good providence,
How Greeks have in their subjection,
Europe and Affryke with many region.
Full large and wide of knighthod most famous,
And of richesse wonder plenteous.
Right renoumed also of worthiness,
With your supporte I dare it well express.
Full peryllous is them displease or disturb
For if that we our quiet now parturbe,
Which stands fully in peace is to dread.
For though all Assye help us in our need,
If it be looked on every part aryght,
They be not egal unto Greeks might.
And though also mine Aunte Exion,
Again all right be hold of Thelamon,
It is not good for her redemption,
To put us all unto destruction.
I read not that we bye her half so dear.
For many of us perhaps that sytte^ here,
And other mo might for her sake
Death vnderfonge and an end make.
Which were no wisdom like as seems me,
And it may hap also how that she,
In short time her fatal course shall fine.
When Attropos the thredde a two shall twine.
What had we then won and she were go,
But enmite, thought, sorrow and woe.
Slaughter of our men death and confusyo^,
Wherefore I read without discencion,
Without more that we our woe endure.
And not to put our self in adventure.
This hold I best and work as the wise,
But doubtless for no cowardice,
I say not this in your high presence.
But forcause I hold it no prudence,
To fortune known so full of doubilnesse,
Sith we be sure to put our sykernesse.
Thus all and some the effect of my will.
And with that word Hector held him still.
ANd when yt Hector by full high prudence,
Concluded has the fine of his sentence.
Full demurely he kept his lips close.
And therwithall this Paris up arose,
And began his tale thus before the king.
My lord quod he so it be lykinge,
To your highness for to taken head.
As me seems we should litell dread,
In knightly wise for to undertake
Upon Greeks a werre for to make,
All at ones their pride to confound.
Since that we so passingly habounde,
Of chiualry here within our town.
And have plenty and possessyowne,
Of each thing that may to werre avail,
Stuff in our self and royal apparayle.
Of all that longs to assautes marciall.
And with all this more in special,
Help and succor of many region,
With us to work to their destruction.
The pomp and pride manly to abate,
And of Greeks the malice to amate.
For all that they of heart be so stout,
Me seems shortly that we need not doubt,
Nor on no part for to be dismayed.
Wherefore I read let not be delayed,
Our ships first ready for to make,
And I my self will fully undertake,
So it to you be liking and plesaunce,
Of this empryse holy the governance,
And you assure and put in certain.
Exyona for to recure again.
And in what form that it shall be wrought,
I have a way devised in my thought.
That likely is hereafter to be done.
Which unto you I will declare anon,
First I have cast with strong and mighty hand,
For to rauyshe some lady of that land,
Of high estate and make no taryinge,
And mightily into Troy her bring.
Maugre her might for this conclusyon,
That ye may have restitucion,
By change of her that ye desire so.
And thereupon shall not be long ado,
I you behete for all the Greeks strong,
And for that I shall not this tale prolonge,
I will you said excluding every doubt,
How this advise shall well be brought about.
First how that I shall this purpose fine,
The gods have through their power divine,
Showed to me by reuelacion.
For thereupon I had auisyon,
But late agone as I lay in a sleep,
Unto the which if so ye take keep,
Ye may not fail nor be in no despair,
To have recure of her that is so fair.
For whom ye have now so much care.
And the manner hoole I will declare,
Of this dream to your magnificence,
If it so be ye lysteth give credence,
To this my tale for I shall not dwell,
Ceryously in order for to tell,
The very truth and no fable feign.
To you that be my lord most sovereign.
First if that ye remember in your mind,
This other day when I was last in Inde
By your advise and commandment,
For a matter which in your intent,
Was specially had in cheirte,
As it is known between you and me,
Of which I took upon me tho the charge,
Within the bonds of that land large.
The same time your desire to speed,
When that Titan with his beams read,
From Geminy drove his chair of gold,
Toward the Crabbe for to take his hold.
Which named is the paleys of Diane,
The bent moon that wex can and wane.
When hallowed is the sons stacion,
Nigh the mids of the month of Iuyn.
At which season early in the morrow,
When that Phoebus avoiding nights sorrow,
Does Pirrous his wayne up to draw,
And Aurora Estward does adawe,
And with the water of her tears round,
The silver dew causes to habounde,
Upon the herbs and the flowers soote,
Full kindly noryshyng both crop and root.
Up I rose out of my bed anon,
Full desirous on huntinge for to gone,
Pricked in heart with lusty fresh plesaunce,
To do to love some dew obseruaunce,
And Diana that day to magnify.
Which called is lady of Venerye,
And reuerendly rites to observe,
Of Citherea her as tho to serve,
I and my feres our hertes to releue,
Cast us fully til it drew to eve,
Within a forest to play us and disporte,
And plesauntly us to recomforte,
As it longs to love of lustynesse.
For thilke day to Venus the goddess,
Ysacred was by full great excellence.
With great honor and dew reverence,
Done unto her both of one and all,
And on a friday is this adventure fall.
When we ga^ haste us to the woods grene,
In hope that day some game for to seen.
With great labor riding to and fro,
Til that we had full many bucke and do,
By strength slain as we might the^ find.
The heart ychased with hou^des and the hind,
Through the downs and the dales low,
Till Phoebus high upon his days bow,
Amid the arc was of Meredien,
For than his beams full hot were and shene*
And we most busy were upon the chase.
That me befell a wonder diverse case.
For of fortune it happed suddenly,
While I was severed from my company,
Sole by my self among the holtes hoar,
To find game desirous evermore,
Or I was ware through thick and thyn,
A full great heart I saw before me ryn.
Down by the launde and the vales grene.
That I in sothe ne might not sustene,
He was to swift for to nigh him nere.
Though him to sewe I pricked my coursere,
Nigh to ye death through many sundry shawe
Out of my sight so fer he can withdraw,
For all that ever that I sewe might,
That I anon lost of him the sight.
In a wood that I dabare the name.
And I so faint began wexen of that game,
And mine horse on which I tho did ride,
Fomyng full white upon every side,
And his flanks all with blood distayned.
In my pursuit so sore he was constrained,
With my sporres sharp and dyed redd,
After the heart so prycked I my stead.
Now up now down with a full busy thought,
But my labor auayled me right naught.
Till at the last among the bows glade,
Of adventure I caught a plesaunt shade,
Full smothe and plain and lusty for to seen,
And soft as velvet was the young grene,
Where fro my horse I did alight as fast,
And on a bow aloft his reyne cast,
So faynte and mate of werynesse I was,
That I me laid down upon the gras.
Upon a bryncke shortly for to tell,
Beside the river of a cristall well.
And the water as I rehearse can,
Like quick silver in his streams ran.
Of which the gravel and the bright stone,
As any gold again the son shone.
Where right anon for very werynesse,
A sudden sleep began me so oppress,
That sith the time that I first was borne,
I never was asleped so toforne.
And as I lay I heard a wonder sweuen.
For as me thought high down from heaven,
The wynged god wonderful of cheer,
Mercuryus to me did appear,
Of whom I was some dele first aferde,
For he was gyrde with his crooked sword.
And with him brought also in his hand,
His slepy yerde as plyaunt as a wande.
With a serpent going enuyrowne,
And at his fete also low adowne,
Me seemed also that there stood a cock,
Singing his hours true as any clock.
And to the mouth of this god Mercurye,
Were pypes set that song wonder merye.
Of which the sweet sugared Hermonye,
Made to mine ears such a melodye,
That me seemed tho in mine advise,
I was rauyshed into paradise.
And thus this god diverse of liknesse,
More wonderful than I can express,
Showed him self in his appearance,
Like as he is descryued in Fulgence.
In the book of his methologies.
Where be rehearsed many poesyes,
And many likeness like as ye may se,
And for to take the moralitee,
His long yerde right as is a line,
Which on no side wrongly may decline,
Signifies the prudent governance,
Of discrete folk yt through their purueyau^ce
Cast a peril or that it befall.
And his pypes loud as any shall,
That through musyke be entuned true,
Betokens eke with many lusty hew,
The sugared dytees by great excellence,
Of Rethoryke and of eloquence.
Of which this god is sovereign and patrowne.
And of this cock the sweet and lusty sown,
That justly keeps the hours of the night,
Is utterly the advice of inward sight,
Of such as void by waker diligence,
Out of their court stouthe and necligence.
And his sword which croketh so again,
That is not forged nor ymade in vain,
Is to revoke to the right weye,
Such as wrongly for truth forueye.
And the serpent which that I of told,
Which wrincled is as ye may behold,
Upon the yerde and about goes,
Signefyeth that falshode wood and wroth,
That lies in wait by many sleyghty weye,
With his ginnes the truth for to werrey.
And of this god of eloquence the king,
Brought with him eke in his coming,
Citherea whom these lovers serve,
Juno and Pallas that called is Minerue.
And this Venus her lieges to delight,
About her head flikered douues white,
With look beninge and eyes debonayre,
Aye circuling with snowy wings fair.
For to declare sothly in sentence.
By the douues very innocence,
Of them in love yt but troth mean,
And yt their ground should honest be and clean.
Ytokned is clearly by witness.
Without soyling of any uncleanness.
And the freshness of the roses red,
That in somer so lustyly does sprede,
And in winter of their color fade,
Signifies the hertye thoughts glade,
Of young folks that been amerous.
Fervent in hope and inly desirous,
When love gynneth in their hertes flower,
Till long process makes them to loure,
With the winter of unwieldy age.
That lust is palled and dulled with the rage,
Of feblenesse when somer is a gone.
As folks know I wott well mo than one.
And therefore Venus fleteth in a see,
To show the trouble and aduersytee,
That is in love and in her stormye law,
Which is byset with many sturdye wawe.
Now calm now rough who so takes head,
As hope assailed aye with sodeyne dread,
And next Venus Pallas I beheld,
With her spear and her bryghte shield
And a raynbowe round about her head,
That of color grene was blewe and read.
And her tofore as I can discryue,
She growyng had a grene fresh olyue,
And thereupon with his brows foul,
In the branches I saw sit like an Owl.
And first the shilde of Pallas the goddess,
Signified as I can express,
In virtue force by manly high diffe^ce.
Again vices to maken resistance.
And her spear sharp and kene ygrounde,
By just rygour was forged to confound,
Them that be false and to put abacke,
And for that mercy shall meddle with ye wrack.
The shafte in sothe shaven was full plain,
Lest mercyles that right ne wrought in vain.
And after werre to make false release,
There was the Olive that betokens peace.
The Owl also so odious at all.
That songs syngeth at feasts funeral.
Declaring plainly fine of every glory,
Is only death who has it in memory.
And the raynbowe grene read and perse,
Signifies the chaunges full diverse,
That often falls in werre and battle.
Now to win and suddenly to fail,
Now stable as blew chau^ging now as grene,
For Pallas play is always meynt with tene.
And alder last as now I have in mind,
With her nymphs Juno came behind.
Which of custom Fulgencius so tells,
Abides in floudes and in deep wells.
And this Juno as these poets feign,
A maiden is and of fruit barayne,
And the Pecock to this fresh queen,
Ysacred is with his feathers shene.
Splayed abroad as large as a sail,
With Argus eyes emprinted in his tail.
The waters ronninge in river and in flood,
Is the labor that men have for good,
The great trouble and the business,
That day and night they suffer for richesse.
That who so ever in these floudes row,
Let him beware for aye after the flow,
Of nature right by courses it is dew,
Following ye moon there must an ebb e^sewe.
The most dread is aye upon the full.
Lest fortune do the fresh feathers pull,
Of rich folks that shine in gold shene,
Since she of chau^che the lady is and queen.
And Argus eyes that set are aye behind,
Are nygardes hertes yt often sythes be blind.
Which not aduert of goods to the end,
That like an ebb suddenly will wend.
Which they nothing consydre in their sight,
For as the fair lusty feathers bright,
Of a Pecock unawarely fall away,
Right so riches shortly at a day,
Will their master suddenly forsake,
Saying adewe and thens their leave take.
And as Juno barayne is of fruit,
Right so naked bare and destitute,
Are these gredy hertes covetous.
Which to gather be so desirous.
That in nothing can have suffysaunce,
The fret of dred the^ puts i^ such mischau^ce.
Imagening that the world will fail.
And in their fear again ye wynd they sail.
Till all at ones they must depart there fro,
And thus of good aye the fine is woe.
Namely of them that so pinche and spare,
For this no dread as clerks can declare,
The fruit of good is to spend large,
And who so ever set but little charge,
But freely parts his treasour in commune,
When he discretely sees time opportune,
He has no joy to put his good in mewe.
For who in heart that fredome list to sewe,
Of gentylnesse takes no head thereto.
And in this wise Pallas and Juno,
With fresh Venus be adowne descended,
Like as I have shortly comprehended,
Under the guyding of Mercurius.
Which unto me began his tale thus.
Paris quod he lift up thine eyes and see,
Lo these goddesses here in nombre three,
Which from heaven with their eyes clear,
So dyuersly unto the appear,
Were at a feast whereof I tell shall,
With all the gods above celestyall.
That Iupyter held at his own board,
Was none absent save only discord,
And for despyte she was not there present,
To be avenged set all her intent,
And in her wits many ways sought,
Till at the last even thus she wrought.
Of old Poets like as yt is told.
She took an appel round of pure gold,
With Greek letters graven up and down,
Which said thus in conclusyowne,
Without strife let it be give anon,
Unto the fairest of them euerychone,
And of discord this lady and goddess,
As she that is of conteke maystresse,
Has this appel passing of delight,
Brought to this feast of malice and despyte,
And cast it down among them at the board.
With deynous chere speaking not a word.
But on her way fast began her hye,
And suddenly so inly great envy,
Into the court this appel has in brought,
So great a werre and such a conteck wrought,
In the hertes of these ilke three,
That after long may not staunched be,
Among them self so they began disdain.
Which in beauty was most seueraygne,
And which of them has most title of right,
For to co^quere this burned apple bright.
And first they began thus for beauty strive,
That of rancour almost their hertes ryue.
To wite of right who should it first possede.
Lo yet envy reygneth in womanhede.
That one is fayrer than an other hold,
For each woman of her kind would,
Have on some part prise above an other.
In each estate in sothe it is no other.
And each of them in her own advise,
Has joy in beauty for to have a prise,
For none so foul does in a myrrour prye,
That shene is fair in her own eye.
But like a fool he him self does quite,
That aumber yelowe cheseth for the white.
A goundy eye is deceived soon,
That any color cheseth by the moon.
For some color with fire is made fine,
And some increased with spices and with wine.
With oyntementes and with confections,
And on the night by false illusyons,
Some appear wonder fresh and fair.
That look full derke by day light in the air.
There is no prefe but early by the morrow,
Of such as need no beauty for to borowe,
But as nature has her self disposed,
Therefore fasting or boxes be unclosed,
Make thy chose so byddeth the Ouide,
When every drugge and pot is set a side,
Lest happily thou be after his sentence,
Deceived lightly by false appearance.
For now a days such craft is full ryfe,
And in this wise first began the strife,
Betwixt Juno, Venus, and Pallas.
That be decended for this sodayn case,
By one assent touching their beauty,
The dome thereof committed unto the.
I speak to the that called art Paris,
And holde^ art full prudent and right wise,
Be well auysed how thy dome shall fine,
For they ne may to nor fro decline,
But must obeyen all by one assent.
Without strife as to thy judgment.
But hercke first or that thou proceed,
Of each of them what shall be thy mede.
Consydre a right and take good head thereto.
If thou the appel grant unto Juno,
She shall the give plenty of richesse,
High renown of fame eke worthynesse,
With habundaunce of gold and of treasour.
And do the reyse to so high honor,
That thou alone all other shalt excelle.
For thy guerdon like as I the tell.
And if to Pallas goddess of prudence,
The list the fine conclude of thy sentence,
That she may lady of the appell be,
For thy mede she shall assure the,
That of wit and eke of sapyence,
Thou shalt holy have the excellence.
And of wisdom and of discrecion,
As to discern by clerenesse of reason,
Also fer as Phoebus cast may his light,
There shall not be a more prudent knight.
Nor in this world sith it first began,
Of just report a more manly man.
Nor to thy name none equipollent.
And if to Venus of true and clean intent,
The list to grant in this conclusyon,
Of the Appell to have possessyon,
The fresh goddess that sit so high above,
Shall the ensue to have unto thy love,
The fairest lady that is or was tofore,
Or in this world hereafter shall be bore.
And in Greece thou shall her knightly win.
Now be advised or that thou begin.
Justly to deem and for no thing spare.
And I anon began look up and to stare,
Greatly astoned what me was best to do.
Till at the last I spoke Mercurye to,
And said certain that I ne would there,
Give no dome but they naked were.
So that I might have fully lybertee,
Eueriche of them advisedly to see.
And well consider every circumstaunce,
Who fairest were unto my pleasaunce.
And goodlyest to speak of womanhede.
And after that would to my dome proceed.
And they anon as ye have herd me seye,
To my desire mekely began obey.
In all haste to do their busy cure,
Them to dispoyle of clothing and vesture,
Lyche as the statute of my dome them bond,
For in no point they would it not withstonde.
That I might have full inspection,
Of form and shape and each proporsyon,
For to discern as I can remember,
A vysedly by order every membre,
And than at erst to judge after the right.
But when yt I of them had thus the sight,
I gave to Venus the Appell right anon.
Because she was fairest of each one.
And most excellyng sothly of beatie,
Most womanly and goodly on to see.
Tho as I demed plainly in my sight.
For the stremes of her eyes bright,
Yleche glade and of egall light,
Were like yt sterre yt shows toward ye night
Which called is Hesperus so shene.
Venus her self the fresh lusty queen.
The which anon this heavenly Emperesse,
After my dome of hearty high gladness,
That of the appell she holy has the glory,
And won it thus justly by victory,
Reioysed her more than I can tell.
That she her fears in beauty did excel.
And she in have of true affection,
Concluded has fully for my guerdon,
Full demurely low and not a lofte,
To Mercury with sobre words soft.
Deuoyde both of doubleness and slouthe,
Like her behest hold will her troth.
And suddenly without more Iniurye,
They disapered and the god Mercurye,
Straight to heaven the right way he took,
And I anon out of my sleep a woke.
Whereof my lord whom I most love and dread
If ye aduerte and wisely takes head.
That this behest affyrmed in certain,
Was unto me assured not in vain.
Of goodly Venus like as I have told,
Wherefore I read ye be of heart bold,
Me for to send with strong and mighty hand
Without abode into the Greeks land.
After the form that I have to you said.
For thus I hope ye shall be well apayde,
When I have speed as Wenus has be hight.
And home return with my lady bright.
So shall ye best me list not speak in vain,
As by exchange your sister wyn again.
Whom Thelomon withholden has of yore.
Lo this is all I can say you no more,
Touching theffect holy of mine advise.
And after that tho satte him down Paris,
As he that had him self full well aquytt.
But say Pryam alas where was thy wytt,
Of neclygence for to taken keep,
Thy trust to set on dremes or on sleep.
Full thynne forsothe was thy discrecion,
To take a ground of false illusyon,
For to proceed like to the fantasye.
Upon a sweuen meint with flattery,
Alas reason was tho nothing thy guide,
For Pallas was wrongly set a side.
Not received with dew reverence.
And Juno eke for all her sapience,
For all her good and lokynge debonayre,
With her treasour and her hestes fair,
Refused was alas of wylfulnesse.
And she that is of love the goddess,
And eke also of Vulcanus the wife,
In whose service is ever werre and strife,
Preferred was the appell to possede.
Again all right for Paris took none head,
Save unto lust and set aside the troth,
Where through alas and yt was full great routh,
The mighty rich and the noble town,
Of Troy was brought to full confusyowne.
Only for he knyghthode has forsake,
Prudence, and gold, and in his choice ytake,
A woman only, and hold him thereto,
That after was the root of all their woe.
As this story ceriously shall tell,
But I in dreams will no longer dwell.
But write forth how that Deiphobus,
That was the third son to Priamus,
His tale began in open audience,
And to the king shortly in sentence,
As he that list a truth not to spare,
Even thus he began his fantasye declare.
My lord quod he if that every wight,
Aduerte should and cast in his sight,
Of future thing the peril and the doubt,
And search it well within and eke without,
From point to point always in reason,
To cast doubts and tournen up so down,
Than should no wight to no purpose wend,
In any matter for to make an end.
Either presume by manhood in his thought,
Who casts doutes achieueth lite or naught.
For if the plowman always cast aforne,
How many graynes in his field of corn,
Shall Be devoured of fowls rauynous,
That he does sow in fields plenteous,
Than should he never in vale nor in plain,
For cowardshyp throw abroad his grain.
Let all such dread now be laid aside.
I hold if folly longer to abide,
But yt Paris my brother make him strong,
With his ships for to venge our wrong.
Upon greeks with all his pain and might,
To preue shortly that he is a knight.
For of reason ye this consider may,
How that no man justly may say nay,
But that Paris has counsayled well.
For by my troth as fer as I can feel,
It were error his purpose to contrary.
Wherefore let him now no longer tarry,
But hold his way with a strong nauye,
For to avenge the shameful velanye,
That greeks have done if so ye list take heed,
In alder days to us and our kynred.
And eke for fynall execucion,
Of the recure as touching Exion.
Whom they demeyne in such dishonest wise,
Against all right and title of justice.
Whereof to think it gives my heart a wound.
The shame of which so newly does rebounde,
Upon us all that be of her ally.
Wherefore the best that I can espy,
Is that Paris take may this voyage,
With such as be of fresh and lusty age.
Manly to wend into greeks land,
And by force of their mighty hand,
Maunger the Greeks proud and most elate,
Rauishe there some lady of estate.
And tha^ ye may by knighthod of my brother,
If ye list after change her for that other.
This is most ready and short conclusyon,
That I can se for restytution,
Of Exyon if so that Paris wend,
And of my counsel shortly thus the end*
And than as fast full discrete and sage,
Helenus the fourth son as of age,
Rose from his seat with humble reverence,
Praying his father grant him aundience
That he may say in presence of them all,
Openly what after shall be fall,
As he that most of secret things can.
And soberlye thus he his tale began.
With clean intent and true affection.
My lord quod he with supportacion,
Of your grace wherein is most my trust,
Let none offense be unto your lust,
Nor you displease if so I my conceyte,
As now declare sith I mean no decetie.
For never yet failed no sentence,
But that it fill efte in experyence,
Like as I told in party and in all.
In pryuye treat and eke in general.
Without meaning of any doubleness.
That it followed as I did express.
Remembryng you as ye shall find it true,
And if god will I shall not now of new,
Spare for to say like as I conceive,
Nor to be deed with fraud you deceive.
Declaryng first of true entention,
As it shall follow in conclusion.
That if he Paris into Greece wend,
Trusts me well it will us all shende.
For the gods so by reuelacion,
Have made to me plain demonstration,
And eke I know it by astronomye.
For never yet as in my prophecye,
I was deceived of that should after fall.
Nor none that list me to counsel call.
So am I taught of thing that shall betyde,
Wherefore I pray for rancour nor for pride,
Nor for envy wrought of old hatred,
To take vengeance that ye not proceed,
In your advise like as ye purpose.
I say you plainly for me ylyst not gloss,
Ye shall repent if so ye Paris send.
Into Greece the which god defend.
Wit this full well for the conclusyon,
Shall fully turn to our destruction,
And finally unto our ruin,
Like as to you I began before deuyne.
For this the fine that there follow shall,
Subuercyon both of town and of wall.
Of house and paleys here in our City,
Al goth to naught ye get no more of me.
Form seems it ought enough suffyse,
That I have said sith that ye be wise.
For if that ye aduerten to my saw,
I doubt not that ye will withdraw,
Your hand be time or that more damage,
Assayleth you by constraynte of this rage.
For better is betymes to absteyne,
From this purpose which is yet but grene,
Than of head thus hastily assente,
To thing for which we shall echone repent.
For plenerly there shall nothing socoure,
That there shall follow both of you and your,
Despyteful death without excepciowne.
Of one and all abiding in this town.
First on your self plainly to endite,
Shall the vengeance of the greeks byte,
Through the fury of their mortal tene,
And your wife fair Hecuba the queen,
Shall led her life through greeks cruelty,
In sorrow woe and in captivity,
And your lyeges by the sword shall pace,
Of cruel death withouten any grace.
And innocents merciles shall blede,
In your advise if that ye do proceed,
Of wylfulnesse a werre for to make.
And folyly thus for to undertake,
As to parturbe your quyete and your rest,
Which shall return nothing for the best.
But to ruin of you and of us all.
I can no more but or that mischyefe fall,
My counsel is before that ye provide,
And lets wylfulnesse be set aside.
Specially when death as I you told,
Must be the fine if ye your purpose hold.
Lo here is all without words mo.
Into Greece if so that Paris go.
And in this wise when that Helenus,
Had plainly said as Guydo tells us,
Tryste and heavy with pale and deadly face,
Again resorteth to his sitting place.
Of whose sentence astoned euerychone,
Sat in silence stylle as any stone.
Powerles their hertes efte to resume.
To speak a word no man dare presume,
Of all the prese but kept their lyppes close,
That at the last Troylous up arose,
Young fresh and couragyous also,
And aye desirous for to have a do,
In arms manly as longs to a knight.
And when that he of chere full glad and light,
Saw his father and brethern euerychone,
So inly troubled thus he spoke anon.
Oh noble and worthy syttyng enuiron,
Of high prudence and great discrecion,
Manfull also and of high courage,
What sodein fere has brought you i^ this rage
What new trouble is cropen in your breast,
For the sentence of a coward priest.
Sith they echone as ye shall ever find,
Desire more verily of kind,
To live in lust and void away travail,
And deadly hate to here as of battle.
For they their wit finally apply,
To sewe their lust and live in glottony.
To fill their stomach and restore their mawe,
To rest and ease evermore to draw.
And to sewe their inward appetite.
This their joy and this their delight.
In eating, drynkyng, and in couetyse,
Is their study fully to deuyse,
How they may follow their lust without more.
Of right naught else setten they no store.
Alas for shame why be ye so dismayde,
And sytte mate astoned and afraid,
For the words of him this Helenus,
Fearful for dread as a little mouse.
That he quaketh to here speak of fight.
And moreover again all skylle and right,
In prejudice of the gods all,
He takes on him to say what shall be fall.
Of thing future for to specyfye.
As if he had a spirit of prophecye,
Granted to him alone in special.
As though he were in connyng perygall.
To the gods having prescience.
To show before through his sapyence,
What shall betyde outher evil or good.
Let be let be for no wight is so woodd,
That has his wit to give thereto credence.
That any man by craft or by science,
That mortal is has connyng to deuyne,
Fortunes course or fates to termyne.
Such causes hyd conceled in secree,
Reserved be to gods priuitee.
Men may dyuyne but all is but folly,
To take heed for they do but lie.
Wherefore I read as in this mattere,
Both one and al and you my lord most dear,
Exclude all dread and all that may disturb,
Out of your heart and let nothing perturbe,
Your high courage that Helenus has told.
And if that he of heart be not bold,
As manhod would to help venge our wrong
Let him go hyde him in the temple strong.
And keep him close in contemplation.
To wake and pray by devotion,
Without socour on days and on nyghtes.
And suffer such as be lusty knights,
To haunte their youth and grene lustynesse,
Manly in arms to preue their hardiness.
That they may have the better acqueintau^ce,
In time coming for to do vengeance,
On their enmyes and their cruel foen.
And since command yt Paris may forth gone,
To execute the fine of your intent.
Before purposed in your parliament.
Upon greeks for their offention,
For to perform the pain of talyon,
For wrongs old of which yet the fame,
Rehearsed is unto our aldershame.
Through out the world ye wot this is no lece
And therwithall Troylous held his peace.
And suddenly all that were present,
Began at ones holly by one assent,
Troylus counsel greatly for to preyse.
And his manhood to the heaven reyse.
His fresh courage and his high prowess,
His fervent zeal and his hardiness.
And of one heart greatly him commend,
And right anon there they made an end.
Than Pryamus when that all was done,
Upon the time of the hour of none,
To mete goes within great Ilyon,
All his sons syttyng enuyron.
And after mete he called has Paris,
And Deiphobus also that was full wise.
And secretly bad they shulden go,
The same day with other lords mo,
To Panonye in all the haste they may,
To make them ready again a certain day,
With all the array of worthy cheualrye,
That they may get in their company,
Toward Greece to saylen hastily.
And after that the king suddenly,
The next day made his counsel call,
And even thus he said before them all.
Oh noble lyeges being now present,
My purpose is to say you mine intent,
Without abode to here it if ye list,
For as I thyncke to you is not vnwyste,
How the greeks of pride and tyrrannye,
Of malys old compassed by envy,
In many wise have again us wrought,
Which is so grene that I foryet it naught.
For day by day encreasynge ever mo,
By remembrance renewed is my woe.
When I record and casten up and down,
Our greues all and how that Exiowne,
In seruytude among them does soiourne.
Which often a day causes me to mourn.
And has my heart almost asonder ryue.
For to consider and se it by my live.
Whose crueltee we have to dear bought,
And albeit that I have means sought,
To have had rest without any more,
When into Greece I sent Anthenore,
Peasably my sister to recure.
And patiently the surplus to endure.
But all for naught they took of it no head,
What I offered them of goodlyhede,
It was not herd for lack of gentilnesse.
Record of which doubleth my distress.
Wherefore we must as teaches surgerye,
With sharp Irous seken our remedy.
To cut away by the root round,
The dead flesh festred in the wound.
Which will not void with oynetmentes soft,
Albe that they applied be full often.
Right so we must attempt as by duresse,
To get recure when that with fayrenesse,
We may none have wherefore by your advise,
My purpose is in have to send Paryse.
Forth into Greece some lady there to win,
And bring her home and we shall here within,
Strongly her keep mauger who says nay.
Till that we see some agreeable day,
That they be feign like mine opinion,
To have exchange for her of Exion.
My sister namely whom I love so.
We may not fail that it shall thus be do,
So that the gods be to us favorable,
And this counsel be also acceptable,
To you echone as it is to me.
For when a thing toucheeh a comonte,
Of wyttye men as it is affyrmed,
Of all the common it ought to be confyrmed.
Thing touching all should be first appreued,
Of euerychone or it were achieued.
Wherefore I cast by advise of you all,
Plainly to work. and forthwith there withal,
This noble Pryam was suddenly in pease.
And after that among all the prease,
When all was whyshte in their alder syghte,
A knight up rose and Percheus he highte.
That son was to great Euforbyus,
De transformatis as says Ouidius
Into whom he fayneth that there was,
Whylom the soul of Pithagoras,
Holy transsumed so as write Ouyde.
As touching that I will not longer bide,
But tell forth of this Percheus.
Before the king which began his tale thus.
My lyege lord unto your high noblesse,
Displease it not nor to your worthynesse,
Though here in presence of your majesty,
That I shall say for to acquyte me,
Toward you of my faith and truth.
For sothfastly in me may be no slouthe,
Touching your honor that without dread,
With zeal of faith I bren as does the glede.
Of all harms to bid you ye beware.
For doubtless this affirm well I dare,
If so ye stand in your first advise,
As ye purpose to senden forth Paryse,
I doubt it not that it shall you rewe.
For god well wot of old and not of new,
I had a father called Enforbius,
Discrete and wise and right virtuous,
And knowing had before of every thing,
By prescyence and before wyttynge.
To tell plainly through his philosophye,
So heavenly he saw and that at eye,
That there nas thing that might so secretly,
Be hyd from him ne yet no pryuytee.
That he ne knew he was of wit so sage.
And at the last when he was of age.
An hundred year with locks gray and hoar,
I well bethincke how he complained sore,
And wept also of pity tenderly,
Fully affyrmyng if Paris utterly,
Went into Greece to rauyshe him a wife,
There should ensue such a mortal strife,
Upon us all that sothly this city,
Should into scindred ashes turned be.
And that there should nothing do us socour,
But greeks sword should cruelly devour,
Both hye and low and plainly spare none.
Wherefore I pray among you euerychone,
Of that I tell have ye no despyte,
Your wrong to venge puts in respyte,
And rancour old I read that ye let.
And the tranquyll now of your quyete,
Of hastynesse that ye not submytte.
To fortune list that can so falsely flytte.
And trouble not for ancient enmyte,
With new sterynge your felycitie.
For if that ye this Journey thus assente,
Ye euerychone full sore shall repent.
And if ye will algates thither send,
In Paris stead let some other wend.
Lest his voyage be to you no speed.
Lo this my counsel and fully my read,
Said under supporte only of your grace.
And suddenly they began echone to chase,
At Penthens and loud again him cry.
Repreuynge him and the prophecye,
Of this father to their confusyon.
But oh alas the reuolucion,
Of joy or woe or of felicitee,
For thing tofore ordained must nedely be,
The state of things with fate is so englewed,
For that shall fall may not be eschewed.
Which caused them for tassent in one,
In all the have that Paris should be gone,
Unhappily with hap they were enuolued.
And thus concluding their counsel is dissolved,
But casuelly lo it befell right than,
That this advise unto the eres ran,
Of Cassandra and she with great afraye,
Of sudden woe began cryen welaway.
Alas quod she alas what will ye do,
What? and shall Paris into Greece go?
And with that word she braste out to weep.
Full piteously with inward syghes deep.
She began to wayle and sown for the pain,
And furyously with noise to complain.
With woeful rage and many pyteus sown,
She made a mortal lamentatiowne.
For to be dead she might her not withholde.
With hear to torn and with fystes fold,
She said alas more than and hundred sith.
Ah stormy fortune why list thou to kythe,
Thy cruel force to our aduersytie.
Upon us all and eke on this City,
Of mortal ire and gery violence,
with sword of vengeance worse tha^ pestilence.
Oh Troy Troy what is the gylte alas,
What have thou done what is thy trespass,
To be euersed and turned into naught.
With wild fire thy sin is dear abought.
Ah Pryam king vncely is thy chance,
What have thou gylte outher do greuaunce,
To thy gods or wyrched through unright,
Them to provoke to show their cruel might,
Upon thy blood alas what have thou do?
Oh mother mine Oh Hecuba also,
What manner crime or importable offense,
Have thou commit to have such recompense.
The day to abide Oh noble worthy queen,
Of thy sons such vengeance for to seen.
Oh woeful death cruel and horrible.
Alas why are ye no more credible,
To my counsel such harms to eschew,
Your mortal purpose fully to remewe.
That he go not as it is ordained.
The thought of which my heart has so constrained
That uneath I may this my woe endure,
And to her father this woeful creature,
Held straight her way and falls plat to ground
And of her weeping all in water drownde,
By her chekes so began the tears rain,
And as she might for constraint of her pain,
Upon him she began clyppen and cry,
Besechynge him to shape a remedy,
With pyteous voice as she yt knew full well,
In this matter plainly euerydele,
What shall befall and had it full in mind.
The sodeyne harms that shall ensue behind,
But all her clamor was not but in vain,
For that shall fall as some clerks said,
Ne may not well of men eschewed be.
And eke fortune by great aduersytie,
Of hasty Ire furyous and wood,
And aye unkind unto the Troyan blood,
Causeless against them sore agreued,
And of rancour suddenly amened,
With blind awaite to catch them in a trau^ce,
By vyolence of her unhappy chance,
Has with a sweyght turned her whele unstable,
As she that is enuyous and mutable,
To hasten Troyens to their confusyon,
Of wylfulnesse and vndiscretion,
Against greeks quarrel for to make,
And thereupon have their counsel take.
And have achieued as ye herd deuyse,
Without assent of the most wise.
For if so they the diffynycyon,
Of Hector herd concluded in reason,
In this matter and of Helenus,
The counsel take, and to Percheus,
Aduerted wisely as to his sentence,
And without faynyng given full credence,
To her Cassandra that never list to lie,
And by advise had hard the prophecye,
From point to point for to cast aforne,
In such mischief they had not tho be lorne,
But floured yet in their felycitie.
Without damage and aduersytie.
But fortune will fortholde her course always.
Whose will abides who so says ye or nay.
For she it was that caused this voyage,
With forhead plain and blandishing vysage.
With sugre shad and venim in the root,
Bitter of taste and in showing soote.
Wrynckled double like an horned snayle,
Faith in her face and fraud ay in her tail.
To haste the Troyans to accord into one,
That Paris should into greece gone.
As ye have herd there is no more to said,
For herupon they cast them to ordain.
How Priam the king sent Paris Deiphobus and others of the worthies of Troy
into Greece, to aduenge the rauishinge of his sister Exion, and how they before
their return rauyshed the fair Heleine wife to Menelaus and brought her to
Troy. Ca. xiii.
THe time approached when ye son shene,
His golden wayne whyrleth up atwene,
The clear sterres of Hyades so read,
Which have their scyte in the Bulls head,
And Pleyades the seventh sterre so bright,
Of which six appearen to our sight,
For the seventh draws her aside,
And covertly does her beams hide,
Whylom for she has done a great offense,
That unto us causes her absence.
For she dare not show her stremes clear,
Nor with her systren openly appear,
Whelom for she as with a god mortal,
A syn committed that was cryminall.
Which noysed was and kouth thrughout ye heaven
That she alone among the sistre^ seven,
Shroudeth to us shamefestly her chere.
And when as Titan in the zodiak sphere,
Atwene these sterres taken had his see,
Of the bull in the sixtenth degree,
Upon the time of Ioly grene May,
When that Flora with her hewes gaye,
Has every plain medowe hill and vale,
With her flowers quick and nothing pale,
Over spread and clad in lyuery new.
And branches blosme with diverse lusty hew
And bid us fully to be glad and light,
For by assurance they their fruit have hight,
Again Autumpne who so that list the^ shake.
When on the vines ripeth every grape.
For thus this season most lusty of disporte.
Embraseth hertes with new recomforte,
Only of hope by kind as it is dew,
That holsom fruit shall the blosmes sewe.
When time comes by reuolucion.
And thus in May ye lusty fresh season,
When birds sing in their hermonye,
The same time out of Pannonye,
Repeyred be Deiphobus and Paris,
And with them brought chosen by deuyse,
Three thousand knights ready for to gone,
With them to greece and ships many one,
Full vitayled of all that may them need,
And of these ships the number as I read,
Was two and twenty like as write Guydo.
And after this without more ado,
The king commands unto Eneas,
To Anthenor and to Polydamas,
In all the haste that they them ready make,
With Paris knyghtly for to undertake,
As ye have herd this Journey to acheue.
And on the time when they took their leave,
Pryamus with short conclusyon,
Shows the effect of his entencion.
And specially they their deuer done,
For to recure his sister Exione.
As ye have herd here tofore me tell.
What should I more in this matter dwell.
When they were ready without more soioure,
This Paris first as lord and governor,
Of this voyage made by Pryamus,
And his brother called Deiphobus,
Their leave have take as longed of deutye.
And after that to ship right manfully,
Without abode they began them selves dress,
And in the name of Venus the goddess,
And mighty Jove they taken their Journey.
With anchor hoist forth by the large sea,
They began to sail and have the wind at will.
The water calm blandishing and still.
Without trouble of any boystous wawe,
And to the costs they ginnen fast to draw,
Of greeks land for nothing ne them let,
And of fortune in their course they met,
A grekishe ship mine Auctour tells thus,
In which there was the king Menelaus,
Toward Pyram a famous strong City,
For to visit a duke of high degree,
That Nestor hight and this Menelaus,
Was brother eke unto the king famous,
The wise worthy great Agamenon.
Greatest of name and reputacion,
Among the Greeks for his worthiness,
And Menelay this storye bears witness,
Husband was to the queen Heleyne.
And she was sister to the brethren tweyne,
Castor and Pollux which as I you told,
Were of their hand so worthy knights hold.
And in that time like to their degree,
In Strynester their most chief City,
They held a household solemn and royal.
The love of whom was tho so special,
Of will and heart according with the deed,
Atwixe them two of very brotherhede,
That none from other could live alone.
With whom was eke the maid Hermyone,
The young daughter of the queen Heleyne,
Of fayrenesse most inly souereyne.
Most passyngly excellyng in beauty,
And thus the Trojans sailing on the sea,
Toward greece among the wawes wete,
Of adventure them happed for to mete,
King Menelaus sailing by their side,
And none of them list of very pride,
For to enquere what that other was,
But passen forth a swyft and lusty pase,
For none of them could then other know,
And aye the wind peasebly began blow,
The Trojan flete causyng in a while,
For to approach to the noble isle,
That called is Cithera at this day.
And in the haven in all the haste they may,
They anchor cast and bound their ships strong,
And after that them list not tarry long,
To take the land full many lusty man,
Araying them as freshly as they can.
Now in this isle of passing excellence,
There was a temple of great reverence,
That builded was of old foundation,
And honored most as in that region,
Throughout the land both of fer and nere,
The feast day aye from year to year,
Like as it fill by reuolucion,
Repeyringe thither of great devotion,
In honor only of Venus the goddess.
Whom the greeks with all their business,
Honored most of every manner age.
With gifts brynging and with pilgremage.
With great offryng and with sacrafise,
As used was in their paynem wise.
For in this Phane as they knele and wake,
With heart contryte and their prayer make,
The statue gave of every questyon,
Perfect answer and full solucion,
With ceremonies to Venus as they loute,
Of every thing whereof they were in doubt.
They hadden there full declaracion.
And thus the greeks upon Citheron,
Halowe this feast with rich and great array.
With rytes dew as fer forth as they may.
In hope fully the better for to thryue.
And of fortune when he did aryue,
Up to the land by adventure or case.
The same time this feast hallowed was.
Of many a greek coming to and fro,
From every cost that to the temple go.
On pilgramage their vows to acquit.
Of the place the relics to visyte.
And after Paris all this did espy,
He chosen has out of his company,
The worthiest that he there chese may.
And to the temple he took the right way.
Full well besene and in knightly wise.
And did his honor and his sacrafise.
Full humble and to the Greeks liche,
With many an ouche and many jewel rich.
With gold and silver stones and rich perre,
He spends there like to his degree.
And quit him manly in his oblacions,
And full devoutly in his orysons,
He him demeneth that joy it was to se.
Now was Paris of passing great beauty,
Among all that ever were alive.
For there was none that might with him strive,
Trojan nor greek to speak of semeliheade,
Wonder fresh and lusty as I read.
And in his port full like a gentil knighte,
Of whose person for to have a sight,
They began to prease both of nigh and fere.
So royally he bare him in his gere.
And all prease both high estate and loowe,
What knight he was desyren for to know.
And of his men they asken busyly,
From whense he came and the cause why.
Of his coming enquyring one by one,
But prudently they kept them euerychone,
That nothing was openly espied,
In their answer so they them selves guide.
That every thing kept was secree,
Eueriche of them was so auisee.
Albe that some openly declare,
What that he was and ne list not to spare,
But told plainly the cause of his cominge.
And how Pryam the strong mighty king,
His father was most royal of renown.
And how he came also for Exiowne.
Thus each of them began with other rowne,
At pryme face when he came to town.
And thereupon were ymagynatyfe,
Sore musyng and much inquisitife,
Each with other as by suspection,
Deminge thereof like their opinion.
And rathest they that nothing ne knew,
As folks done of things that be new.
And whiles that they of this matter treat,
In sundry wise among their words great,
The saying of them began anon atteyne,
To the ears of the queen Heleyne.
Nigh there beside in that regyon.
And when she herd as by relacion,
And by report of them that come between,
This fair Heleyne, this fresh lusty queen,
Anon as she the sothe understood,
Without delay or any more abode,
She casts her to this solempnytye,
The fresh folk of Phrigia to se.
Well more god wot in her entention,
To se Paris than for devotion.
Under color of holy pylgramage.
To the temple she takes her voyage,
With a great meyne and royal apparayle,
Paris to se for she will not fail.
But oh alas what lusty new fire,
Her heart has now enflawmed by desire,
To go to vigiles other to spectacles.
None holiness to hear of miracles,
Has meued her that there shall befall,
But as the manner is of women all,
To draw thither platly to conclude,
Where as they be sure that multitude,
Ygathered is at lybertye to see,
Where as they may find oportunitye,
To their desire full narowe they awayte.
Now covertly their eyes for to bait.
In place where as set is their plesaunce.
Now pryuely to have dalyaunce,
By some sign or casting of an eye,
Or tokens showing in heart what they dry.
With touch of hands stole among the prese,
With arm or foot to catch up in their lose,
Whom that them list, all be he free or bond,
Of nature they can hold him in hand.
Again whose sleyght avails wit nor might.
For what them list be yt wrong or right,
They aye achieue who so says yea or nay.
Again whose lust defend him no man may.
Thus Guydo aye of cursed false delight,
To speak the^ harm has caught an appetite
Throughout his book of women to say ill,
That to translate it is again my wll,
He has aye joy their honor to ramuerse.
And I right sorye that I must rehearse,
The fell words in his book yfounde,
To all women I am so mikle bound.
They be echone so goodly and so kind,
I dare of them not say but as I find.
Of Guydoes write throughout Troy book,
For when I read for fear my heart quoke.
And verily my wits began to fail,
When I thereof must maken rehersaile.
Like his decrete but Guydo now do wit,
For ye shall hear anon how that he chit,
The queen Heleyne for cause that she went,
With heart devout her offryng to present.
To the temple of Venus the goddess,
Thus word by word he says to her express.
O mortal harm that most is for to dread,
A fraud ycast by sleyght of womanhead.
Of every woe ginning crop and root,
Against which help may no bote,
When lust has drive in their heart a nail,
Aye deadly venim seweth at the tail.
Which no man has power to restreyne,
Record I take of queen Heleyne.
That inly brent alas in her desires,
Of new lust to dele with those strangers.
Whom she knew not ne never saw beforne,
Where through alas full many me^ were lorne,
Of cruel death embrased in a cheyne.
Without pyty now say thou queen Heleyne,
What ghost or spyryte alas has meued the,
Sole fro thy lord in such royaltye,
Out of thy house to go among the prease.
Why were you weary to live at home in peace.
But wentest out strangers for to se,
Taking no head unto thine honestye.
Thou should have kept thy closet secretly,
And not have passed out so folyly,
In the absence of thy lord alas.
Thou were to wilful and rakel in this case.
To se before what should after sewe,
For all to sone thou were drawn out of mewe.
That could not keep at home tho thy bounds.
Thou we^test out as hare among ye hounds.
For to be caught of very wilfulness.
And thy desire coudest not compesse.
For though thy lust list not to refrain,
O many woman has caught be in a train,
By going out such halowes for to seek.
It sit them better at home for to keep,
Close in their chaumber and fle occasyowne.
For never ship should in peril drown,
Nor ryue on rock nor be with tempest rent,
Nor with Caribdis dreached or yshent,
Nor to go to wrake with no wethers ill,
If it were kept in the haven still.
For who will not occasyons eschew,
Nor dread no peril for it is to sewe,
He must nedely as by necessytie,
Or he beware endure aduersytie.
And who can not his foot fro trappes spare,
Let him take heed or he fall in the snare.
For harm ydone to late is to complain,
For if whylom the noble queen Heleyne,
Her self had kept at home secret and close,
Of her there ne had be so wicke a lose.
Reported yet grene fresh and new.
Whose chance vnhappi each man ought to rue
That cause was of such destruction,
Of many worthy and confusyon,
Of her husband and many other mo.
On greeks side and those of Troy also.
In this storye as ye shall after read.
And so this queen as fast as she may speed,
To the temple has the way ynome,
Full royally and when that she was come.
Full devoutly within Citheron,
Made unto Venus her oblacion,
In presence and sight of many one.
With many jewel and many rich stone.
And when that Paris had this thing espied,
To the temple anon he has him hyed.
Full thriftely in all the have he might.
Where he forthwith as he had a sight,
Of the goodly fair fresh queen,
Cupides darte that is whet so kene,
Or he was ware has him marked so,
That for astoned he nist what to do.
So much he meruayleth her semelinesse,
Her womanhead her port and her fayrnesse.
For never erst ne wend he that nature,
Coud ought have made so fair a creature.
So aungellyke she was of her beauty,
So feminine so goodly on to se.
That sothly he her dempte as by liklynesse,
For her beauty to be some goddess.
For so his heart did him aye assure,
That she ne was a mortal creature.
So heavenly fair and so celestyall,
He thought she was in party and in all.
And eft consydereth for auysely,
Her features all in order by and by.
So curyously aye in his reason,
Of every thing by good inspection.
Her golden hear like the son streams,
Of fresh Phoebus with his bright beams.
The goodly head of her fleshly face,
Full replete of beauty and of grace.
Ylike enewed with quickenes of color,
Both of the rose and the lyly flower.
So egally that another was to wite,
Through none excess of much nor of lite.
Within the cerclynge of her eyes bright,
Was paradise compassed in her sight.
That through each heart ye beauty ga^ to perce.
And certainly if so I shall reherce,
Her shape her form her features by and by,
As Guydo does by order ceryously,
From head to foot clearly to deuyse,
I want english that thereto may suffyse.
It will not be our tunge is nothing like,
I want also the flowers of Rethorike.
To sewe his flouryshyng or his peynture,
For to discryue so fair a creature.
For so my colors feeble be and feynte,
That another can ennewe nor well depaynte.
Eke I am not acqueynted with no muse,
Of all the nine therefore I me excuse,
To you echone not all of neclygence,
But for defaute only of eloquence.
And you remit to Guydo for to se,
How he descriueth by order her beauty.
To take on me it were presumpciowne.
But I will tell how Paris up and down,
Gothe in the temple and his eye cast,
Toward Heleyne and began presen fast,
As he that brent hoote in loves fire,
That was enflawmed greatly by desire.
And often he changes countenance and cheer,
And ever he neygheth to her nere and nere,
Ydarted through with her eyes tweyne.
And in likewise this fresh queen Heleyne,
As hot she brent in heart privily,
Albe no man it outward could espy.
For as her thought she never erst to fore,
Of all men that ever yet were bore,
Se none so fair nor like to her pleasaunce.
On him to look was hearts suffysaunce.
For in the temple she takes head of naught,
But compasses and casts in her thought,
How she may catch some oportunitye,
With him to speak at further lybertye.
This holy was all her business.
For him she felt so inly great distress.
That often she chau^geth cou^tenau^ce and hew,
For Venus has them marked so of new,
With her brondes fyred by feruence,
And enflawmed by sudden influence,
That egally they brought were in rage.
And save the eye atwene was no message.
Each on other so fyxe have cast their sight,
That they conceive and wist anon right,
Within them self what their heart meant.
And nere to her ever Paris went.
To seek fully and get occasyon,
When as they might by full relacion,
Their hertes conceyte declare secretly.
And so befell that Paris nigheth nigh,
To the place where the queen Heleyne,
Stood in her see, and there atwene the^ tweyne,
They broke out al and sum of their whole heart.
And gave issue to their inward smerte.
But this was done lest they were espied,
When the people was most occupied,
In the temple for to stare and gase.
Now here now there as it were on a mase.
They kept them close that no word asterte,
There was no man the treason might aduert.
Of them twain ne what they would mean.
But at the last Paris and this queen,
Concluded have with short auysement,
Fully the fine of their both intent.
And set the time betwyx them in certain,
When they appoynten for to mete again.
But lest men had to them suspection,
They made an end without more sermon.
And sith depart albe that they were loathe.
And soberly anon this Paris gothe,
From the temple with breast in every part,
Fully through gyrt with loves fiery darte.
And to his ships he held the right way,
Where he anon in all the have he may,
When that assembled was his chiualrye,
One and other and al his company.
In few words as shortly as I can,
Tofore them all his tale he thus began.
LOrdinges quod he shortly to express,
The cause is kouthe as to your worthiness,
Why my father into Greece us sent.
For as ye know the chief of his intent,
Was to recure his sister Exion,
Out of the hands of mighty Thelamon.
The which thing for ought I can espy.
Is impossible shortly in mine eye.
By any way as fer as I can se,
He is so great and strong in his country.
Of his allies about on every side,
And in heart so inly full of pride,
To yield her up he has not but disdain.
Thereof to treat it were not but in vain.
Therefore the best that I can devise,
Since our power may not now suffice,
To werrey him in this regiowne,
We be not egall of might nor of renown,
For lack of men with him to hold a field.
We may not win with spear nor with shield,
Tencountre him with all his multitude.
Wherefore the best that I can conclude,
Is since fortune has us hither brought,
And the gods have eke for us wrought,
So graciously to make us for to land,
At Venus temple fast here by the stronde.
Which abounds with full great richesse,
Of greeks offringe unto the goddess,
By land and sea fro many sundry port,
Of men and women that hither have resort,
To that place in worship of Venus,
So that the wife of king Menelaus,
Is there present. full rich and well beseyne,
And if that we by manhod might atteyne,
To rauishe her and the temple spoil,
And of their treasour chesen out and coil,
The chief jewels and chargen our summers,
With gold and silver and with prisoners,
And maugre them to our ships bring,
This same night without tarying,
We may not fail who ever that says nay,
If ye assenten of a worthy pray.
Wherefore in haste that ye now ready make,
And every man anon his harnes take,
And arm him well in his best array.
And they assente without more delay,
And in their ships they byde^ till at night,
When Phoebus chair wtdrawe^ had his light,
Under the wawes and sterres did appear,
On the heaven with their streams clear.
And or the moon that time did arise,
They shope them forth in full thrifty wise,
The manly Trojans armed in steel bryghte,
To the temple holding their way aryght.
For they casten no longer for to tarry,
But proudly enter in the sanctuarye,
Into the chapel called Citheron,
Without reverence or devotion.
Done to Venus in her oratorye.
For it was clean out of their memory.
Honor and dread and all obseruaunce,
For finally all their attendaunce,
As mine Auctour sothly can diffine,
Was to right naught but only to rauyne.
They token all that came to their hand,
Richesse and treasour that was in the land,
Gold and silver stones and rich Iewelles,
Releques sacred the holy eke vessels,
Without abode out of the sacrary,
And all yfeare to their ships carye.
It is a wonder to think on the good.
They kill and sley all that them withstode,
And likewise pytie for to se them blede,
And of the Greeks how they to ship led.
That after lived in captyuytie,
Full many a year in Troy the City.
And there whiles goth Paris to Heleyne,
And her embraseth in his arms tweyne,
Full humble and with great reverence.
In whom he found no manner resystence.
It sat her not she was so womanly,
For there to Paris she yolde her utterly.
Her heart in hap was yolde or he came there,
Therefore to yield she had less fear.
She can not strive nor no woman should,
And he anon as gentilnesse him would
Comfort her as he best can or may.
And led her forth without more delay,
Unto the ships and there full busyly,
He set wards to keep her honestly.
While to the temple he retourneth again,
To spoil and rob and to make all plain,
Through the temple with his walls wide.
Now stood a castle fast there beside,
Ystuffed well with Grekishe Souldeours,
The which awoke with noise of pylours.
The same night and began make a shoute.
And therwithall anon they issue out,
Armed in steel the temple to reskewe.
And manfully after them they sewe.
And so befell when they together met,
With speres sharp and swerdes kene whet.
They ran together as these Tygres wild,
Like wood Lions or these Bores vnmilde.
There was no fayninge found in their fight,
Albe the field was not departed right.
For the Trojans doubled them in number,
That utterly the Greeks they encoumbre.
And at mischefe made them fast to flee
And in pursuit full cruelly them flee.
Without mercy to the castle gate.
There was no rescuse for they came to late.
Of this skermyshe for the fine was death,
Now here now there they yelde^ up ye breath.
So mightily the Trojans them assail.
That to withsta^de it might not them avail.
For of manhod they the field have won.
And after that right cruelly begone,
In hasty wise to ransacke that castle,
And to ship they broughten euerydell.
Treasour and gold and what that they may win,
And on the morrow to salen they begin.
Stuffed with good by the grekyshe sea,
Toward the costs of Troy the City.
The sea was calm and fully at their will,
Both of tempest and of storms ill.
And clear also was the bright heaven,
That in space almost of days seven,
At the castle called Tenedowne,
They are aryued six mile from the town.
And glad and light they to land went.
And after that I find this Paris sent,
His messa^ger straight unto the king,
That him enfourmeth of his home cominge,
Of their exployt he told them every dele,
And Pryamus it lyketh wonder well,
That so manly they have borne them out,
And made to publyshe in all the town about,
These tidings new with great solempnitie,
To high and low through out the city.
And that for joy the most and eke the least,
For remembrance halowe and hold a feste.
And thank their gods in full humble wise,
With obseruaunces and with sacrafyce,
On their aulters with great devotion,
And all this while he at Tenedon,
Holds soiourne with the queen Heleyne.
The which her hap began rewfully complain,
Her uncouth life to dwellen with strangers.
Disconsolate among the prisoners.
Far sequestered away from her country,
All solytarye and in captivity.
She wepeth and cries with a pyteous chere
With wawes vpboyled from her eyes clear,
Whereof the stremes by her chekes rain.
And for constraynt of her inward pain,
Full often sythes her song was well away.
With sobbing voice that she so fer away,
Departed is from Menelaus,
For whose absence in rages furyous,
She hates her life and curses eke fortune,
And in this woe she ever does contune,
Without soiourne always more and more.
And for her brethern Pollux and Castor,
And for the love of her daughter dear,
Now pale and grene she wexeth of her chere,
That whylom was fresher for to seen,
Than is lyilye on his stalk grene.
Alas changed is her rosen hew.
And aye elyche her woe increases new.
That like no woman she was to behold,
For aye she wept as she to water would.
Till at the last in all her heaviness,
Paris to her came of gentylnesse,
To recomforte and to appese her rage.
He besyeth him her sorrows to aswage.
Saying to her alas what may this mean,
That ye in one oh goodly fresh queen,
List thus your self in sorowynge diffygure.
I wonder greatly how ye may endure,
So much water causeles thus to shede,
That with weping have dewed so your wede.
For like a conduite the streams ran a down
And as a penitaunt in contriciowne,
Ye you disraye alas why do ye so.
Let be this fare and let it over go.
All your weeping thought and heaviness,
And be no more my lady in distress.
Make here an end now of your greuaunce,
For all the ease comfort and pleasaunce,
That men may do trust well ye shall have,
It is but folly in sorrow thus to rave.
Let passen over all these sharp shoures,
And here my troth ye and all youres,
Of what your list you shall have suffysaunce.
As ferforth and more in haboundaunce,
Than have ye had among the greeks there,
I you ensure and be nothing in fear.
That I shall hold all that I have hight,
On my truth as I am true knight.
In word and deed with all my heart entire,
And she anon with a doleful chere,
So as she might forsobbyng tho suffyce,
Answered again in full lowly wise.
I wot quod she were me loathe or lefe,
Sith I am caught and take at this mischief,
Unto your will I may not now with seye,
I am so bound that I must obey.
Under your danger that I may not flee,
In hold distrayned and in captiuitee.
Ye wot also by nature out of dread,
That it ne longs unto womanhead.
In strange soil to strive or to rebel.
And namely there where as her quarrel,
Shall have no favor nor sustained be,
But if ye list now to have pitee,
On me or mine of your goodlyhead,
Ye may of god deserve thank and mede.
That will reward justly give to tho,
And comfort them that be in care and woe.
Now lady mine, than quod Paris,
What that may like or be at your deuyse,
All shall be do trusts me right well.
For by my truth as far as I can feel,
In any thing that may do you pleasaunce,
Ye shall it have and that in habundaunce.
This I ensure of heste not fallyble,
Be not agaste but fully be credible,
To my words and hestes euerychone.
And therwithall he ladde her right anon,
Into a place of royal apparayle,
To comfort her if it would avail.
And secretly there between them two,
This Paris first without more a do,
Spoke unto her and said my lady dear,
I feign it not but speak of heart entyer,
And that I hope ye shall hereafter find.
Wherefore I pray enprenteth in your mind,
What that I say and in your remembrance.
This is to say sith ye by purueyaunce,
Ben of the gods brought as now thereto,
And fortune eke will that it be so,
I dare affirm plainly for the first,
That they disposed have not for your worste,
But for your good and so ye must it take,
Wherefore I read suffer over shake,
All heaviness and looks that ye be,
As glad and light here in this country,
As though ye were in your own land.
For faithfully I do you tunderstande,
Ye shall have here as much habundaunce,
On every part with full suffysaunce,
Of all that you seems to be pleasant,
For of one thing I dare me well auaunt,
That in this country as it shall be found,
In every thing we plenteously habounde.
And more at full then do your greeks yonder,
And though ye ben far from them a sonder,
Out of the land that called is Achaye,
There is no cause why ye should dismay,
Sith ye at worship and more reverence,
At more honor and greater excellence,
Here shall be cherished than ye were before.
And where ye plain that ye have forbore,
Your own lord and be as now left sole,
For whom ye maken all this woe and dole,
Ye shall in haste be set at better ease.
For certainly so it not displease,
Nor offend unto your womanhead,
Instead of him I purpose out of dread,
To wedde you and be your true man,
To love and serve in all that ever I can,
Without faynyng to my lives end.
And be to you as lowly and as kind,
As dylygent and eke more laborous,
Than whylom was your Menelaus,
In every thing your lusts to obey.
Have here my truth till time that I deye.
And though that I in words be but plain,
For the love of god have no disdeyne,
Of my request nor grutche not at all,
For at the least of the stock royal,
I am descended and come as high of blood,
As Menelay and of birth as good,
And can in love to you be far more true,
Than erst was he and change for no new.
Wherefore leave of thus to plain and weep,
And let some comfort in your bosom crepe,
Your woe appease which is not worth an haw,
And let some mirth in your heart adawe.
This I beseech you and of womanhead,
To my words that ye list take heed.
Alas quod she how might this befall,
That have ylefte my friends one and all,
In strange land and here am al alone,
How should I tha^ but still complain in one,
I have no cause god wot for to pley,
Nor yet my chekes for to keep drey.
From salt tears alas it will not be,
That can none end of mine aduersyte.
For in good faith it were against kind,
So suddenly tabandon out of mind,
Thilke thing that either for joy or smerte,
In all this world sytteth next my heart.
For whom alas so sore I am destrayned.
But sith the gods have as now ordained,
No better chance of hope unto me,
I can no more I must it take at gre.
And humbly accept also their sonde.
For I am weak their power to withstonde.
Wherefore I shall again my will now strive,
Al be for woe my heart I feel ryue.
For to consent and lowly to admytte,
Thylke thing fro which as now I may not flytte.
Maugre my will of necessytie,
Fully to obey what ye list do with me.
It will not help although I said you nay.
And thus she playneth in all that ever she may
Little and little her sorrow to aswage.
What should she aye live in woe and rage.
To lose her self so tender a creature,
An heart of stele ne might it not endure.
But aye of women the manner is and kind,
That they can not of sorrow make an end.
Till they by leisure wept have at full.
But at the last when they gynnen dull,
To make sorrow it happeth them as fast,
That by grace they soon it over cast.
And lightly catch comfort for their smerte.
They be so tender yt men may them convert,
Fro woe to joy and thought from them disseuer,
There is no storm that may last ever,
As clerks wise in books list discern,
Thing vyolente may nothing be eterne.
For after storms Phoebus bryghter is.
And so by comfort and counsel of Paris,
She is adawed of her old sorrow.
For even like as the glade morrow,
Of very kind seweth the dercke night,
So by process her heart wexeth light.
And of her weeping dried is the well.
Like as the storye shall anon us tell.
How Paris was received in Troy at his return, and of his marriage to
Heleyne. Capitulo. xiiii.
When so ye queen that called is Heleine,
Adawed was of her drery pain,
And the wawes of her heavy cheer,
On her chekes gonnen for to clear:
Paris in heart fresh and amerous,
In haste has sent to king Pryamus,
For horse and men and other apparayle,
Clothes of gold full noble of entayle,
Made for Heleyne, and wrought for the nones,
With rich perle and many sundry stones,
Again her coming into Troy town.
And after that Paris from Tenedowne,
Shappeth him to lead her into Troy.
And Pryamus met them on the way,
Full royally as fast as he might hye,
With many a lord in his company,
Full many lady fresh and well beseyne,
And many maid that ride them again,
First estates and after communers.
Now had Paris all his prisoners,
Set before in order tweyne and tweyne,
And he rode next with the queen Heleyne.
And Deiphobus upon the other side,
And his knights enuyron him did ride.
But next him rode the worthy Eneas,
And the Troyan called Pollydamus,
His mean suynge each in his degree,
So gentylmanly that joy it was to see,
Each from other keeping a certain space.
And forth they ryden but a soft pace,
Till that the king them met suddenly,
And them received has full solempnely,
As he best could and goodly took the rain,
Into his hand of the queen Heleyne.
And her conveyed forth to his City.
Great was the preyse that abode to see,
Of sundry folk that shoued fast and croude.
The shyrle trumpettes were yreysed loud,
Up to the sky goth the blysfull sown,
When all this people enters in the town.
And many a another diverse instrumente,
That all tofore in at the gates went,
In sundry wise that made melodye.
That to here the heavenly armonye,
By musycke touched upon string and cord,
So even in one and justly they accord,
It would an heart rauyshe into joy.
And when they weren entered into Troy,
Amydde his palayse Pryamus alight.
And then anon as fast as ever he might,
Into a chamber rich and well besey,
The queen Heleyne in haste he does convey.
Co^maundyng eft with heart will and thought,
His officers that her fail naught,
Of any thing that she can bethyncke.
The spyces parted anon ye wine they drink.
And than the king took leave till supper,
And she there whiles changes her attire.
But of the joy that was in the town,
In every place where men went up and down,
I am to rude sothly all to write.
So much in heart the Troyans them delight,
That safe and sound returned in Paris.
They wend have been for joy in paradyse,
That he so well sped in his iourne.
And has not one lost of his meyne.
Whereof they be in heart glad and light.
And in all haste after the next night,
As write Guydo without tarying long,
Erely the morrow before the lark song,
In Pallas temple as mine auctor says,
Assured was by oath and eke by faith,
The bond of wedlock of him and of Heleine,
For evermore to last atwixte them tweyne.
The knotte is knitte of this sacrament.
And thus was done fully by thassent,
First of the king and also by thaduyse,
Of all the City in favor of Paryse.
And so the feast and great solempnitee,
Continued was with much royaltee,
Of this weddyng in myrthe and solace,
Through the town by eight days space.
What should I write the revel or ye daunces,
The fresh array or the countenaunces,
The scole touches the lokes amerous,
The prive grutche of them yt were Ialous,
The great iustes bourdes or tornaye,
Amydde palestre with many sundry play,
The diverse courses eke at every feste,
The large plente done to most and lest,
The strange meats the manner of service.
I have none english all for to deuyce,
I pass it over for I was not there.
But when this weddyng came unto ye ere,
Of Cassandra and first it did espy,
A thousand sithe alas she began to cry,
Of pyteous woe with vntressed heeres.
And said thus albe spreynte with teeres.
O wretched Troy errynge in this case,
Within thy self to suffer this trespase,
For to consent unto such folly,
In susteynyng of foul auouterye,
That Paris should taken unto wife,
The queen Heleyne whose husband is alive,
Oh woeful Troy to cruel is thy fate,
For to beware it is almost to late.
The time is come thou shalt destroyed be,
For many father shall his son see,
Hole on the morn that shall be slain or eve.
Amyddes the fyelde that will him sore grieve.
And many wife shall carefully bewepe,
To se her husband with large wounds deep.
Gryde through the body pale cold and grene
Alas how shall ye the sorrow mow sustain.
Ah wretched mothers how shall ye endure,
To se your children by cruel adventure,
Before you slain withouten remedy.
It will not help though ye clepe and cry.
Ah mother mine Heccuba the queen,
How shall thou bide ye sharp stoundes kene,
Thy worthy sons to se before the slawe.
And in the fyelde by cruelte ydrawe.
Ah blind people of death you take no head,
Why nylte thou work and do after my read,
And in this case more prudent be and wise,
To take away this Heleyne fro Paris,
As right requires withouten any more,
And to her lord justly her restore.
What trowen ye his theft and cruel deed,
Shall pass thus nay nay withouten dread,
The sword of vengeance shall full sharply byte
For his offense and we shall bear the wit.
Paleys and house to se within a throw,
And toures hye laid on the earth allow.
Alas alas I say to the Heleyne,
Unhappy woman causer of our pain.
Hard, vnsely, and also gracelese,
Vnwealfull woman disturbler of our peace.
Thou have us brought in mischefe and in were,
Kyndled a bronde to burn us all yfeare.
Alas thou art the ground and root of all,
Of many drery feast funeral.
That shall behold among us in this town.
And in this wise Cassandra up and down,
About ran in subarde and in street,
And cries in one whom ever that she mete,
Full often sith alas and welaway.
Till Pryamus because of her affray,
And for the noise that she as tho did make,
Without abode anon he does her take,
And bound her fast and fetred in prison,
Without mercy or remyssyon:
They took no head to her sad truth,
Nor to her words it was the more routhe.
But shet her up in bonds great and strong,
Without pity where she abide long.
And thus in prison a while I let her morn,
And to the greeks I will again return.
THunhappy time and in the same while,
That false fortune friendly began to smyle,
Upon Troyans and bad them to be merry,
For which highly they began their gods hery
Wenyng with joy to have assured weal,
Nothing aduerting the tournyng of ye whele,
Of her that lasts stable but a throw.
When men most trust her she can make a mow
Turn her forhead and her face wrythe,
Such joy she has her doubleness to kythe.
And to wrappe her clerenesse under cloud,
Against whose might there may no man hi^ shroud
When most she flattereth the^ is she lest to triste,
For in her joy the Troyans little wyste,
What she has mente to their confuciowne.
For while that they about in all the town,
Wend of greeks have gotten full recure,
Of their domages and to have be sure,
Through thilke pray ye Paris had the^ won.
The wicked fame and rumor is yronne,
With swift wings of al yt they have wroughte,
To Menelay the fydynges were ybrought,
Whiles he abode with Nestor at Pirrha,
First of the temple in Cithera,
How it was spoiled and the robberye,
Of gold and treasoure and the tyrrannye,
Upon his men by Troyans execute,
Both of assaylyng and of all the suite,
That on the greeks they made cruelly,
And how that they ne spared utterly,
Man nor woman that came in their way,
That they ne took and ladde as for pray,
To their ships. also of the fight,
Before the Castle that was on the night.
And alder last he hears of his wife,
Whom he loved as derely as his life,
More tenderly god wot a thousand fold.
For whom at heart he waxed is as cold,
As any stone and thereto pale of hew,
His hertye woe so inly began renew.
That first when he hard her name sown,
Without more anon he fell in sown,
For he ne might endure for to stand.
Til that duke Nestor took him by the hand,
And him adawed of his deadely swowe.
Alas quod he why have I lost and how,
My lives lust my hertes suffysaunce.
Ah death come now and make of my greuau^ce,
Fully an end with thy cruel darte.
That wounded am through on every part,
My heart also korne in every vein,
For you my wife for you mine own Heleine
That be deforced fro me welaway.
Farewell my joy farewell my old play.
Now have strangers of you possessyon.
Which will to me be full confusyon.
Alas I not how they cheryshe or trete,
My fair Heleyne that were to me so sweet.
Now ye are gone pensyfnesse me sleath,
I may not wait now but after death.
And after this amyd in all his woe,
This Menelay shope him for to go,
To his reygne but little there beside.
He axeth horse and said how he would ride,
Sole to complain of yt he felt him grieve,
But all this while Nestor will not leave,
To go with him for consolacion.
Of friendly right having compassion,
Him to comfort with all his full might.
Leading with him many a worthy knight.
Into the reygne of this Menelaus.
Than first of all the story tells us,
How they sent for king Agamenon.
And for Castor to come to him anon.
And for Pollux if it might so be,
And when that they comen were all three,
And saw their brother i^ such mischief brought
Almost murdered with his own thought,
Without abode the wise Agamenon,
To give him hoope and consolacion,
Did his labor and diligence entere.
Saying to him as ye shall after here,
Oh brother mine, what woe, what heuinesse,
What deadly sorrow thus inly may oppress,
Your knightly heart or trouble your manhead.
More furiously ywys than it is need.
For though that right required utterly,
You for to sorrow and hadden cause why,
Yet me seems by just providence,
Ye slyly should dyssymule your offense.
Since each wise man in his aduersytie,
Should fame chere and kepen in secree,
The inward woe that bynt him in distress.
By manly force rathest there compesse,
The spyryte of Ire and melancolye,
Where the people might it not espy.
The doctrine of them that be prudent,
Than when a man with furye is to rent,
To feign chere till time he se leisure,
That he of vengeance kyndell may the fire.
For sorrow out showed if I shall not feign,
Who so takes head it does things twain,
It causes friends for to syghe sore,
And his enemies to rejoice the more.
Thy friend in heart is sorye of nature,
Thine enemy glad of thy mysaduenture.
Wherefore in heart wha^ woe does most habou^de
Faineth gladness thine enemy to confound,
And show in chere as thou roughtest naught.
Of that most is grievous in thy thought.
And where you have most matter to complain,
Make there good face and glad in port ye feign.
For into tears though thou all distylle,
And rende thy self as thou would the spylle,
It helps not to a ledge thy greuaunce.
For honor another pursuit of vengeance,
With sorrow making mow be execute.
Though it last ay there comes thereof no fruit,
Men say how he that can dissimule a wrong,
How he is slyghe and of heart strong.
And who can be peasyble in his smerte,
It is a token he has a manly heart.
Not to weep as women in their rage,
Which is contrary to an high courage.
With word and weping for to avenge our pain,
And no means to worship to attain,
Let us with sword and not with words fight.
Our tunge appese, by ma^hod preue or might.
Word is but wind and water that we weep.
And though the tempest and of fluddes deep,
Of this two increase ever mo,
They may not do but augment our woe.
And to our foon thereof when they here,
Both of our dole and our heavy chere,
All is to them but increase of joy,
Wherefore brother a while do acoye,
The cruel tourment that byndeth you so sore,
For in proverb it has be said full yore.
That the prowess of a manly knight,
Is proved most in mischyefe and his might.
To be assured in aduersitee,
Strongly sustain what woe that it be,
Not cowardly his courage to submytte,
In every peril nor his honor flytte.
Through no dispeyre but hope always well,
And have a trust true as any stele.
Tacheue aye what he take an hand,
For finally I do you understand,
That of him self who has good fantasye,
To set upon and put in inpartye,
What that befall or hap what hap may,
Taking what chance tourneth on his play,
The fine of such gladly is victory.
They fail selde of the palm of glory.
And time is now to speak in words few,
Oh brother mine manhood for to show.
To pluck up heart and to make you strong,
And to venge your damages and wrong.
We shall echyone help and lay to hand,
Kings, Dukes, and lords of this land.
And all atones do our business,
I you behyght your harms to redress.
And in despyte who that ever us let,
We shall us lodge and our tents set.
Even in the fyelde before Troy town.
And it beseage to their destructiowne.
Albe thereof I set as now no day.
But brother first in all the haste we may,
Let maken letters without more sermon,
To all the lords of this region,
Of matter touching this your vyllanye.
To come to gyther and shape a remedy,
This is theffect of all that I can said.
And thus released somewhat of the pain,
Is Menelays through comfort of his brother,
For when he saw it might be none other,
And of his tale the king made an end,
Through out ye land he did his letters send.
First to her kynne and to his allye,
To come to help him of their curtesye.
And first of all to Menelaus,
Came Achylles and with him Patroclus.
And alder next the strong Dyomede,
And many another to help in this need.
And all echone in open Parliament,
They were accorded full by assente,
To be governed as Agamenon,
List to ordain in his discrecion.
Of this voyage they made him governor,
And of their hooste chieftaine and Emperor.
Among them all there was full unity,
Upon Troyans avenged for to be.
And from this purpose never to remewe,
But first I find Paris for to sewe,
The voyage took ye worthy brethern tweine,
Pollux and Castor to recure Heleyne.
Yet nevertheless as some books lysten tell,
That these kings no longer would dwell,
But alder fast as Paris was agone,
They took a ship and followed him anon.
With many worthy in their company,
And doubtless but if old books lie,
That or they had sailed days three,
To Troyewarde in the large see,
The tempest rose and wyndes did awake,
The heaven derke with the clouds blake,
That have the day turned into night.
And bright Phoebus was mirked of this light
The fyry lenen and stroke of the thonder,
Smote in the maste and shyuerde it a sonder.
It was so derke no light might adawe,
The sea began swell with many sturdy wawe.
That rose on hyghte large as any mount,
And fell down and swapped in the frounte,
Even of the ship and plunged it full low.
Now up now down forcast and overthrow,
Their ships were with tempest to and fro.
The fomy waters grene, white, and blo,
Of fervent boylyng and as pytche black,
With storm and wynd that al goes to wrack.
So hydously the blastes at them drive,
That every board began from other ryue.
And all is peryshed there escaped not a man.
But all atones as I rehearse can,
Be dead and drowned with tempest suddenly,
There escaped none I say you certainly.
Except the brethern such as books tell,
The one in heaven the other low in hell,
Were lords made tabyde eternally.
And some feign in their poesy,
How the gods have them defied,
Like in heaven and ystellifyed.
After their ships ware ygo to wrake.
They were made sterres in the zodyake.
And to the sign transfourmed utterly,
Which is of clerks called Gemyny.
The which sign and constellation,
Is to Mercury house and mansyon.
And is of kind femell and masculyne,
In which the Egle and also the Dolphyne,
Have their arysyng by reuolucion,
The tail also above the Dragon,
Is exaltate in the third degree,
Of Gemyny which sign has most pouste,
In hand and arms of man out of doubt,
Like as Lucina halt her course about.
And in this wise were the brether twain,
To heaven rapt as these poets feign.
After the tempest ye get no more of me.
For in this wise the greeks in the sea,
An end made and that full wylfully.
This ernest first came unhappily,
To them echone as ginning of their woe,
And final chance to the brether two.
How ye Greeks assembled to be adue^ged of yt Trojans for the rauishing of
Helein. Ca. xv
But for as much as Dares frigius,
Was in his book whilom curyous,
The form of Troiens and greeks to descriue
Like as he saw this auctour by his live,
The shape the form and complexiowne,
Both of the party of them of Troy town,
And of the greeks by good auisement,
In time of trewse among them as they went,
Seeing the manner of their governance,
Their port their chere with every circu^stau^ce,
Namely of tho that were of high degree.
He not forgate one loose nor qualyte,
Conditions and also their stature,
All to descryue Dares did his cure.
In Grekishe tunge beginning at Heleyne.
Like as tofore ye have herd me seyne.
Of her beauty and her semelynesse,
How seryously Guido does express,
Save he said as in a little space,
A strype there was endlong in her face,
Which as he write became her wonder well.
Embelyshing her beauty euerydele.
Like as Dares makes desripcion.
And first he says how king Agamenon,
Was of good shape and high of his stature,
And might in labor at the best endure.
Impatient to live in quiet,
He was to arms so egall and so mete,
Of color white and good proporcion,
And flemytek of his complexion.
Discrete and hardy and wonder virtuous,
And of speech right facundious.
And coud him well in every thing demene,
But Menelay of stature was but mean.
Proporcioned atwix short and long,
Worthy in arms deliver and right strong.
Of courage and of heart vygorous,
Semely also and aye more desirous,
To live in werre rather than in peace.
And furthermore to speak of Achilles,
He was right fair and of great semelynesse.
With aborne heyr crispyng for thickness.
With eyes glawke, large, stepe, and great,
and shuldred broad with breast full square and mete,
To endure in arms fell and coragious.
And of his look wonder amerous.
High of stature and large of gifts eke,
And more of strength than any other Greek.
And to spend he set little charge,
He was of heart so plenteous and large.
And in the field passing chyualrous.
And for to tell forth of Tantalus,
Of sanguine hew having much of reed,
Diverse eyed aye meuing in his head.
Of huge making also and of great strength,
Well answeryng his bread to his length.
Hatinge to strive where he saw no need,
Right true of word also as I read,
And never quarrel would he take on hand,
To fight for but he might understand,
That it were fully grounded upon right.
And than he would quyte him like a knight.
Cilcus Ayax was right corpulent,
To be well cladde he set al his intent,
In rich array he was full curyous.
Although he were of body corsyous,
Of arms great with shoulders square and broad,
It was of him almost a horse lode.
High of stature and boystous in a pres,
And of his speech rude and rechles.
Full many word in ydel him asterte,
And but a coward was he of his heart.
An other Ayax Thelamonyous,
There was also dyscrete and virtuous,
Wonder fair and semely to behold,
Whose heyr was black and upward ay ga^ fold.
In compass wise round as any sphere,
And of musyke was there none his pere.
Having a voice full of melodye.
Right well entuned as by Hermonye.
And was inuentife for to counterfete,
Instruments as well small as great,
In sundry wise longing to musyke,
And for all this yet had he good practike,
In arms eke and was a noble knight,
No man more orped nor hardyer for to fight.
Nor desirous for to have vyctorye,
Deuoyde of pomp hatyng all vaynglorye,
All idle laud spent and blow in vain.
Of Vlyxes what shall I also said,
That was so noble and worthy in his days,
Full of wyles and sleyghty at assayes.
In meaning double and deceyuable,
To forge a leysyng also wonder able.
With face plain he coud make it toughe,
Merry worded and but selde loughe.
In counsayling discret and right prudent,
And in his time the most eloquent.
And help to Greeks often in their need.
And for to speak of worthy Diomede,
Full well compact and grow well in length,
Of sturdy port and famous eke of strength.
Large brested and ferse also of sight,
And deceyuable of what ever he hight.
Hasty testyf to smite reckles,
And medlyng aye and but selde in peace.
To his servants full inpacient,
And baraytous where that so ever he went.
For little worth of disposycion,
And lecherous eke of complexion.
And had in love often sith his part,
Brenning within of Cupydes fyery darte.
And spechles full often felt he his sore.
What shall I said eke of Duke Nestore,
Of long stature and well compact wythall,
With corbe shoulders and of middell small.
In hands strong with arms large and round
In counsalyng prudent and wise yfounde.
Whose words were sugared with pleasaunce,
Upon his friend having aye remembrance.
For of his truth he ne coud feign.
But in anger he might him not refrain.
He was so fret with melancolye,
That no man might his ire modefye.
Albe it last but a little space,
Who could him suffer anon it would pace.
Lightly it came and lightly went away.
And Prothesalyus yt fresh was of array,
Wonder semely and of great beauty,
I trow a fayrer might no man se.
Of good stature deliver and full light.
No man swyfter and to speak of might,
Of his making he was passing strong.
Ferse of courage and loathe to take a wrong.
And to tell of Neptolomus,
He was of making wonder corsyous.
Whose heyr was black shining as does geat,
With eyes round broad and thereto great,
Large brested with a rysyng back,
And in speech stamerd when he spacke.
But in causes he could meddle well.
And in the law full deep he did feel.
For all his lust was beset on plees.
But for to tell of Pallamides.
King Naulus son withouten any wene,
Of face fair of body long and lene.
Of manful heart hardy in battle,
And desirous his enemy to assail.
Famylyer curteyse and thereto right tretable,
In all his deeds and inly worshipable.
In giving large and passing of great fame,
Of whose bounteful wide sprange the name,
In many land the storye tells thus.
And next I find of Polydamus,
The worthy Greek was of great thycknesse,
Of womb swolle enbossed with fatness.
That uneath he might him self sustene,
And yet of heart he was full proud and kene,
Right surquidrous and full of pensyfenesse,
And selde glad so thought did him oppress.
But Machaon like as write Guydo,
Of long and short was betwyx two.
Full proud and ferse deuoyde of pacyence,
And vengeable who him did offense.
And yet he was as balde as is a coote.
On whose forhead even by the root,
The heyr was fallen and wasted clean away.
And selde or never he would sleep a day.
And ouermore to tellen of Crysyde,
Stumbleth my pen for long or she dyed,
My master Chauncer did his diligence,
As to descryue the great excellence,
Of her beauty and that so maysterly,
To take on me it were but high folly:
In any wise to add more thereto.
For well I wot anon as I have do,
That I in sothe no thank deserve may:
By cause that he in writing was so gay.
And but I write I must the truth leave,
Of Troy book and my matter breue.
And over pass and not go by and by,
As does Guydo in order ceryously.
And that I must don offencion,
Through necligence or presumpcion,
So am I set even amiddes twain,
Great cause have I and matter to complain.
On Attropos that through her envy,
Tho brake the thread and made for to dye,
Noble Galfryde chief Poet of Brytayne.
Among our English yt caused first to rain,
The golden drops of Rethorike so fine.
Our rude language only tenlumine,
To god I pray that he his soul have.
After whose help of need I must crave.
And seek his book that is left behind,
Some goodly word therein for co find,
To set among the crooked lines rude,
Which I do write as by symylitude,
The rubye stant so royal of renown,
Within a ryng of coper or latowne.
So stant the making of him doubtless,
Among our books of English pereles.
They be full easy known so they be excellent.
There is no making to his equipolent.
We do but halte who so takes head,
That meddle of making without any dread.
When as we would his style counterfete.
We may alday our color grind and beat,
Tempre our asour and vermilyon,
But al I hold but presumpcion,
It follows not therefore I let be.
And first of all I will excuse me,
And proceed as I have erst begone,
And through his favor certain if I con.
Of Troy book for to make an end.
And there I left I will again now wend.
Unto Crisyde and though to my succor,
Of Rethoryke that I have no flower,
Nor hewes rich stones nor yet perre,
But al bare of curyosytye,
Though crafty speech to enbroude with her sleue,
Yet for all that now I will not leave,
But be as ay bold bayarde is the blind,
That cast no peril what way that he find,
Right so will I stumble forth of haed.
For vnconning and take no better head,
So as I can her beauty to discryue,
That was in sothe of al tho alive,
One of ye fairest this Calchas daughter dear
Thereto of shap of face and of cheer,
There might be no fayrer creature,
Of high nor low but mean of stature.
Her sonnishe heyr like Phoebus in his sphere,
Bound in a tresse bryghter tha^ gold wyere,
Down at her back low down behind,
Which with a thread of gold she would bind.
Full often sith of a customaunce,
Thereto she had so much suffysaunce,
Of kinds work without any were,
And save her brows joined were yfere,
No man coud in her a lack espyen.
And furthermore to speak of her eyes,
They were so heavenly persyng and so clear,
That an heart ne might him self stere,
Again her shyninge yt they ne wou^d would,
Throughout a breast god wot and make it yold
Also she was for all her semelinesse.
Simple and wise and full of soberness,
The best nouryshed that eke might be,
Goodly of speech fulfilled of pytye.
Facundious and thereto right tretable,
And as says Guydo in love variable.
Of tender heart and unsteadfastness,
He her accuses and newfanglynesse.
And after this Dares does rehearse,
Among other how the king of Perse,
Came to greeks with many worthy knight,
To help and further all that ever he might.
The which king was of stature long,
And wonder fat and as he write right strong.
Whose berd and heyr red as flawme of fire.
With eyes stepe and fervent of desire,
To have ado and stern of cheer and look,
And often sythes of sudden ire he quoke.
And had wertes plenty in his face.
And thus Dares shortly for to pace,
No more of Greeks writes as I find.
But of Trojans for to make mind,
Ceryously he does his style dress,
Them to discryue as I shall express.
The descryption of Priam, his sons and daughters and of the ariuall of ye
greeks tofore the Temple of Diane the goddess. Ca. xvi.
ANd first he says how king Pryamus,
Was of his cheer bening and gracious.
Of stature high with lymmes sklendre and long,
Delytyng much in musyk and in song.
And specially was most desirous,
To hear songs that weren amerous,
A semely man and of great hardiness,
And spoke but low as books us express,
Deuoyde of dread hating flatterye,
And all that could other gloss or lie,
True of his word and to every wight,
He did plainly equite and right.
For no mede him list not to declyne,
And loved early on morrow for to dine.
In his time one of the worthyest,
Of all kings and he that loved best,
Worthy knights and all that ever he knew,
That manfull were and of heart true.
He coud cherishe no man half so well,
With gold and gifts that they might feel,
His great fredome and larges eke withal.
And of his sons for to reken all,
The first of birth so as books tell,
Was worthy Hector of knighthod spri^g and well
Flower of manhod of strength pereles,
Sad discrete and prudent nevertheless.
Crop and root ground of chyualrye,
Of cheer demure and of curtesye,
He was example thereto of soberness:
A very myrour and for his gentilnesse,
In his time and thereto most renoumed,
To reken all and of goodlyhead.
The most famous in peace and werre.
Whose fame stretched both to nygh and far,
On each part he was so virtuous.
And to be loved most gracious.
Of brawne and bones compact by measure,
So well brethed in arms to endure.
So well performed by proporciowne,
So quick so lively and of most renown.
So huge made so well grown of length,
So well complet for to have great strength*
That in this world if I shall not feign,
Was never none that fully might attain,
To the prowes of this worthy knight
To praise his heart as well as his might.
And therwithall so wise and aduysee,
The lowlyest eke of his degree.
To rich and pore and of words few,
Unto all such cheer he could show,
Of his presence that glad was every wight.
When they at leysur had of him a sight.
He was so bening to them of the town,
And to his enemies like a ferse Lyowne.
He could him show when it was to do.
And in the field there might no man so.
To reken all his labor half endure.
For the storye does us plyan assure,
That he was never werye in battle,
Nor faint in heart his fomen to assail.
Of all good I find he was the best.
Prowess and virtue in him were set at rest.
So passingly that never was or shall,
None bore of mother so perygall,
To him of manhod nor of chivalry:
For all he passed but if books lie.
In whom nature ne was nothing to wit,
Save in his tunge he was let a lite.
And as some Auctours make mention,
He was sanguine of complexion.
And furthermore his brother Deiphobus,
Like as I find and also Helenus,
Were like Pryam that sothly of them three,
Was hard to espy any dyuersyte,
Of shape or form or of countenance,
Save of age there was no varyaunce.
Their father old and they were young and light,
And in Deiphobus was a worthy knight.
And in arms fame and excellence,
And Helenus in clergy and science,
Was well expert and took but little head,
Of all the werre knighthod and manhede.
But sothly Troylus if I shall discriue,
There was of heart no manlyer alive.
Nor more likly in arms to endure.
Well grown of hight and of great stature.
Young, fresh, lusty, hardy as a Lyo^,
Deliver and strong as any champyowne.
And perygall of manhood and of deed,
He was to any that I can of read.
In derryng do this noble worthy wight,
For to fulfill that longs to a knight.
Te secounde Hector for his worthiness,
He called was and for his high prowess.
During the werre he bare him self so well,
Thereto in love true as any stele.
Secre and wise steadfast of courage,
The most goodly also of visage,
That might be and most beninge of cheer,
Without change and of one heart entere.
He was always faithful just and stable,
Perseueraunt and of will immutable.
Upon what things he ones set his heart,
That doubilnesse might him dot pervert.
In his deeds he was so hole and plain,
But of his foon the sothe for to said,
He was so ferse they might him not wtstand,
When that he held his blody sword in hand.
Unto Greeks death and confusyon,
To them of Troy shield and protection.
And his knighthod shortly to accounte,
There might in ma^hod no man him surmou^t.
Through the world though me^ woulde^ seek,
To reken all Trojan nouther greek.
None so named of famous hardiness,
As books old of him do bear witness.
Except Hector there ne was such an other.
And after him to speak of his brother,
I mean Paris most passing of beauty,
That in this world no man might se,
In very sothe a more semely knight,
For as I read that he by title of right,
Of fayrnesse bare aye away the flower.
With locks yelowe like gold as of color,
And in shotyng most was his delight,
Having in hunting a full great appetyte.
And as Dares lyketh him discriue,
The best archer one that time a live.
And of his hand was eke a noble knight.
A manly man deliver and of good might.
And in the werre preued well he was.
And as I read the Trojan Eneas,
As mine Auctour lysteth to endyte,
Was well brested and of body lyte.
And bare in Troy wonder great estate.
And in his works discrete and temporate.
And had a fame of passing eloquence,
Wise of counsel and of great sapyence.
Most reno^med also of lecture,
Delyting much in books and scripture.
And ever glad both of port and cheer,
Stern of his look with persyng eyes clear.
And among all dwelling in the town,
To speak of goods and possessyowne,
Of castelles and Toures great plentye,
I find sothly that none in that City,
Ne might attain unto his richesse.
And had also for all his worthynesse,
Of gold and Iewelles passing great treasor.
And his fellow that hight dan^ Anthenor,
Was sklender long and of great dalyau^ce.
And circumspect in all his gouernaance.
Well-beloved also of Pryamus,
And of words wonder copyous.
Resowning ay into mirth and play.
And he was bouerdyng all the long day.
Among his feres and in company,
So dryely that no man might espy.
So sobre he was in his countenance.
That every wight had great plesaunce,
To hear him talk when that he was glad.
And albeit that he of port was sad,
Yet all his speech full of bouerdes was,
And his son called Pollidamas,
Was like his father of stature and of make.
Ythewed well that there was no lack,
In his person gentill and right true,
Wonder strong and pale also of hew.
And to ire stered suddenly.
Albe in words he kept covertly,
But all his heat pass would anon.
And to tell of king Mereone,
Large brested and of his making all,
The best compacte and the most tall,
Of shape and form that men could find,
And eke so well performed up by kind,
That none was like to him nigh ne far.
His locks yelow and crisping was his hear.
Still of his port and gentill with to play,
And inly strong maistryes to assaye.
Wonder curteyse to no wight rygorous,
And wrought in ariues deeds meruaylous.
As in this book hereafter shall be seen.
Now after him Heccuba the queen,
Like the story my style I must enclyne.
Whose lymmes all rather did declyne.
To shappe of man than to womanhead,
As says Guydo. but in work and deed,
She was in soth the most womanly,
The best aduysed and most prudently,
In her deeds could her self govern,
That man's wit might in no wise discern,
To find a better doubtless than was she.
So true example of femynyte.
She was in sothe and to every wyghte,
Benynge of port and gracious of syghte.
To pore also pyteous and mercyable,
And unto nedy wonder cherytable,
The wife of Hector her daughter eke in law
After her lore seemed much to draw,
Andromecha the faithful true wife.
So good, so just, the which in all her life,
In honest did aye her most delight.
Long of her shap with breasts fair and white.
With ruddy chekes ennewed by measure,
With persynge eyes of angelyke figure.
Leke gold her tresses and rosen lyppes red,
Ylyche fresh, of color nothing dead.
Thereto she was of chere the goodlyest,
To rich and pore and spoke always the best,
Of every one aye helpyng that she might,
That no man heavy went out of her sight,
And over this every gentylman,
She further would in all that ever she can.
And gladly ever did her dylygence,
To get grace to them that did offense.
This was her usage and condition,
She was so filled of compassyon.
That women all might of her lere.
And Cassandra her own daughter dear,
Was of stature wonder womanly.
Of color white and therewith right semely.
Save in her face in sundry places were,
Many wertes growyng here and there.
And all her joy and felycytee,
Was to kepen her virginite.
In freelte that women have of kind,
Through virtue moral she put out of mind.
And of all folly fleing occasyon,
So aye in study and contemplacyon,
Of sundry books she would her occupye.
But most of all to know Astronomye.
Of prophecye a spyryt also had she,
And some men say she was one of three,
Of thilke women that Cebyle bare the name.
Of whom ye renown floureth and the fame,
Unto this day and is as yet full grene.
And to tell of young Polycene,
And to descryue her beauty up and down,
It were in soth a foul presumpciowne,
To take on me now so great a thing,
To clymbe so hye it passes my connyng.
Sith nature has in forgynge of this maid
Her connyng all utterly assayed.
To make her fair above each creature.
And said proudely se how I nature,
When that my list enbellyshe can my work.
Like as Phoebus among the clouds derke,
Is passing clear so in comparyson,
I can my work and operacion,
Right as me list adourne and make fair.
So painte and floryshe it shall not appayre.
And my colors so craftily dispose,
Of the lylye and of the fresh rose,
And so ennewe them yt they shall not fade.
But aye be one and in this wise I made,
My dear daughter as ye know who^ I mean.
The young fresh and fair Polycene.
Askaunse that none can this craft but I,
This in her work bosted utterly,
Nature her self when she this may wrought.
As she that fully in her heart thought,
Above all other to maken her excel.
And of beauty to be the very well.
And therwithall in shap nor in stature,
Ne was no lack I dare you well assure.
And god above gave her soueraintee,
In all thewes and would she should be,
Crop and root named of womanhead,
With fulsomnesse of all goodlihead.
So passyngly that it were ydelnesse,
Me to presume in words to express,
Her beauty all it were a vain travail.
For well I wot mine english would fail.
In such matter to talk felingely,
Who ever can it certain it am not I.
Therefore I pass and straight now will I go,
To my matter for Dares of no mo,
In all his book makes menciowne,
Of them of greece nor of Troy town.
In special he put no mo in mind,
Than ye have herd save as ye shall find,
In this storye when it comes thereto,
Of their knighthod and who that best has do,
Lasting the siege the manner euerydell,
And right anon to sharp my poyntell,
I will me dress this storye to entreat,
Of all the werre and to tellen you the great.
THe time nigheth after this as yore,
The breme winter with his trostes hoar,
Began to aswage of his bitter cold.
When Apollo passed was the hold,
Of the sign that we call Aquarye.
And in the fyshe fer in Februarye,
Yronne was toward the Ariete.
And that season with his feynte heat,
On hills high began his beams smite.
Making the snow with fair flakes white,
Into water kyndely to relente.
Which from above to the valey went.
That nere floudes of the sudden thowe,
The grene mede began to ouerflowe.
And the yse began s^oundmele destyll,
Down fro the hight the brokes for to fill.
With fomy streams of the wawes small,
By broke banks as they did auale.
When lusty Vere with his young grene,
Yrecomforted by the son shene,
Which little and litel his hewes still ame^deth,
Ayein his sphere as Titan up ascends.
When March approaches and branches over all,
Began blow out and Equinoctial,
Of Vere is hallowed the season amerous,
When the Greeks proud and courageous,
With hole the flower of the chiualrye,
Assembled were and holy their nauye.
In the haven that was most of fame,
And of Athenes that time bare the name.
Ygathered was by assent echone,
Towadre Troy to sail and to gone,
So great a number that since the world began,
Is remembered of no manner man.
That together in one company,
Was met yfeare so passing a nauye.
Of manly men who so list take heed,
In this storye as ye shall after read.
And by and by to make descripcion.
Mine auctour tells how Agamemnon,
The worthi king an hundred ships brought,
With worthy knights stuffed as the^ ought.
And Menelay on whom lay most ye charge
Has with him brought syxty ships large.
Out of his land that called is Sperten.
And from Boece full of manly men,
Came fifty ships ye story tells thus,
With Prothenor and with Achelaus.
And from the land called Sithemenye,
Came syxty ships in the company,
Of the Duke that hight Achalaphus,
With who^ was eke fresh and desirous,
Helmyus the Earl the worthy knight.
And fyfty ships enarmed for to fight,
With him brought the king Epistrophus.
Only with help of king Thedius.
And Thelamon whom Ayax men call,
Full renowned for to reken all,
Has fifty ships brought to his Journey.
From Salerne his royal chief City.
With Earls Dukes and many worthy knight,
Eueryche of them in steel armed bright.
And Duke Tenter with Amphiacus,
Earl Daryon and noble Theseus.
This ylke four full worthy of renown,
In this voyage came with Thelamowne.
And old Nestor cruel of heart and thought,
Out of Pylon has fyfty ships brought.
The king of Dyames yt full worthy was,
And eke the king that hight also Thoas.
Brought with them in their company,
An hundred ships knightlye for to guye.
And Thelamou ycalled Pyleus,
That was in arms fell and d^spytous,
With him brought from his land so far,
Six and thyrty ships for the werre.
Amphymacus and king Polibete,
Thyrty ships brought to the flete.
From Calcedoyne and Mereo^ the king,
With Ydameus had in their ledinge,
Four score ships with them out of Crete.
And Vlixes with the greeks did mete.
with fyfty ships stuffed out of Trace.
Toward Troy proudly for to pace.
Duke Mellens full of manly men,
Brought eke with him great ships ten.
And moreover the duke Prothecatus.
And the duke named Prothesylaus,
To the haven that called was Athene,
Brought fyfty ships enarmed bright and shene
From Phylyarcha the strong mighty isle.
And Machaon as Guydo does compyle,
With his brother Polydris also,
From their country Trycionyco,
Brought two and twenty ships as I find.
And from Phyces as it is had in mind,
With Achilles came fyfty full by number.
And from Rhodon Troyans to encombre,
Came twenty ships with king Thelapolus.
And with the duke that hight Antipus,
Out of the land that Hesyda men call,
Of which the folk be nyghe cherles all.
With sail crossed again the bright heaven,
In number came ships eke elleuen.
And with them was of name full famous,
The worthy duke called Amphymacus.
And Polibethes the strong mighty king,
Fyfty ships brought at his coming,
Out of Richa the noble regiowne.
And with this king full worthy of renown,
Was Latnisus the duke eke as I read.
And as I find the noble Diomede,
Of ships great I say no small barge,
Has with him brought fro Calidonye and Arge,
Fourscore in number sothly this no tale.
And Thelemus and mighty Euryale,
Two manly men and in arms sage,
With Dyomede came in this voyage.
And Polyphebus brought ships seven.
And Phyneus the hardy king enleuen.
And Prothoylus as I can specifye,
Brought fyfty ships unto this nauye.
Fro Demenesa the mighty regyon.
And Carpenor as made is mention,
Brought fyfty eke from Capadye his country
A great prouynce of which king was he.
Tricorius of Beysa lord and king,
Brought two and twenty eke in his coming.
And finally if I shall not lie,
Full many ship was in this nauye.
Mo than Guydo makes rehersayle,
Toward Troy with greeks for to sail.
For as Homer in his discrypcion,
Of greeks ships makes mention,
Shortly affyrmyng ye man was never borne,
That such a nombre of ships saw toforne.
Countyng the ships that Palamydes,
Brought with him their nombre to increase.
That when these lords aforsayd euerychone
Kings, dukes, and earls all in one,
Assembled were without any wene.
Before the haven that called is Athene.
THe famous king great Agamenowne,
So wise, so worthy, and of so hye renown,
As he that was Prince and governor,
Of greeks hooste anon did his labor,
His busy cure and waker dylygence,
By high advise and inward prouydence,
To deliberate wisely in this need,
What were to do or that he proceed,
In this matter, castyng up and down,
And reuoluynge of high discreciowne,
That he may so begin that the end,
Conclude well that wylfulnesse ne shende,
Holy their purpose through no rakelnesse.
Ne through none haste without auysenesse.
So that they may before so wisely see,
That finally they in felicitye,
Accomplish may their purpose in certain.
And so this king upon a large plain,
Out of the City little from the stronde,
With his lords will for nothing wonde.
To have counsel this wise Agamenon,
Making anon a conuocacyon,
Of such as were more great inspeciall.
He syttyng first in his see royal,
And his lords eueryche in his see,
Like as they were of hye or low degree.
And all Tumulte stynted and scylence,
Was through ye prese to gyne him audyence,
When he anon in full sobre wise,
Began his tale as I shall deuyse.
SYres quod he I pray you takes head,
That be so noble and so renowmede.
Both of wisdom and of worthiness,
Of manhood eke and of high prowess.
That of knyghthode the report and the fame,
Thrughout ye world rebou^deth to your name.
For doubtless the flower of chyualrye,
Men may now find in this company.
For who saw ever of manly men yfeare,
Together met as there be now here.
So young, so fresh, couragyous also,
So well besene for to have a do.
Or so lykely sith the world began,
Without raskayle so many knyghtly man.
Of kings, dukes, and many an other lord,
As be now here of will and one accord.
And of one heart assembled in this place.
That if fortune and gods of their grace,
Be not behind our Journey to repreue,
We may not fail our purpose to achyeue.
For I deem him plainly in arage,
Or worse than wood that durst this voyage,
In any wise perturbe or presume,
To take again us outher to assume,
By might on him of malys to exscyte,
Our worthynesse were it never solyte,
Us to provoke to Ire or do offense.
That we ne should by mortal recompense,
Aquyte his mede as it lies in our might.
In this assemble of many worthy knight,
Amouges which an hundred and yet mo,
I could chese able for to go,
By manly force and knyghtly suffysaunce,
To take on him for to do vengeance,
Upon Troyans by him self alone.
For which that we be gathred echone,
That with his men were suffycient,
To execute the sum of his intent.
And it accomblyshe in felicitee,
The cause I mean for which that all we,
Assembled ben together hye and low.
And also this to you is not unknow,
How shamefully Troyans have us grieved.
Provoked us and wylfully ymeued,
To rise again them to have recure of right,
Of wrongs done with all our force and might.
Wherefore let us by one assent and will,
Set to have as it is right and skyll.
Redress to find of that we now complain,
And of one heart do our busy pain,
Upon Troyans a werre for to make.
And I suppose we shall them so awake,
That they shall learn or we thense wend,
To remember to the worlds end,
Now they hereafter shall dare take an hand,
For to presume in greece more to land.
Or to be bold while they have life or space,
Again greeks more to trespace.
For whose offense as who says do but late,
Within our heart the deadly brennyng hate,
The fervent hete and the gredy ire,
Fro day to day so sets us a fire,
That it renews the constreynt of our peine.
So inwardely that if I shall not feign,
We must of reason of so high greuaunce,
Our self enforce for to do vengeance.
As right requereth and our just sorrow,
Compels us both at eve and morrow,
On Troyans our harms to bewreke.
And for to stop the tounges that so speak,
To our reprefe and to our villanye,
We must attones shapen remedy.
That our foen henseforth may have dread,
For to do worse to us as god forbed.
In time coming if through our patience,
We lykely suffer their importable offense,
To pass forth and take of it no head.
Sith never yet of Greeks could I read,
That any man did reprefe to their name.
That justly might rebounde to their shame.
Withouten this that they it quyte again,
Through their manhood so openly and plain,
That no man might of them seyne ere this,
In any wise or report amysse.
Ne we shall not dyssymule in this case,
With chere oppressed nor with dreadful face,
To let slide or lightly over go,
The great offenses that were so late ydo,
Which might happly turn to us and ours,
A great reprefe and to our successors.
In tune coming and shamfully bespoke,
Now that greeks durst not be a work,
Upon their foon the which may not be.
I you ensure sithe that all we,
Be of one will to refourme our wrong,
And therwithall so mighty and so strong.
That who is he that could in bread and length,
A right rehearse our power and our strength.
Or who durst ever our worthynesse assail,
That he ne should withouten any fail,
Repent in heart or at the end rewe.
Save Troyans this other day of new,
Of wylfulnesse in a folly rage,
Into our land made a voyage,
Unware of us and with their pray home went,
The which they shall full hastily repent.
For their trespace and great offencyowne.
For all the world knows up and down,
But late a gone how greeks but a few,
Upon Troyans their power did show.
And slew their king called Lamedowne,
Father to Pryam now king of that town.
And clean fordyd both toures and City,
And slew up all the commynaltye.
From greeks sword whom yt them list spare,
Those among us in servitude and care,
Compleine their harm yt may not be recured
Than how may they stand full assured,
Again us all to hold chaumpartye.
That have so worthy in our company.
For it is lykely a thousand to acheue,
That four or five so lightly might preue.
And yet one thing affirm well I dare,
Of our cummyng Troyans are well ware.
And do their labor and their diligence,
Against us to maken resystence.
With all their might I know it out of doubt.
And gather friends in countries all about,
To help them and strength them in their need.
Us to withstand if so they may speed.
But finally one thing I counsel,
From this haven or we ferther sail,
That we may be the more fortunate,
Of one assent to make ambassyat,
And prudently or we further wend,
Into Delos in all haste we send.
Which is an isle a little here beside,
More discretely our journey to provide.
That we may have the better hap and grace,
Of Apollo Patron of this place.
To have of him if that we may speade,
Fynall answer in this great need.
Of our exployet how that it shall fall,
If it be so ye will assenten all.
To this counsel the most and eke the least.
And they echone thought for the best,
To condescende to this conclusyon:
Without any contradiction.
And all attones without any dread,
To preyse his counseyle and his wise read,
And thereupon distretly as they ought,
As says this story even thus they wroughte.
How Achilles and Patroclus were sent to Delos to receive answer of god
Apollo, how they should speed against ye Troyans. Cap. xvii.
AFter the time that Agamenon,
Concluded had fully his reason,
As ye have herd and his sentence fined,
The greeks be of heart full enclyned,
And with one voice accorded plainly thus,
That Achilles and also Patroclus.
For common profyt sith they were sage.
Shall take on them ye charge of this message,
To Appollo for answer for to gone.
And to ship they them in haste anon.
And sail forth by the large sea,
Toward Delos and in prosperitee,
They be aryued and ycome to land.
The which isle as I understand,
And as mine auctor says without les,
Has his scyte among the Cyclades,
Where men with rocks have so much a do,
Amyd the sea called Helespontico.
Of which isle to make descrypcion,
I must awhyle make disgressyon,
Fro my matter as mine auctour does,
For in this isle Isodorus in soth,
Reherseth plainly how Latona the queen,
Appollo first and Dyane the shene,
Ychilded has by Iubyter her lord.
When he and Juno were at such discord,
As write Ouyde for a little while,
And so befell that in this little isle,
There was a temple whylom dedicate,
Unto Appollo and also consecrate,
In his worship of old foundation.
That was honored by great devotion.
Because Appollo with his beams clear,
After the flood first there did appear.
To show his horns rather there and soon.
And eke Dyane that called is the moon,
Of which showing this isle bears the name,
Into this day that is of so great fame.
Only be apperyng of this ylke twain,
For Delos is in greek no more to said,
Than a showing or an appearance.
And thus began the great reverence,
To Appollo first and the honor eke,
To him ydone of so many greek.
And to his sister that called is Dyane,
The pale moon that can so wax and wane.
And called is of Paynems a goddess,
That whylom was in wod an hunteresse.
And this lady with the son her brother,
Of this isle has lordshyp and none other.
Only for they at their nativity,
Showed their light first in that country.
The which isle greeks also call,
Ortygya in their language all.
Because Curlewes were there first yseyne,
For Otygyas is no more to seyne,
Than a Curlewe in Grew I understand,
For they were first engendered in that land.
And Appollo is called eke Tytan,
That in his time so much worship wan.
Long before or he was made a sterre,
With Iubiter when that he held werre,
And he also ycalled is Phoebus,
And of some ynamed is Phyteus,
For of Phyton he had the victory.
When he him sl^we to his great glory.
The great serpent here in earth allow,
With his arowes and his mighty bow.
Of which conqueste the great god Cupyde,
Had envy and even through the side,
He wounded him deep to the heart.
With ye arowe of gold yt made him sore smerte.
And of Phyton that Phoebus made thus fine
Came Phetonysses that can so deuyne,
I mean women that be deuyneresses:
Through dead men these false sorceresses.
As one whylom raised Samuel,
For love of Saul the bible can you tell.
And in his temple large long and old,
There was a statue all of pured gold.
Full great and high and of huge weight,
And therein was through the deuylles sleyght
A spyryte unclean by false illusyon,
That gave answer to every questyon.
Not the ydoll dombe as stock or stone,
And thus the people deceived euerychone,
Were by the fend brought in great error.
To do worship and such false honor,
With sacryfyce and cursed mawmentrye.
And in this wise began ydolatrye.
As in this place to tell I me cast.
And eke how long it abode and sith last,
Compendiously I purpose to descryue,
Gynnyng and end as ye shall here blyue.
Withouten any ambyguytee,
For at the birth and nativity,
Of christ Ihesu his incarnaciowne,
All the ydolles braste and fell adowne.
And vanyshed and were brought to naught,
When Herodes the blesfull child sought,
Through his malis and crueltye horrible,
As holy write records and the bible.
For which pursuit and persecucion,
There did appear tho by auisyon,
An holly angel to Joseph as he sleep,
And bad him rise and also take keep,
Unto the child and also to Marye,
And go his way or Herod him aspye.
Into Egypt the great regyon.
Like as the gospel makes mencyon.
And right anon as he came to that land,
There was none ydol yt upright might stand.
But to shyuered unto pieces small,
This holy writ plainly and no tale.
And was recorded first of Esaye,
How that our lord on an easy skaye,
Ascend should and hold forth his weye.
Toward Egypt and therwithall should deye,
All mawmentrye and no longer dwell.
But as the Jews record of Ismael,
That he was first yt mawmentrye has fond,
And made of claye an ydoll with his hand.
And as Paynems write and tellen us,
That alder first as Prometheus,
That found ydolles shortly to conclude.
For symulacrum comes of symylytude.
That is nothing plainly but likeness.
Made after man his image to express.
Unto which paynems in their guyse,
With false honor and cursed sacryfyse,
Begone first this ryte for dread of man.
And some say how Belus first began,
Such false worship and such mawmentrye.
In their books as clerks specyfye.
That of Assiry was lord and governor.
After whose death his son is in honor.
That Nynus hight an image did do make
To be worshypped only for his sake.
All of brent gold by false effection,
And set it up for consolacion,
And for amynde and a memoryall,
Unto the which with heart will and a^l,
Of ignorance and of fleshely love,
He did honor as to god above.
In his temples most of excellence.
And made his people to do reverence,
And said in heaven he masdefyed.
That of no man it durst be denied.
Till after soon but a little while,
A wicked spyryte folks to begyle,
In this ydoll entered to abide,
And gave answer upon every side,
To the people of what them list demand.
And they again what he will command,
Obey fully the folk of all Assyrye.
Which unto god did great iniurye.
Making the people in such error fall,
And some Belus, and some Bell him call.
And some Balym, and some Belphegore,
And fell in error always more and more.
And Beelzebub he named was also.
Which name is made of these words two,
Of Bell, and zebub that thus syngnyfye,
For Bell is God, and zebub is a fly,
Than Beelzebub together specyfyes,
Joined in one the great god of flies.
And of this feigned false ydolatrye,
Began all the world worship mawmentrye.
For some Saturn god of gods all,
Began in their error falsely for to call.
That whylom was the mighty king of Crete
And gave him name after the planete,
That in heaven has so large a sphere.
And as Poets in their fables lere,
That he before through his sapyence,
Saw in his divine prouydence,
How a son should of him descend.
And of Juno the gods as he wend,
That should him plainly fro his reign expel,
And suffer him no longer for to dwell,
In his kingdom when he came to age.
Whereof Saturn fill in such rage,
That he will shape remedy therefore,
Byddyng his wife when ye child were bore,
That she to him should it bring anon.
Instead whereof to him she brought a stone.
To save her child she did her business,
And this Saturn through his gredinesse,
The stone deuoureth in his melancolye.
And this Saturn but if books lie,
Had sons three a daughter and no mo.
Iubiter, Neptunus, and Pluto,
But Iubiter greatest was of name,
Most renowned and worthyest of fame.
Among Paynems as it is veryfyed.
For they so high have him magnifyed,
That they him call god of fire and air,
Next to Saturn borne for to be heir.
And next to him in books as I read,
Is god of battle mighty Mars the read.
And next Appollo so clear shene and bright
The days eye and voyder of the night,
Cherisher of fruit, herb, flower, and corn,
The which god like as is said toforne,
In Delos is worshypped and honored.
And after Venus that often has socoured
Many lover the fair lusty queen,
And them aledge of their wounds grene,
That first was hurt with her fyrye bronde,
As she that is goddess of many land.
And all the world has in her demeyne,
Fast enbraced in her fyry cheyne.
I mean the lady that called is Venus.
And next in order is Mercurius.
That in speech has most excellence,
Of rethoryke and sugared eloquence.
Of musyke song and of Hermonye,
He has lordshyp and hole the regalye.
Next the Moon that wexe can and wane.
Called Lucyna and also eke Dyane,
That in Delos has her mancyon,
Like as tofore is maked mencyon,
Now full of might now horned pale is she,
Lady of change and mutabilitie.
That selde in one halte her any time.
And so fare they that be borne in her clyme,
That aye delight in things that be new,
Whose heart is cladde in many sundry hew.
So they be diverse in their affections,
And in this wise in sundry regyons,
Of mawmentrye is the venym run,
Like as clerks well deuyse konne.
For as I find of the Mauryens,
They worship Iubam and Egypciens,
Honor ysis after their connyng.
Whylom daughter of Inachus the king.
That taught the^ first their land to ere and sow.
And also letters for to read and know,
And in lecture to set their business,
For which thing they call her a goddess.
And Iubyter honored is in Crete.
Where he whylom held his sovereign seat.
And on them laid many diverse charge,
With Egles beaten in his baner large.
And he was lord of air land and see,
His royal kingdom dividing into three.
In the highest him self does contune,
And hoole the sea he gave unto Neptune,
And last the earth to hold his sea royal,
He gave to Pluto that god is infernal.
And alder last when he was stellyfyed,
This Iubiter was most magnyfyed,
Of them of Crete about over all.
To whom they made for a memoryall,
A large tomb and statue high alofte,
And him honored in their rites often.
With encens and with other sacryfyse.
And of this matter ferther to deuyse,
The latins with their busy diligence,
In their rytes didden reverence,
To the gods if it be credyble,
Ycalled Fawny that be inuisyble.
And have their dwelling in the wodes grene.
Albe that men their figure may not seen.
And of the Romans further to deuyne,
They most i^ honor have their god Quirine.
The which whylom as books tellen us.
Among them was called Romulus.
That bylte first the walls of the town,
And from an herd he came to such renown.
Through his manhod and his worthiness.
The spear of whom as books said express,
As he the head pytched in the ground,
It began anon like as it is found,
To flouryshe flower and budde by miracle,
And of nature had none obstacle,
To wax grene with fresh blomes new.
And for the manhood that men in him knew.
For his knyghthod and his worthy fame,
The worthy knights of Rome bare ye name,
After him and were Quirites called.
High in heaven when that he was stalled,
Among the gods and ydeyfied,
And thus Romans have him glorified,
As for their god with gold and great expenses.
And as I read the Athenienses,
Of hoole heart chosen have to serve,
The goddess great that called is Minerue,
And Pallas eke with her cristall shield,
That with Neptunus even amyd the field,
Held champartye with women on her side.
And he with men full surquedous in pride,
Defends him for gyuing of the name,
To Athenes a City most of fame.
That is to said whether he or she,
Should of right give name to the City.
Till it befell as they began to strive,
Suddenly there sprange a fair Olyue,
For Pallas part grene and fair blossominge,
On the other side a well began to spring,
For him Pluto with water large and deep.
Of which thing Apollo took good keep,
Which in his dome was not reckles,
And for the Olyue tokeneth love and pease,
Water trouble conteck werre and strife,
He gave sentence anon diffynitife,
How Pallas should that called is Minerue,
The palm plainly of this strive discerue.
And she anon gave name to the town,
And called it by high discrecyowne,
Athenes the which in special,
Is to said a City immortal.
For wisdom first there began to flower,
And for this skyll this City did honor,
Mighty Pallas goddess of science,
And her aye most had in reverence.
And they of Pauye in all their region,
Worship most the queen of Citheron,
I mean Venus full of doubilnesse,
Of whom before somewhat I did express.
And in her temple there full solemplye,
They set her highest and most rychly,
With gold and asure her statue they do paint.
And other colors that may never faynte.
And set her up in the highest see,
Of all the temple that all men may se.
And she stant naked in a wawy see,
Enuyron her with goddesses three,
That be assygned with busy attendaunce,
To wait on her and do her obseruaunce.
And flowers fresh blewe, read, and white,
Be her about the more for to delight.
And on her head she has a chaplet,
Of roses read full plesauntly yset.
And from the head down unto her foot,
With sundry gommes and oyntementes soote,
She is ennoynte sweter for to smell.
And all alofte as these Poets tell,
By dowues white fleing and eke sparowes,
And her beside Cupyde with his arowes.
Her blind sone for to hurt and dear,
And loses often and smite he wot not where.
As he must needs because he is blind,
And thus honored and had most in mind,
Among this people is Venus the goddess.
And Naxyens do their business,
To serve Bachus the mighty god of wine,
Whose lycour is most precious and fine,
To recomforte hertes and to make glade,
And to refreshe hewes that be fade,
In faces pale and makes wits sharp,
Loses tunges and make them loud to carpe.
And causes them to walk at lybertee,
And to discure things that be secree.
Without advise or discrescion,
For where as wine has domynacion,
No secretnesse may be kept in mewe.
And some of them that Bachus serve and sewe,
Among to him have such devotion,
That they some while void of all reason,
Hasty and wood and without all dread,
And some also so toty in their head,
That they are void of power and of might,
And have no foot for to stand vpryght.
And yet they be as Iargaunt as a pie.
Right pale cheared with a glasye eye.
Full of reason til his wind be spent,
For or woman that is vynolent,
Is verily a beast unreasonable.
And to my dome I hold them eke unable,
To be accepted in any company.
When that their tunge wadeth on the lie.
That they ne may bring forth a word.
And thus Bachus the strong and mighty lord,
Full often causes folks for to err,
For to debate and to maken werre.
Of hastynesse where as is no need,
Wherefore it is wisdom that men dread.
His sleyghty workyng or they fall in snare,
And feeble brains by measure for to spare.
Or they unawarely arested be and take,
And or Bachus make them for to shake.
In a fever worse than tercyen,
If it of custom be cotydyen.
Alterat with Bachus mighty Ious.
And affered of tourning of the house.
And fordreynt on the dry land,
When he has lost the use of foot and hand.
And with a straw plays like an ape,
And devoutly ginneth for to gape,
And noddeth often with his Iowsy head,
As he had on an heavy cappe of lead.
And who that be of this condition,
He enter may the relegyon,
Of mighty Bachus for habylite,
The which lord has the souereynte,
Both of honey and of milk thereto.
And of bawme that is so rich also.
And lordshyp has of high power divine,
Both of grapes and of every vine.
Them to nouryshe through his influence.
Of whom the honor and the reverence,
Is raised most as I understand,
Among vynters in every manner land.
Because he is to them so gracious.
And they of Lemnos worship Vulcanus,
The god of fire Iubyter his smythe,
The which forgeth on his black stythe,
The great thonder hydous and horrible.
And the leuens that whylom be visible,
Into the west out of the Oryent.
And gasteth us with his dredful dent.
The smotry smyth this swarte Vulcanus,
That whylom in heart was so Ialous,
Toward Venus that was his wedded wife,
Whereof there rose a deadly mortal strife,
When he with Mars began her first espy,
Of high malice and cruel false envy.
Through ye shining of Phoebus bemes bright,
Lying abed with Mars her own knight.
For which in heart he brent as any glede,
Making the slaundre all abroad to sprede.
And began thereon falsely for to muse,
And god forbede that any man accuse,
For so little any woman ever.
Where love is set hard is to disseuer.
For though they do such thing of gentilnesse,
Pass over lightly and bear none heuinesse,
Lest that thou be to women odius.
And yet this smythe this false Vulcanus,
Albe that he had them thus espied,
Among Paynems yet was he defied.
And for that he so falsely them awoke,
I have him set last of all my book.
Among the gods of false mawmentrye,
And in this wise began ydolatrye,
As ye have herd through oppynyons,
Of people erryng in their affections.
That all is false who the truth search.
For by teaching of all holy church.
By holy doctrine and tradicions,
We shall despise such opynyons.
Which of the fend were found not of late.
For when aungelles in heaven were create.
He that of all had the prelacye.
Of whom the prophet called Esaye,
Writes right thus how the Cedres grene,
Of Paradyse were not so fair to seen,
Planys nor fyrre in heyght soth to said,
To his highness might not attain,
Nor all the trees so delycious,
Of Paradyse were not so precious,
Nouther in sight nor in semelinesse.
To be egall to him as in fayrnesse.
But through his pride and his surquidrye,
When so he said to god that sit so hye,
He will be like and also set his see,
High in the north passing his degree.
He was cast down with all his legyons,
From the fair heavenly mansyons,
All suddenly into the pyt of hell,
Perpetually there for to dwell.
Of whom was said when he fell so far,
How fell thou so O thou morrow sterre,
From the mids of the stones bright,
That be so persyng and fyery of their light.
That whilom were for thy great bryghtnesse,
Called Lucifer of who^ Christ says express,
In his gospel how he saw fro heaven,
Satan descend like the fyery leuene.
The old serpent that is so low yfall,
Whom the Hebrews in their tunge call,
Bemoth that does in latin plain express,
A beast rude full of cursednesse.
The vile serpent he Leuiathan,
Whom I sydore well descryue can,
Which of kind is never conuersaunt,
In wells trouble and has most his haunt,
Among waters and in the large sea.
Of whom says David like as ye may se,
In his Psalter making mention,
Of the snake the monstrous Dragon,
full of venym and of hard grace,
Which in the sea large and great of space,
With foul adders has his mansyon.
Unto mankind to do illusyon.
Whom whylom saw the holy monk Bra^da^
As he sailed forth by the Occyan,
Thorowen and deiect in a pyt horrible,
More foul and hydous than it is credible.
There to abide this tortuous serpent.
Unto the day plainly of Judgment.
That of malice enuyed so mankind.
Which with his ginnes and sleightes as I find,
Came to our fathers first in paradyse.
And to deceive the bet at his deuyse,
More covertly this worm in his passage,
Took of a serpent the lyknesse and image.
That is of cheer of look and countenance,
Like a maid and has resemblaunce,
Of a woman as records Bid.
In his deceytes rather for to speed.
I mean the face only and not else,
For behind so as clerks tells,
Like a serpent of womb back and tail.
He was when he began him to assail,
And toward Eve when he began to glyde.
He first enquereth as he her took aside,
Why god forbad them eten of the tree,
Which if they eat sothly they shulden be,
Like to gods knowing good and ill.
And right forthwith as they began fulfill,
The fendes hest their eyes were unclosed,
And for their gylt suddenly deposed,
From Paradyse into wretchedness,
To live in labor sorrow and distress.
And thus the fend when that first he took,
Form of a snake and a woman's look,
And made the tunge in her head to meue,
By false engene mankind for to grieve,
So as he does in them that be trauayled,
With wicked spyrytes vexed and assailed,
To meue their tunges falsely out to break.
Into blasphemy what thing yt they speak,
The same serpent he Leuiathan,
Continuing aye falsely as he began,
In cursed Idolles dombe, deaf, and blind,
Full often speaks by spyrytes as I find.
Which are but fendes David write certain*
The gods all whom folks so in vain,
Honor with rites supersticious,
As whilom was Apollo Delphicus,
Like as tofore ye have herd devise,
Which as for now ought enough suffice.
And as I trow the very cause why,
That mine auctour reherseth by and by.
Ground and ginnyng of Idolatrye,
This the cause for ought I can espy.
For that he saw the matter was not know,
Ilyche well both to high and low.
Perauenture you to do pleasaunce.
He has the ground put in remembrance,
Of false gods and of mawmentrye,
And most for them that can no poesye,
ANd to ye storye resorteth soon again,
How Achilles as ye have herd me saine
And Patroclus have the way ynome,
To the temple and thither be ycome.
To have answer of their embassadrye,
Of great Apollo which may not lie.
Of ye pryestes they have their counsel take,
In the temple to pray and to wake,
Till they may find unto their entente,
To have answer at time convenient,
To their purpose and leisure oportune.
And of one heart so long they contune,
In praying fasting and oblacions,
With sacrifise and sundry orysons,
Tofore the god awayting always fast,
Till he to them answered at last.
With soft voice and said Achilles twye,
Home to Greeks fast that thou the hye,
From whom thou were hither to me sent.
And say the^ sothly the su^me of their intent,
Shall Be fulfilled withouten words mo.
And how that they shall to Troy go,
And there abide many strong battle.
But at the last withouten any fail,
At ten years day they win shall the town,
And bring it plainly to destructiowne,
Wall and toures fall shall to ruin,
And with all this their purpose for to fine,
King Priamus and Hecuba his wife.
And their sons in this mortal strife,
Shall there be slain brother after brother,
This is the fine for it may be none other.
For there shall none escape in the place,
But such as Greeks likes unto grace,
Of very routhe and of mercy take.
This all and some and thus an end I make.
Of which answer Achilles glad and light,
Was in his heart and with all his might,
Thanketh Apollo of his blesfull eure.
And suddenly of sort or adventure,
The self time befell a wonder thing,
For out of Troy from Pryamus the king,
Was sent a bishop for the same case,
To have answer and named was Calchas.
And he came in fool without prese,
The same hour while that Achilles,
Was there present a man of great science.
I mean Calchas had experyence,
Especially of calculacion,
Of sort also and dyuinacion.
And learned was in astronomye,
And when that he his time did espy,
To have answer most convenient,
Of Appollo like to his intent,
As heretofore maked is memory,
He entered is in to the oratorye,
Doing his rytes and his obseruaunces,
Like the custom with the circumstaunces.
And besely began to knele and pray,
And his things devoutly for to say.
And to the god cry and call full strong,
And for Apollo would not tho prolonge,
Suddenly his answer began attame.
And said Calchas twies by his name.
Be right well ware thou ne turn again,
To Troy town for that were but in vain.
For finally learn this thing of me,
In short time it shall destroyed be.
This is in sothe which may not be denied.
Wherefore I will that thou be alyed,
With the Greeks and with Achilles go.
To them anon my will is it be so.
For they shall have as I have disclosed.
Victory and honor that may be disposed.
For it is fatal and ne may not varye,
And thou to them shall be necessary,
In counseling and in yeuing read,
And be right helping to their good speed.
And with that word rose him up Calchas,
And to Achilles he went an easy pace.
And when that he came to his presence,
With great honor and much reverence,
He was received like to his estate.
And after soon they were confederate,
Swore together be bond and assurance,
To be al one withouten varyaunce.
And than in haste they together gone.
To their ships and shope them forth anon,
With Patroclus going by their side,
They hale up the anchor and no longer bide,
But sail forth Calchas and they twain.
Toward Greece them needs not complain.
On wind and wawe till they aryued be,
At Athenes that stood upon the sea,
A large City of old foundation,
And Achilles to king Agamenon,
Has Calchas brought and also Patroclus,
And when the Greeks the storye tells us,
Assembled were they together went,
Tofore the king and Calchas represent.
To all the lords and no longer dwell,
And right anon Achilles began to tell,
Without abode in Delos how they met,
Tofore Apollo where they answer fette.
And how the god has plainly determined,
The Greeks purpose how it shall be fined.
Upon Trojans and bad Calchas also,
In no wise that he to Troy go.
But with Greeks that he abide still,
Till they their purpose finally fulfill.
Of which thing the greeks glad of chere,
Calchas accept with heart full entere.
For one of them confederate by bond,
To be all one on water and on land.
Without change or any varyaunce.
The oath is made and put in remembrance,
And they again fully him assure,
To cheryshe him while their life may dure,
For weal or woe and so they made an end,
And after part and to their lodgyng wend.
TIll on the morn after the sterry night,
When Aurora was gladded with the light,
Of Phoebus beams the greeks up arise,
And to their gods with many sacryfyce,
They do honor in what they can or may.
And devoutly holdyng a feast day,
After their rytes meynt with love and dread,
In remembrance of the good speed,
And of the answer ye gods have them sent.
So agreeable unto their intent.
By Patroclus and by Achilles.
And after this among all the prese,
Is Calchas come tofore Agamenon,
All his lords sitting enuyron.
Like their estates each in his place dew,
And humbly began them all to salewe.
Upon his knees with sobre countenance,
And prayed them it be no displesaunce,
To stynte a while and give him audyence.
And right anon as made was silence,
Among them all Calchas began abrayde,
And even thus full sobrely he said.
OH syres quod he and my lords dear.
Kings, Princes, and Dukes that be here,
So noble echone worthy and famous,
And eke so manly and so virtuous.
Which in this place be now here present,
Is not the fine and chief of your intent,
And cause also why that ye echone,
Assembled be to Troy for to gone,
With this power and this great strength.
Your purpose is to long draw a length,
And differred forth from day to day,
To your damage platly this no nay.
For to long ye soiourne in this isle.
And trow ye not that Pryam in this while,
Has his espyes among you pryuely,
I wot it well I say you faithfully.
To know the fine of your governance.
And he there whiles may make purueaunce,
Him to defend while ye in ydell rest.
Me seems sothly ye do not for the best.
For in abydyng and in such delays,
Great harm may fall certain this no nay is.
I preue it thus for plainly while that ye,
To your enmyes grant this lybertee,
Them to puruey they may with mighty hand
Enforce them your power to withstand.
With their fryendes and their allyaunce,
And at leysour make their ordinance.
It is folly that ye so dyfferre.
Sith ye be ready for to make a werre.
On your enemies with every circu^straunce,
For nothing may a quarrel so auaunce,
As hasty suite it will the sharper byte.
The Iron hoote time is for to smite.
And not abide till that it be cold.
For it will neither plye then nor fold.
Go set upon all of one accord,
And to your ship anon within board,
Enhaste you for time is to remewe.
With all your might your quarrel to pursue.
Against them that have to you trespassed,
How many days be of somer passed,
And many months run and ouerslyde,
And Titan often with his chare has ride,
From East to West and in the wawes deep,
His streams bathed whiles that ye a sleep,
And spent your time in this place thus.
While that the wind called zephirus,
Beningly enspyred has alofte,
The attempre aier with wether fair and soft,
The calm sea from wawes still and plain,
Whiles ye waste your days here in vain.
That when your foon thereto taken head.
They will suppose that it is for dread,
And be more bold to set of you but lite.
Trust forsothe for I will me quite,
Trewlye to you like as I am bound.
And think how ye have the gods found,
There toward bening and fortunate.
Your honor saved in high and low estate.
And so shall forth if your ingratytude,
Provoke them not your purpose to delude.
Wylfully to slouthe your good fortune,
No wonder is though they not contune,
Toward you for to show their grace,
Wherefore I read hense for to pace,
And shapeth you no longer to lie here,
But while the wether is so fair and clear,
And lusty somer abides in his hete,
Or winter come with his raynes wete,
And while the season is so fresh and grene,
I speak of heart platly as I mean,
For your exployt and your alder ease,
Where it so be I anger you or please,
That forth in haste ye to ship wend,
I can no more my tale is at an end.
How the Greeks nauye retourning from Athenes were distressed by tempest, and
how they took a castle of ye Trojans called Saranaba. Ca. xviii.
ANd all at ones they be co^desce^ded,
To his advise and have it well co^me^ded.
And in all haste Agamenon the great,
The lusty time and the season sweet,
Hastyng the greeks both the high and low,
Made sou^de a trumpe and to shipward blow.
And they echone his bidding did obey,
And to their ships they go the right weye.
Without abode they will no longer dwell,
What should I more of the number tell.
Of their ships sith ye have herd before,
It needs not rehearse it any more,
I can not se what it might avail.
But forth they dress the^ and began to sail,
And this is sothe plainly and no wene,
So great a nauye was never yet ysene,
In all this world nor together met.
The wind was good yt they were not let,
On their way first when they begone.
But after soon began the shene son,
The clearness change of his bright face,
And dim clouds began his light enbrace.
And suddenly in full ougly wise,
The heaven dercke and the wind began rise,
The hydous thunder and leuene clear,
Smote in the mast bright as any fyere,
And the blacknes of the smoky reyne,
Blinds the air that nothing may be seen.
And the wawes began to rise alofte,
And in their ships fell nothing soft.
But plonge a down and their tops smite,
That them thought they wanted but a lyte,
To have be dead in the self stounde.
Till Calchas has by his craft yfounde,
The cause of all and with his orysons,
With his charms and incantacions,
Made suddenly the tempest to appease
And with his craft done them right great ease.
For he found out the cause of euerydele,
How Dyane lyked nothing well,
That the greeks dursten take on hand,
To be so bold to part from the stronde,
Into the sea in any manner wise,
And do to her no manner sacrifyce.
Nouther offer tofore or that they gothe,
For which thing the goddess is so wroth,
Toward greeks saylynge on the sea,
That they echone wend have drowned be.
Till at the last the king Agamenon,
Has by counsel and information,
Of wise Calchas made set up to land,
Into an isle and fast his ships bond,
And Aulydes that little isle hyghte.
In which he fond unware in his syghte,
A little temple and an oratorye,
Founded of old and made in memory,
Of great Dyane to which anon he went,
Full devoutly his offering to present.
And quemed her with his oblacions,
And lay there long in his orisons.
After the rytes used in his law.
Tell after he saw the tempest began adawe.
But some books maken mention,
Touching this thing that Agamenon,
As Ouyde list rehersen in his book,
How this king his own daughter took,
Effygenya benynge of face and chere.
And endelonge there upon the aultere,
This maid he laid dispoyled of her wede,
Tofore Dyane to maken her blede.
To fine only that he the heavenly queen,
With blood that was innocent and clean,
Appease might and quemen of her rage.
And the goddess gracious of visage,
Has mercy meynt with her magnifycence,
To suffer a maid so full of innocence,
Gyltlesse to be in her temple slawe.
Has by miracle away her body draw.
And it conserved from all anoy and smerte,
And in her stead unawarely cast an heart,
By death of whom as books maken mind,
Agamenon first began grace find.
In the gods for to modefye,
Her cruel Ire and cleren began the sky.
The sea wax calm and the wether fair*
And Phoebus eke to glade with the air,
Began show new and his beams cast,
In to the sea and the king as fast,
Unto ship repaired is again.
Through help of her which is as clerks saine
Lady and queen is of ways and of passage,
And goddess is called of voyage.
After the sentence and opinion,
Of them that work by calculacion.
And gyn their domes by Astronomy.
And most of all they her magnifye,
In the tenth and the twelfe house.
For there she is they say most gracious.
Best fortuned, clear, or in her shade,
If she have comeforte of aspectes glade.
Of planettes standing tho as in good state,
I mean such planettes as be fortunate,
To voyage or journey for to make.
And such time Agamenon has take,
His happy way shypped for to be.
And in good hour he taken has the sea,
With the greeks the wether agreeable,
And Eolus has maked acceptable,
Wind and air hoole at their will.
Nouther to loud plainly nor to still.
But in a mean so merry made it blow,
That they attain as in a little throw,
To certain bounds of Troy the City.
Unto a castle that stood upon the sea,
Right wonder strong though it were but lite,
The name of which though Dares list not write.
I mean Dares called Frygius,
Yet other auctours rehearse sothly thus,
Saranaba that it was ycalled.
Round about diched and well walled.
With high toures round square and wide,
Where under went the sea and fast beside,
Was an haven able for ryuayle,
At which plainly the greeks will not fail,
With their power myghtely to aryue.
Maugre all tho that there again strive.
They might well for it was not denied,
Only except that they were espied,
Of them alone that in the castle dwell,
The which anon as they herd tell,
Of their coming proudely in the berde,
With them to mete were nothing aferde.
But issue out down unto the stronde,
In purpose only to let them to land,
With all their might if it would avail,
But the greeks so proudely them assail,
That they ne might in their defense endure,
For where as they wend to have be assure,
Demyng the greeks plainly on the sea,
For weryed and faynted to have be,
With long saylinge parbraked and forbroke,
Wherefore they cast on them to have be wroke,
All sodeinly and set on the head,
And put them self in adventure and dread.
Of rakelnesse unadvisedly.
Whereof to them self unhappily,
It befell when they with greeks met,
With speres long and swerdes sharp whet.
Each on other manhood for to show.
But for cause Troyans were to few,
To issue out they did folyfye.
The fyelde was not parted egally.
For the greeks were innumerable,
That them to mete Troyans were not able.
For that time they mighten not suffyse,
They took on them to passing high empryse.
And yet they would for nothing them wtdrawe
Till that they were wounded and yslawe,
And ouerlayne of greeks utterly.
Now here, now there, bore down cruelly.
Mercylesse as Guydo does report,
That them behooves home again resort,
Of very need and necessytee.
And all attones began for to flee,
I mean such as were left alive,
To the castle they hasted them full blyue.
For they ne might no longer hold the fyelde,
Against greeks with spear nor with shield.
They were to feeble shortly to conclude,
There to abide so great a multitude.
And as they flee the greeks a great pace,
Ne cease not to sewe them in the chase,
Full hastyly to the castle gate.
And enter in and by cruel fate,
They kill and slay all both hye and low.
They spare none ne list no wight know.
Of none estate but felly them oppress,
And what they fond gold and eke richesse,
Unto ship they carried it anon.
And of the castle they ne left a stone,
Above an other but turned up so down.
Both wall and toure and the chief dongeowne
That nothing stood so they under mine,
And when that all was brought unto ruin,
Greeks anon to their ships haste.
Of one assent and purposen as fast,
Without abode of one will and heart,
Fro that haven plainly to dyuerte.
And to sail toward Tenedowne,
A strong castle which from Troy town,
In distaunce thense but six mile stood,
Full of treasour of richesse and of good.
Replenyshed of all in habundaunce,
And when that they with their ordinance,
Ysayled have their Journey safe and sound,
And fro the sea taken have the ground.
To their plesaunce wonder agreeable.
And of sight a place delectable,
Wholesome of air the soil fair and grene,
And lusty playnes goodly on to seen.
And was also haboundaunt of vitayle,
Replenyshed of all that may avail,
The osteyng and to soldiers,
For first the land of fresh flowers,
Was plenteous both of corn and grain.
Of wine and fruit yt no thing lay baraine,
Of beasts and fowls passyngly plentee,
And fast by was adjoining the sea.
Full habundaunt of fyshe as I find,
After the season of every manner kind.
And when that they yt in the castle were,
The Greeks sea londed from a far,
Without abode they arm them and went out,
And upon them make an hidous shoute.
Stuffyng the castle with meyne strong behind,
And took their way in Guydo as I find.
Toward their foen and knyghtly set upon,
And right forth the greeks eke anon,
Met with them upon the other fyde.
Right surquidous and inly full of pride.
Clenly armed in harneys all of stele,
Fresh arrayed and besene so well,
For in the field as thick as sworme of been,
On each side men may behold and seen,
Spradde all the plain down unto ye strond.
Till at the last they met hand to hand.
Where as they yoyne with square speres ground,
And hurtle yfere with many bluddy wound.
There was no good day nor no saluynge.
But strokes fell that men hardeen ring,
On bassenettes the fields round about.
So cruelly that the fire sprange out,
Among the tuftes broad bright and shene.
Of foil of gold and feathers white and grene.
Eke in breasts perced many shield,
And coursers fled abroad in the fyelde.
And many laid in that mortal stounde,
Full deadly pale low upon the ground.
With face gruf and bluddy streams wide.
And aldermost upon the greeks side,
The slaughter was and the discomfyture*
So mightly the Troyans did endure.
TIll at the last for they were so few,
With multitude the greeks on the^ hew,
For mo then forty were against one,
Of very force abacke they must gone,
Nothing for lack of manhood dare I seyne.
But for so many have them over layne.
They no longer may in fyelde soiourne,
But to their Castle home again return,
In full great haste such as might escape,
Away alive. and some of them for rape.
And dread of death took them to flight.
On horse back to Troy town full right.
No wonder was though they haste fast,
For to the gates the chase of greeks last.
So cruelly after they pursewe.
And some of them that might not remewe,
On Troy side forweryed of the fight,
The greeks slew with all their full might,
Now here now there who^ they might atteine,
There may no raunsom nor no mercy gain.
Of none estate without excepciowne.
And after that unto Tenedowne,
The greeks went and it be set about.
That Troyan none might escape out.
And when yt they the bulwerkes had ywonne
To skale the wall after they begoone.
And made a saute manfully and often,
And eke Troyans as they stood a lofte,
Drive them of that enter they ne might.
With cast of stone and with quarelles bright,
With bow turkeys and shote of Arbalasters.
And their gonners standing at corners.
With this also and cast of wild fire,
Of yrous hate full hot in their desire.
Like manly men them self they do deffende.
And aye the greeks as they up ascend,
Cruelly they driven to the ground.
Till they without an ordinance have found,
What with gynnes devised for the nones,
And gonnes great for to cast stones,
Bent to the toures right as any line,
And large sowes low for to mine,
And some of them upon the wall gone,
That were so thycke made of lyme and stone.
And in to enter they many ways seek.
Set their bastyles and their hurdeys eke.
Round about to the hard wall,
And skalyng ladders for sawtes marcyall.
They began up cast with hokes for to hold,
And up ascend the sturdy greeks bold.
Till the Troyans from the crestes cast,
The great stones while as they would last.
And Rollers eke greeks to oppress.
And wonder manly did their business,
In their deffence and made plonge them low,
With cast of quarrel and with shote of bow.
Through Olyettes that of necessytee,
They put them of it may none other be.
And broke their necks and their shulder bones,
As they fell down with the square stones.
And lain dead pyteous pale of hew.
But greeks aye began the saute renew,
With multitude Troyans to assail,
That to withstand they gynnen for to fail.
And were feeble for rescuse came their none,
And so of force the greeks be in gone.
Through ye walls when they have the^ broke,
And on Troyans so cruelly be wroke,
That finally they left none alive.
But slay and kylle and after that as blyue,
On the walls their baners they have set.
And young and old it might be no bette,
All goth to wrack upon Troy side.
And after that they will no longer bide,
But treasour gold and what so they may find,
They cast on heap and together bind.
And make spoil of all that was within,
And then in haste the walls they begin,
Pynacle, toures, and also the dungeowne,
To brenne and hew and to beat down.
And with the soil they made even and plain.
And with great pray anon they went again
To their ships glad and light of chere.
When the fire with the flawmes clear,
The castle had consumed and ybrent.
And after that auyse and right prudent,
The manly man the worthy Agamenon,
Let make anon a convocation,
Of the greeks and bad they shulden bring,
Gold and treasour without more taryinge,
With all the pray they wanne at Tenedowne,
To his presence for this conclusyowne.
That he may make distribucion,
Among them without exception,
Like their desert unto pore and rich.
He departs to every man a lyche,
But most to such as did it best deserve,
For to him self him list nothing reserve,
For he has lever their hertes then the good.
Of such as had spente their own blood,
So manfully the castle for to win.
For who that can with largess first begin,
Ne fails not after well to speed.
Through help of men when that he has need
For love follows fredome comenly.
How Agamenon assembled a counsel of the nobles of Greece, and determined,
and sent Vlyxes and Dyomede in ambassade to king Pryam. Capi. xix.
ANd after this the king let make a cry,
That all the kings and lords of his ostie,
Dukes and Earls come from every cost,
The next morrow before him to appear.
The night ypassed Phoebus began to clear,
Their hemysperye after the lark song.
When yt the king among the greeks strong,
Upon the plain in his see royal,
And fast by most chife and pryncipall,
Of his lords were set in their degree.
And when the king saw oportunitee,
And that there was made scile^ce every where,
His lyeges standing enuyron here and there.
The king of chere sad and not Iocounde,
As he that was of speech full faucounde,
Began his tale with sobre countenance,
The effect of which was this in substance.
Syres quod he full worthy of degree,
Of very right and of necessytee,
We be compelled both the high and low,
With all our might like as ye well know,
To redress a thing that is amys.
For through the world as it reported is,
We be of force of power and of might,
Of worthynesse in every wyghtes sight,
Most renowned and most worshypable.
And ydempt and judged for most able,
Of all people and lyklyest to stand,
For to perform what we have take on hand
Who that ever grutcheth or says nay,
Yet me seems if it be your pay,
Thylke power most is acceptable,
Unto gods and longest stondeth stable,
That is deuoyde of surquidry and pride.
For it is kouth upon every side,
In each land both of one and all,
How many harms and greues have befall,
Through rancour only pride and wylfulnesse.
So inportable as I could express,
Through pride there as is done offense,
The high gods maken resystence,
To all tho that be surquydous.
Which is a vice so contraryous,
That it ne may in no place abide.
And in good faith manhood is no pride,
For who that has any acquaintance,
Outher by frendshyp or by alyaunce,
With a proud man to be confederate,
With him in heart of high or low estate.
He needs must what ever that he be,
To many other of necessytee,
Be lothsomest enmy and contrayre.
For nothing may a man so much appayre,
As pride in soth in high or low degree.
Wherefore I read plainly how that we,
This foul vice out of our heart arrace.
That our quarrel may have the more grace.
And specially that our deeds all,
Conveyed be how ever that it fall,
By ryghtwysenesse more than voluntee.
For if troth our sothfast guide be,
Us to derecte by his rightful line,
Than shall our quarrel aye in honor shine,
And contune in full felycytee.
And ferthermore this known all ye,
How we are come for to done vengeance,
With our frendshyppe and our alyaunce.
Upon Pryam for wrongs done of old.
By him and his as I have often told.
And hereupon we have his ground ytake,
And some of his maked to a wake.
With manful hand and his castelles strong,
I beat down that stand have so long.
And take there the richesse that we found,
And slew his men with many bluddy wound
And harms mo done in his country,
That I wot well if their enmytee,
Was unto us great and much before.
I dare say now it is in double more,
That if that they avenged might be,
On us echone anon ye should see.
Their great Ire so cruel and so huge,
Be execute without more refuge.
And yet in soth I wot they have espied,
Our being here though we be not askyred.
Of them as yet I dare say utterly,
They are well ware that we are fast by.
And ouermore this wot I well also,
Of the harms that we have to them do,
The which as yet be but fresh and grene,
If they were strong and mighty to sustain,
I werre on us anon they would it gynne,
And yet the City in which that they be in.
Is walled strong and toured round about,
That they wenen fully out of doubt,
With the meyne that they have gathred in,
Of their allies that we shall not wyn,
Of them but small in werre nor in strife.
For he in soth has a prerogatyfe,
And advantage that in his country,
Him self deffendeth namely if that he,
Be stuffed strong of friends him beside.
And of alyes where he does abide.
Like as the Raven with his fether black,
Within his nest will often time make,
Again the Faukon gentle of nature,
Full hard diffence whiles hy may endure.
Or that he be vanquysshed and outrayed.
And yet some while the Faukon is delayed,
Whiles the Raven beside his nest does flee,
Within his court at his lybertee.
As every foul is froward to areste,
For to be daunted in his own neste.
ANd yet to you these words I ne say,
In any wise to putten in a fraye,
Your knyghtly hertes so manly and so stable.
Nor that to you it should be doutable,
But we the Troyans fully shall confound.
And their City in which they now habounde,
Plainly destroy albe that it be strong.
And they and all that now be them among,
Shall finally consumpt be with death.
Through greeks sword yelden up the breath.
But the cause without any dread,
Why I say thus is that ye take heed,
For any pride or presumpcion,
To aduerte in your discrecion,
So prudently that reason in this need,
For any haste may our brydell led.
And so ordeyne or we hense wend,
That laud and praise after in the end,
May be reported as I have devised.
For many man that has not be advised,
In his pursuit for lack of providence,
To se tofore in his aduertence,
What should be fall to death it has the^ brought.
Such wylfull have were good to be thought,
Of us by fore examynacion,
And well discussed by reuolucion.
Of thynkyng often that we not repent,
And first remember how that Pryam sent,
To us but late only for Exyon.
That yet is hold of king Thelamon.
Which was of us without aduisement,
Indiscreetly denied by assent.
Which has to us be none advantage.
But ground and rote of full great damage.
For if that we through wise purueyaunce,
Of her had made tho delyueraunce,
The harms great had be then eschewed,
That after were of Paris so pursewed.
In the temple of fair Cythera,
That builded is beside Cirrea,
The treasour great also that he had,
And Iewelles thense that he with him ladde.
Than to Troy and the great richesse,
The slaughte of men and the heaviness,
That yet is made for the queen Heleyne.
Throughout Greece and the great pain,
Of Menelaye all had been now unwrought,
If so we had foresene this in our thought.
Wisely tofore and restored Exyon,
Than had not the harms ne of them one,
Ensewed on us in very sothfastnesse.
Nor spent our labor so in ydelnesse.
Treasour nor good wasted so in vain,
Nor come so far for to fetch again,
The queen Heleyne with costs inportable.
Withouten harms now in eschewable.
ANd for all this yet ne wot we,
Whether to joy or to aduersytye,
The thing shall turn that we be about.
Sith often sith dependent and in doubt,
Is fatal thing vnsyker and unstable.
And fro the gynnynge often varyable.
The end is seen fortune can transmewe,
Her gery course and therefore to eschew,
The harms possible lykely for to fall,
My counsel is here among you al,
Upon arryuaile travail to eschew,
In this matter are we further sewe,
To Pryamus without any more,
To send first again for to restore,
The queen Heleyne as right and reason is.
And other harms done eke by Paris.
After his trespass and offencion.
Justly to maken restytucion.
Than may we all in worship and honor,
Return home without more labor.
If they assente to do as we requere.
And our axynge if they list not here,
But folyly of their wylfulnesse,
Refusen it than this our worthynesse,
Is double assured on a syker ground.
By just title Troyans to confound.
With things two we shall be under pyght,
First our power borne up with our right,
Shall for us fight our quarrel to dareyne.
In balaunce even to weye atwixe us twain,
To fine that we shall be more excused,
For they tofore have wylfully refused,
Our just profers made to them before.
And we shall be through the world therefore,
Without spot of trespass or of blame.
Of mysreporte in hyndrynge of our name.
Where they of folly shall ynoted be,
Of wylfull wodnesse plainly where that we,
Shall stand free our power for to use.
And every man shall us well excuse.
Though that we do execucyon,
By taking vengeance for their offencyon.
Of men and child of each sect and age.
That shall of death holden their the passage.
And by the sword without mercy pace,
One and other there is no better grace.
But yet tofore I counsel takes head,
That ye to them with all measure bid,
This hold I best and most syckernesse.
And work now by good auisenesse.
Among your self and no longer tarry,
To which counsel some weren contrary.
And varyaunt to his opinyon.
Save they that were of most discrecion,
Assented be plainly to this end.
And chosen have to Pryam for to send,
Among them the ambassyat to speed,
Vlyxes wise and worthy Dyomede.
The which anon began them ready make,
And shope them forth and their way take,
Toward Troy as any line right.
When the son shone full shene and bryghte.
Holdyng the course of his fyry sphere,
In mydday arc wonder bright and clear.
And gylte each hill vale plain and roche,
With his beams, when they did approach,
To the walls and gates of the town,
And in they go without noise or sown*
Full well be seen and in their port them had,
Right manfully and the way them ladde,
To the paleyes straight as any line.
Them needs not aside to declyne.
But into a court large wide and square,
And they full knightly for no wight would space
Unto the effect manly to proceed.
To do their charge without fear and dread.
For their coming was not tho refused,
And in tho days peraunter was not used,
To have no conduite for embassadrye.
The custom was to no man to deny,
As I suppose enter nor passage,
If it so were he come as for message.
And in this court builded so royally,
When they come first they meruayled greatly
The royal sight of so huge a strength,
So well complete both in bread and length.
For they ne had in their life tofore,
Seen none so fair and yet they wonder more,
Into the paleyes as they together gone,
That paued was all of Jasper stone,
Of a tree that amyddes stood.
On which to look they thought it did the^ good
Musyng where it were Artifyciall,
Erecte or set by magyke natural,
Or by engyne of workmen curyous.
Through subtle crafts supersticious.
Or other work of Nycromancye,
Or profounde casting of Phylosophye,
By apparaunce or yllusyon.
Outher by craft of incantacion.
Up and down they casten in their mind,
Out by reason if they myghten find,
Rote and ground of this wonder work.
But the truth was to them so derke,
That in their wit though they long trace,
The pryuitee they can not compare,
To conceive how it was possible,
For to the eye as it was vysyble,
In very soth without any fable,
To man's hand so it was palpable.
Of which the stock of Guydo as is told,
In sothfastnesse was of pured gold.
Which shone as bright as the somer son.
To enlumyne things that weren done.
And the body as a maste was right,
Proporcyoned most goodly to the sight,
Substanciall and of huge strength,
And twelve cubytes the body was of length,
And the croppe round and large of bread,
And in compass began flourishe so and sprede,
That all the plain about enuyrowne,
With the bows was shadowed up and down.
The rich branches and the leaves fair,
Twain and twain joined as a pair,
One of gold another silver shene,
And meynt among with stones white and grene,
Some read and some sapher hewed,
And every day the blomes were renewed,
And the blossoms with many sundry suyte,
For stones Inde it bare instead of fruit.
As says Guido I can no other tell.
And the Greeks will no longer dwell,
But hold their way by many sundry went,
For to parfourme the fine of their intent.
Till they atteyne the chamber pryncypall,
Where Pryamus in his see royal,
Like his estate in full kyngly wise,
Sat and about full prudent and full wise,
His lords all in settes him beside.
When the greeks surquedous of pride,
With stern cheer and froward countenance.
As they that had little remembrance,
Of gentylnesse nor of curtesye,
For as Guydo does plainly specifye,
Enteryng in they taken have their place,
In thopposyte of the kings face.
And set them down without more sermon,
Any obeysaunce or salutacyon,
Worship honor or any reverence,
Done to the king for all his excellence,
In preiudyce of all gentylnesse.
And than anon Vlixes began express,
Cause of their coming to king Pryamus.
Without abode saying even thus.
Not forberyng presence of the king.
Marvel not nor have no wondering,
Though we to the do no honor dew,
In our coming the for to salewe.
Sith it ne longs in sothe as thinks me,
Where rancoure is and hertye enmyte.
Or deadly hate with salutacions,
Or with feigned false affections,
For to show where hertes ben a fire.
For naturally no man shall desire,
Of his enmye the health nor welfare.
And platly now me list not for to spare,
Shortly to show the fine of our intent,
Like as we haven in commandment,
In our message from Agamenowne.
The noble king most worthy of renown.
Which us has sent there is no more to seyne,
Now unto the for the queen Heleyne.
That was rauyshed out of greeks land.
And brought to Troy by force of mighty hand.
Against right and by vyolence,
Wherefore shortly without more offense,
We justly axe without more demand,
That thou anon rightfully command,
To Menelay that she be sent again.
And with all this we axe not in vain,
That thou do make restytucion,
Of wrongs done in that regyon.
Of pylfres great slaught and robberye,
By Paris done of wylfull tiranye.
Which is thy son and by the sustained,
And in his error wronfully maynteyned.
Wherefore come of and fully condescende,
Without grutching this wrongs to amend.
For so thou may best the gods queme,
Like as thou may in thy reason deem.
As right requires and work as the wise.
For if so be that thou now despise,
To execute that I have the told here,
Trust me right well a lesson thou shall lere,
Which thou and thine shall hereafter rewe,
Without feyning thou shall it find true.
That but if thou a better end make,
Cruel vengeance shall on the be take.
And finally what should I to the feign,
The force of death this quarrel shall darayne.
Upon the and upon all thy blood,
Raunsomles other of gold or good.
And questionles report this of me,
That merciles this rich strong Cite,
Shall down be beat and ylayde full low,
Wall and Toures also overthrow.
This all and some beth now well aduysed.
That our axyng of the be not despised.
But wisely work and do as I have said.
ANd suddenly king Priamus abrayde,
Of hasty ire he ne might abide.
Of the greeks when he saw the pride,
The great outrage and presumpcyon,
Without abode or delyberacyon,
To Vlyxes anon he began out break,
And unto him even thus to speak.
I wonder greatly in mine aduertence,
Being astoned how in my presence,
So ungoodly ye dare make this demand.
Like as ye had power to commaundt.
And me constrayne your byddyng to obey,
And I for fear durst you not with say,
No manner thing that ye axen here.
Nor contrayre what that ye require.
Whereof sothly in heart I am amened,
And of your threttes inwardly agreued.
And astoned surely not a life,
That ye so hardy are this to excyte,
And vylaynously mine honor to provoke.
On your words for to be a work.
But for all this trusts me right well,
I will not pass my bounds never a dele,
Nor the rather shortly at an end,
To your axyng in ought to condescende.
For to consydre the fine of your entente,
It were not syttyng nor conuenyent,
A king to grant your axing though yt he,
Stood in myschefe and captivity,
Without recure to vttraunce ybrought.
It were outrage plainly to be thought.
To axe of him that ye axe of me,
And sothly yet I not believe that ye,
Accomplyshyng may so much avail,
As ye have said for platly ye shall fail,
Of your purpose I say and god toforne.
Mauger your might though ye had it sworn.
For your request in every man's sight,
Wants a ground both of truth and right.
To axe of me satysfactyon,
And were your self first occasyon,
When ye slew my father Lamedowne,
And his lyeges and brent eke the town,
And many harms if they were out sought,
On him and his causeles tho ye wrought.
That it were long all for to rehearse.
Which day by day through my heart perce.
My sister eke called Exiona,
Out of this regyon ye have ladde away,
The which is not unto her worthiness,
Ytreated like nor after gentilnesse.
And for all this ye would amends have.
Wrongly of me that whylom for to save,
All things in peace and to stynt werre,
To you have sent into Greece far,
Only to have Exyona again.
Of which sonde ye hadden but disdain.
And cruelly in ungoodly wise,
My messenger ye began as tho despise.
That he vnueth ne might escape away,
From out of greece ye know it is no nay.
Of you he had so ungoodly cheer,
And in good faith me list not now to hear,
Your request nor given audience,
To your axyng for your great offense.
For lever I had shortly to deyen here,
Than condescende to ought that ye requere.
For I will fully for conclusyon,
That it be known to Agamenon,
That we have lever this is doubtless,
Finally his werre that his peace.
Sith ye to me have done so great trespace.
And by my truth in this self place,
Cruelly anon ye shulden dye,
But for the office of embassadrye,
Against death is fully your diffence.
That be so bold withouten reverence,
In my presence so to thret or speak.
Trust me right well it should anon be wreke.
Wherefore in haste without words mo,
My counsel is that ye be ago.
Out of my sight and void this my Cite,
For thus it stands that whiles I you se,
In my heart may enter no gladness.
The fret of ire so holds me in distress.
That in good faith I may it not sustene,
So Inportune is the rage and tene,
That inwardly binds me for the while.
ANd Diomedes tho began to smyle,
And said anon thus unto the king.
If it be so that thou of our cominge,
In thine heart have so mykle pain,
Us to behold now that be but twain,
And art therewith so inly set a fire,
Than shall thou never be withouten ire,
In all thy life nor deuoyde of woe.
Sith thou have so many cruel fo,
Of greeks now entered in thy land.
An hundred thousand almost at thyn hand.
Again whose might you may ye not assure,
To resyst plainly nor endure,
Consider well how that they be strong,
As thou shall wit peraunter or be long.
So manly men and so well arrayed,
Expert in arms and of old assayed.
That no diffence may again them veil,
And wit eke well that thou may not fail,
By death of sword of their hand to deye,
And all thine there is no more to seye.
Though it so be proudly that thou speak,
And with thy tunge only to be wreake,
Afermest more than thou may acheue,
Better it were such bostyng words leave,
And to wise counsel takes better head.
But than in haste again this Diomede,
Surquidous and inly full of pride,
There rose up some by the kings side,
With swords and draw on him would have fall,
And al to hewn him there among them all,
Of hasty ire brenning as the glede,
Till Pryamus began to taken head.
And rose him up seeing this disease,
And manfully this rage began appease.
Them diffending upon death and life,
That none of them be hardy in this strife,
The embassadoures to harm or to grieve,
For though a fool his folly will not leave,
To presume to speak vnconningly,
A wise man must suffer pacyently.
And though that he hap to do offense,
Through folishe speech for lack of sapyence,
A wise man ne ought sothe to said,
To taken head or to speak again.
For to a fool as it is pertynent,
To show his folly, right so convenient,
Is to the wise sothly with suffraunce,
In all his port to have tolleraunce.
For unto foles belongs kindly,
Without advise to speak folyly.
Indiscreetly his mening to fulfill.
Where as a wise man hear can and be still,
Till he se time and have patience,
And dissimule in his aduertence,
The rage of foles that last but a throw.
For by his tunge a fool is often know.
And lever I had I do you well assure,
In my person damage to endure,
Then to suffer any messengere,
In my court of you that be here,
To have a wrong other great or lite.
The sword of rancoure may not always bite.
To do vengeance for a thing of naught,
For often it falls that a wrong is wrought,
For little excess follows great reprefe.
And haste is aye meddled with myschefe.
Wherefore I bid that ye sytte adowne,
And in no wise of presumpciowne,
Attempteth not in no manner wise,
By sign or word more for to despise,
Thembassadoures from the Greeks sent.
But let them freely declare their entente,
And ye there whiles keep your lips close,
ANd suddenly then Eneas rose,
Which next the king held then his see,
So inwardly with rancour fret was he,
That he ne might him self not refrain,
And said sir so ye not disdain,
That I shall say me seems that it is,
Well according when one has said amys,
And rekly spoken unadvised,
Of his folly that he be chastysed.
That other may example by him take.
To be well ware such noise and cry to make.
And specially in open audience.
So to offend your royal excellence.
And sothly yet I wot well that I might,
So me govern plainly in your sight,
Of hastiness without auisement,
That I should by your commandment,
The death deserve for my great offense.
And trewly yet ne were for your presence,
Of this twain that have so yspoke,
Without abode I should anon be wroke.
For it were worthy and right well sittyng,
When that a fool in presence of a king,
Is bold or hardy of presumpcion,
To take on him of indiscrescion,
Thing to rehearse concluding in sentence,
Preiudyce of his magnificence,
That he were taught better to govern,
His large tunge to konne bet and diserne,
When he shall speak or when be in pease,
To suffer him to run out of lose.
As does he this that spoke has so large.
Wherefore in haste I counsel him and charge,
Without abode or any word mo,
Out of your syghte anon he be ago.
For it is best to do as I him read.
TO whom anon full proudly Diomede,
Not astoned but with a stern look,
To Eneas that for ire quoke,
Answered again but with words few,
And said sir thy words does well show,
What so thou be that thou art right wise.
Well is that king that does by thine advise.
Or has the nigh of counsel for to be,
For he ne may err in no degree.
That art so rightful in thy judgment.
Of wylfullnesse without aduysement,
To cause a lord his bonds for to pace.
So would god in some other place,
That I might by favor of fortune,
Mete with the at leisure oportune.
Like my desire that can so well endite.
In old fables thy labor for to quyte.
And the to thank for thy gentle chere,
Which so knightly thou have us showed here,
Trust well thereto and have thereof no dread.
ANd tho Vlixes of this Diomede,
Began interrupte his words prudently,
And to him said full aduysely,
That it was best to stynt and be still.
And now we know fully all thy will,
Quod Vlyxes full manly to the king,
We will go hense without more taryinge.
Out of thy sight to Agamenon,
And make to him plain relacion,
Of thy answer in order by and by.
And to horse they wenten suddenly,
And in short time so have them in their way,
That they be come there is no more to say,
Where the king satte in his tentorye,
And word by word as came to memory,
They rehearse the substance every dele,
Whereof the greeks like nothing well.
Conceyuing full there was no remedy,
As by report of the embassadrye,
Save only this utterly proceed,
How they them shall govern in this need,
Again Trojans of necessitee.
For they well wot it may none other be.
And assented both in will and deed.
To puruey them fast they them speed.
In this storye as ye shall after find.
But first or I thereof maken mind,
I must a while of Eneas endyte,
As mine Auctour list of him to write.
The which sothly as books say he was,
This manly Trojan this worthy Eneas,
Anchises sone of great worthiness,
Whylom get of Venus the goddess.
Conqueroure of many regyon.
When Troy was brought to destruction,
He went his way by the large see,
Called Tyrene and saylyng forth goth he,
By many cost and many straight passage,
Many danger till into Cartage,
He ryued is and thense began to sail,
To the conquest of the great Ytale.
And so to Rome he has the way take,
Of whose spring as auctours mention make,
Came Augustus Caesar the Emperor.
That was whilom so noble a conqueror.
That his renown to this day does shine,
And of Enee the Emperor Iustyne,
In his books called Autentykes,
Full plainly wryt therein the rubrykes,
That after Caesar so as Cesares,
Be named yet right so Eneades,
After Enee they name shoulden bear.
Which fro Troy comen was so fere.
Unto ytayle and of this Eneas,
As I have told Caesar descended was.
Down line right full manly and royal.
That first in Rome by scepter imperyall,
Maugre their might had the governance,
And of wisdom set the ordinance,
Of common things touching the Cytee.
And to proceed further of Enee,
Holy his life and knyghthod by and by,
If that ye list to read ceryously,
Ye may se all full autentyke of style,
In Eneydos compyled of Vergyle.
Albeit so that this noble clerk.
Was grave before or co^plete was his work.
As books old maken mention.
How Agamenon sent Achilles and Thelephus into the Island of Messa for
vytayles, and how they slew the king and after ordained Thelephus the king
there. Ca. xx.
But now again to Agamenon,
Without more I will my style return,
The which king will no more soiourne,
In this matter delays for to make,
But in all haste he has his counsel take.
Of his lords being there present.
And such as were not he has after sent,
For one and al, Earls, Dukes, and kings.
And said syres among other things,
To our Journey that be necessary,
My counsel is no longer that we tarry,
But first of all to make ordinance,
By one assent with prudent purueaunce,
That alder first we shape us for vytayle.
Without which none host may avail.
To parfourme a journey thryftely.
Wherefore I read here but fast by,
If it to you be lykyng and plesaunce,
Into an isle full of habundaunce,
Called Messa that we send anon.
And at one word assented every chone,
They chosen have worthy Achilles,
And Thelephus the sone of Hercules,
To execute this purpose finally,
With many worthy in their company.
Ychosen out through the host anon,
With Achilles are to Messa gone.
In which land rich and plenteous,
Reigned a king worthy and famous,
That Tentran hight which in tranquylyte,
Without werre or aduersyte,
Had hold his Scepter and his royal sete,
In this isle so pleasant and so mete.
Albe that some say that this little isle,
To the kyngedome longs of Cecyle.
And has his name given of plente,
After Messane an huge great Cite.
Full plenteous both on se and land.
The which kingdom as I understand,
Is said Messena of Messes in latin,
Through habundau^ce of fruit corn and wine.
At the aryuayle on the playnes large,
Where they are wont for to stuff and charge,
Merchaunt ships of strange fer country.
That thither sail by the large sea.
To fetch vitayle aye from year to year.
Fro many cost of lands far and nere,
Only by eschaunge of merchaundise,
And eke also as books can deuyse.
And as Guido full plainly tells us,
That of a king called Messanus,
This country first of Messa took the name,
That in his time was of great fame,
Passing rich and wonder plenteous.
But of all this Dares Frygyus,
In his book makes no mention.
But shortly tells in conclusyon,
How Achilles and Thelephus also.
To Messena be together go.
With three thousand of greeks chosen out.
Most manly men among all their route.
The which as fast as they began to land,
And the king began to understand,
Of their coming he is descended down.
With all the worthy of his regiowne,
On horse and foot in steel armed bright,
Against Greeks manfully to fight,
Them to deuoyde plainly if they can,
And suddenly thus the skermyshe began,
Atwixe Greeks and other mortal fone.
On other part there was many one,
Slain and hurt and to the death ywounded,
Never lykly thereof to be sounded.
For other treat was them not atwene,
But swerdes sharp and speres square and kene.
Now here now there that they go to ground,
For every man his foo for to confound,
His labor did and his business.
And though greeks through their worthiness
Had on their foen much land ywon,
Yet to retire after they begone,
And marvel none because that their fone,
Had always three in noumber against one.
For the time it may none other be,
Till Achilles began behold and se,
The mortal slaughter upon greeks side.
Tourning ye back with wounds large and wide.
Of hasty rancour chaungen began his blood,
And for ire furious and wood,
When he beheld his men lose their land,
He with the swerd which he held in his hand,
Made way killed and bare down,
And in the field like a fierce Lyowne,
He fared in sothe when yt his men were slawe.
Making his foen backwarde to withdraw.
And his greeks so manly recomforte,
That maugre them he made them to resort.
And who that ever in his way stood,
Without mercy he kylleth in his mode.
There gayneth naught in his crueltee,
For doubtless ne had his manhod be,
His passing renown and his worthynesse,
His knighthod eke and his high prowess,
The Greeks had that day fynallye,
Vanquished be without remedy.
But through his help they recure all,
For Achilles sturdy as a wall,
Began search sheltrouns and their ra^ges brake,
Tofore whose face his fomen go to wrake.
And alderlast when he began espy,
Tentran the king through his chyualrye,
Defend him self like a worthy knight,
And as a Lion bare him in his fight,
Now here now there greeks so oppress.
This Achilles of cruel hardynesse,
Ne would cease in his pursewynge,
Through the ward till he came to the king.
Of manly force stout and full of pride,
Making a way round on every side,
Again whose might nothing might avail.
And of Tentran first the auentayle,
He raced has and rent the male asonder,
And al to hew that it was a wonder,
To consydre that day his cruelte.
And after that al to broke has he,
His bassenet with many cruel wound.
And by his might smyt the king to ground.
And in all haste he maked has no let,
From of his head to rende his bassenet.
And merciles for to do vengeance,
His harm he began on heyght to auaunce,
Fully in purpose that he should be dead,
And raunsomles began amyn at his head,
With blody sword and despytous heart,
Castyng plainly he should not asterte,
In his Ire he was so furyous.
But of fortune it befell right thus.
Thelephus the young lusty knight,
Casuelly thereof had a sight,
And of Achilles the manner full beheld,
The stroke anon he bare up with his shield.
And began Achilles mekely for to preye,
To have pytye so to do him deye.
Sith he lay wounded almost to the death.
Brought to the point to yelden up ye breathe.
Beseching him for his beningnyte,
Of manly routhe and eke knightly pity,
Withdraw his hand and to do him grace,
And grant him life for a little space.
Sith every knight should of gentilnesse,
His enmye spare when he is in distress.
To vttraunce brought and specially when he,
Mercy requires of humble voluntee.
To whom Achylles fervent in his ire,
As he that was of rancoure set a fire,
Answered again what list the so to preye,
For him that nolde of pride our will obey.
But gyn a werre where as was no need.
Of high disdain and indignacion,
Having a trust of presumpcion,
In his manhod which might him not avail.
Against greeks to holden a battle.
As it is preuyd plainly in the end,
All otherwise shortly than he wend.
For in the dyche justly he is fall,
Which he has made of malys for us all.
Where we of will nor entencion,
Gave unto him none occasyon,
Upon no side platly fer nor nere,
Nor ministered to him no such matere,
Nor to his land menten no damage.
But he him self ground of all this rage,
Without offense done to him of us.
And efte again this young Thelephus,
Humbly required has of him Achylle,
Of knyghtly routhe his axyng to fulfill.
And to have mercy on him in this case.
For with my father this king whylom was.
Quod Thelephus by bond confederate.
Which lies now here all disconsolate.
Expectant only with a deadly face,
Upon the hour when his ghost shall pace,
Through gyrte alas with many mortal wound.
And for because that I have in him found,
Before this time assured great kyndenesse,
For of manhood and of gentylnesse,
In the bounds of his regiowne,
He unto me through his high renown,
Whylom as I casually began ride,
Showed in soth upon every side,
Full royal chere and great humanite.
That I am bound as of very duytee,
To remember and to have in mind.
And doubtless else me seems I were unkind
Which after would my name foul a twyte,
And for that I in part would him acquit.
I you beseech of respyte of his life.
And Achylles withouten any strife,
Delivered has the story tells thus,
Tentran freely unto Thelephus.
Whether him list to sauen or to spylle.
And when that he had him at his will,
He has considered by his wounds grene,
That were so mortal sothly and so kene,
Of very need that he must dye.
There was no gain nor no remedy.
Nor avail may no medecyne.
The hour when Phoebus westward began decline
And the battle brought was to an end,
While the greeks to their ships wend,
The mean while Tentran for the pain,
Of his wounds began more and more complain.
Without staunche so pyteously they blede.
His officers fast began them speed,
In a lytter made tho full royal,
Toward his paleys and dou^ge own pryncipall,
To carry him soft and easyly.
And at his prayer full benyngly,
Thelephus and also Achylles,
Conveyed him among all the prese,
Till he was brought there as him list to be.
And they received like to their degree.
Full royally the king aye languysshyng,
As he that drew toward his ending,
And might not longer drawn forth a length,
His woeful life so weke was he of strength,
That his spirit must algates wend.
And he in haste caused for to send,
For Achylles and for Thelephus,
And when they came he said unto them thus.
Syres quod he full worthy of degree,
Health and honor with long prosperitee,
Be unto you and goodly adventure,
All the while that your life may dure.
And specially of the Oh Thelephus,
Which haste to me be so gracious,
Of gentilnesse in my pains strong,
Only of grace my life for to prolonge.
But death alas I may not now eschew.
Nor his sword on no part remewe.
Without recure knytte in bitter bonds,
Upon the brincke fall of fatys hondes,
And of my life all fully in dispeyre,
Which of my body never might have heir.
After my day by succession.
As to govern this little regyon.
Which lykely is to stand disconsolate,
Of governance and fully desolate.
Which erst I wan with full great travail,
And to this day with werre and strong bataile
I have it kept as ye well know echone.
And it defended from all manner fone,
Withouten loss years heretoforne.
But recurlees of yore I had it lorne,
Ne had I had help and eke socour,
Of Hercules the great conqueror.
That whylom was father to Thelephus.
So strong so mighty and so chyualrous.
By whose manhood and whose hardiness,
By his knyghthode and great worthynesse,
Which day by day is new of memory,
Of all my foen I had the vyctorye.
He daunted them and made them so a ferde,
Only by rygoure of his sharp sword,
That finally through his manlyhede,
He caused me this reygne to possede.
Maugre their might in peace and quyete.
With septre and crown and my royal seat.
That none of them till that he was dead,
Hardy was to lift up the head,
Against me to speak but words few,
Whereby I may fully declare and show,
By euydence that this little isle,
Is perteynent and longs to Cecyle.
Where Hercules for a memoryall,
Set pillars in his conquest royal.
When he had ride and gone tho so far,
And of Columpna yet the name they bear,
After him called Herculea.
Though some say they hight Herracula.
The name chaungyng by corrupcion.
The which land was whylom mansyon,
To the people of wild Barbarye.
The which kingdom for to magnyfye,
Frederyke sothly the secounde,
Of gold and good passyngly habounde,
That chosen was to be Emperor,
Of Rome town and mighty governor,
And whylom eke king was of Cecyle,
Which made reyse in that large isle,
A mighty toure high and thycke of wall,
As says Guydo for a memoryall,
To put his name long in remembrance,
And for the soil was to his pleasaunce,
With flowers fresh of many sundry hew,
In some books the land was named new,
And ycalled as I understand,
For his fayrenesse the lusty new land.
But Tentran aye lyinge in his pain,
As he that fast began the hour attain,
Of cruel death before his lords all,
He made in haste Thelephus to call,
To his presence and with a mortal chere,
Said openly that all men myghten here.
My son quod he sith nedely I must pace,
Out of this world for gain may no grace,
My life to save through no man's might.
But for because of equytye and right,
I am compelled justly in sentence,
To declare clearly my conscience,
Tofore my death herynge all this prese,
This to say thy father Hercules,
The wise worthy and that knyghtly man,
Whylom this land through his conquest wan:
The which only of his godlyhead,
As he that was the stock of manlyhead,
Took unto me by co^myssyon,
The governance of this regyon:
Of his free will with hole the regally.
And nolde him self the country occupye.
And sothly yet his right was not the less.
For love of whom sith that I shall pass,
With full intent of my last will,
To the I grant as it is right and skylle,
As very heir justly to succeed.
Long in honor therein thy life to lead,
Making there a protestacion,
That in full token and confyrmacion,
This is the will fynall of mine heart.
Fro the which no man may me diuerte,
Upon no side nor utterly declyne.
For first my will and dissent of line,
Be together combyne now in one.
Fro which thing no man may do me gone,
For this desire last of my langour,
That thou plainly be my successor.
And finally thus I conclude and deem,
That unto the Septer and diadem,
Delivered be with every circumstaunce.
But all his will for more assurance,
He made do write it in his testament.
The fine concludynge of his last intent.
And after that he full piteously,
Besought Thelephus most hertely,
Of manly routhe and knyghtly gentilnesse,
To do his deuer and his business.
After his death like his estate royal,
To halowe and hold his feast funeral,
Solemply and the exequies do.
And suddenly without words mo,
The king Tentran yeldeth up the ghost.
And went his way I note to what cost.
I can not deem of such mystyhede.
And when Percas broken had the threde,
On the rock and he was forth his way,
Then Thelephus out of marbell graye,
Curiously a tomb made do carue.
The dead corpse therein to conserve,
Full rychely and above the grave.
An Epythaphe anon he did do grave.
In his honor plainly to express,
His knighthode both and his worthynesse.
And how his ghost and he were deuorced,
With letters rich of gold above enboced.
Round about wonder curious.
On his tomb that sayden plainly thus.
Here lies Tentran the king doubtless,
Whylom slain of cruel Achylles.
That his scepter and the regallye,
Holy gave which no man may deny,
To Thelephus the son of Hercules.
Which in his tomb rests now in peace.
When this performed was in every thing,
And Thelephus of Messa crowned king,
And high and low all by one assent,
Had solempnely in open parliament,
Made faith to him and ydone homage,
Like their degrees as they were of age,
And with hole heart in all their best intent,
By oath assured and by sacrament,
As true lyeges received him for king.
Than Achylles without more taryinge,
When all was set in peace and governance
Without grutchinge or any varyaunce,
To their ships anon he made carye,
Every thing that was necessary,
To the greeks, corn, fruit, or vitayle.
Flesh or, fyshe, or what that might avail.
To hosteynge or help them in their need.
Down to the sea he all this did led,
Fully their vessel for to stuff and lade.
And Thelephus after this he made,
Stylle in bounds of his regyon,
For to abide for this conclusion.
That through his help and his diligence,
Busynes and discrete prouydence,
Again all myschyefe and all scarsytee,
When they need he might their socour be.
ALbe that he like as says Guydo,
With Achilles full feign would have go,
But he abode sothly for the best.
By bond assured fully and beheste.
In every thing greeks to releue,
And than in haste Achilles took his leave.
Of Thelephus and began anon to sail,
All his shyphes stuffed with vitayle,
Toward greeks as made is menciowne.
And in short time he at Tenedowne,
Aryued is and taken has the ground.
With all his knights likewise hole and sound,
And after this to Agamenon,
He first has made full relacion,
Of his exployt like as it was fall.
In the presence of his lords all.
Sittyng enuyron many worthy knight.
And first in Messa he tells of the fight,
When they entered and of their welcomyng,
And ceryously he told eke of the king,
That Tentran hight and plainly also how,
Achylles amydde the fyelde him slow.
And or his death how he of hole intent,
Fully ordained in his testament,
Thelephus also to be his heir.
All this he told and eke of his repair,
Unto the sea and eke of the vyttayle.
And Thelephus how he will not fail,
To send them all that may them please.
Of which thing the greeks in great ease,
Were brought of heart and like wonder well.
When Achilles had told them euerydell,
And greatly preysed his high prouydence.
His manhood both and his sapyence.
In his out being that he bare him so,
And after this Achylles is ygo,
To his lodging a little there beside.
Where his knights upon him abide,
Myrmydones full glade of his coming.
And him received as longs to a king.
Where he abode and rested him a while.
But for Guydo declyneth here his style,
From the greeks to them of Troy town,
I must also make digressyowne,
Of mine auctour the steps for to sewe.
Like as it is convenient and dew,
To my matter sith he is my guide.
And for a while greeks set aside.
I will rehearse how Dares Frygyus,
In Troy book declares unto us,
And ceriously makes menciowne,
Of the lords that came to Troy town,
To helpen them manly in their defense,
Against greeks to maken resystence.
With ordinance of many diverse things,
There came to the^, Earls, Dukes, and kings.
As in Dares plainly is made mind,
Read his book and there ye may yt find.
And alder first I read how that he,
Specially speaks of kings three.
Full manly men and also of great fame.
All be that he reherseth not the name,
Of their kyndomes yet he writes thus,
The first of them was called Pandarus.
And as I read Tapor the second,
The third Andrastrus like as it is found.
And as Guydo list to specyfye,
Three thousand knights in their company,
And manly men they were euerychone.
And from an isle called Coleson,
Like as Dares lists to express,
There came also of excellent prowess,
Kings four of which the first was,
As he has writ ynamed Carras.
And the second hyghte Ymasyus.
Nestor the third the.iiii. Amphymacus.
And five thousand worthy knights all,
There came with them manly for to fall,
Upon the greeks in helping of the town,
And fro ye province known of great renown
Called Lycye came the king Glaucon,
And with him brought his son Sarpedon.
A noble knight in arms full famous,
And was allied to king Pryamus.
And three thousand if I shall not feign,
There came of knights with these lords twain.
And from Larysse a rich land also,
As I find there camen kings two,
And them to quite manly as they ought,
A thousand knights they to Troy brought.
And from a kingdom named Lycaowne,
Euphemus a king of great renown,
Brought with him as Dares does witness,
A thousand knights of great worthynesse.
And five hundred Dares tells us,
Came with Hupon and with Epedus,
Many knights in plates of silver bright,
And with him eke a king yt Remus hight.
Brought.iii. thousand to Troy many mile,
From Tabaria his large mighty isle.
And Dukes four with all their chiualrye,
And Earls.viii. came in his company.
Having in arms great experyence.
And all they bare without difference,
Their men and they when they were in ye fyelde,
The chief of gold eueryche in his shield,
Whereby the king and holy his navy,
Among them all known mighten be,
Albe that other bore eke the same.
Also from Trace king Pylex by his name,
Fro thylke Trace that is most excellent,
Which in the plage of the Oryent,
Haueth his scyte from which this mighty king,
A thousand knights brought at his cominge.
As mine auctor records eke also,
An hundred knights be to Troy go,
With Alchamus a worthy Duke famous.
That came with Pilex Guydo writes thus.
Troyans to help in their great need,
And fro Pauonye sothly as I read,
Came Pretemessus the noble werryour,
Lord of that land king and governor.
And duke Stupex with him also had,
And of knights a thousand that he ladde.
Toward Troy from his region.
And as this storye makes mencyon,
That province stands most by wilderness,
And by woods of plenteous thickenesse,
Wherein grow full many diverse tree,
And most is forest that men may there se.
For they there build houses but a few.
And in that land full diversely them show,
Many likeness queynte and monstrous,
Beasts uncouth to sight merueylous.
Stoundmele as by appearance.
By illusyon false in existence.
Wonder gastfull plainly for to seen,
For diverse gods of the woods grene,
Apperen there called Satyrye,
Bycornes eke Fawny and Incubye.
That cause often men to fall in rage.
And of this land the people full savage.
Hardy knights furyous and wood,
And desirous aye to sheden blood.
Greatly Expert specially to shete,
With darte and spear peryllous for to mete.
For they cast even as any line.
And from an isle that named was Boetine,
In great array to Troy the City,
Like as I find there came Dukes three.
The first of all called Amphymus,
Samus the secounde the third Forcius.
And as says Dares which lists not to lie,
Twelve hundred knights in their company.
And fro Brotyne as made is remembrance
The rich land that has such habundaunce,
Of spyces, gummes, fruits, corn, and wine,
Wholesome rotes, ryndes, rich and fine,
Wonder uncouth and precious also,
Out of which there comen kings two.
Full knightly men in arms desirous,
King Boetes and Epristuis,
And with them brought to Troy from far,
A thousand knights arrayed for the werre.
And fro the land called Pafflagonye,
Which severed is from all company,
As books say that be hystoryall.
Under the plage that is Oryentall,
Set so far as made is rehersayle,
That few or none to that land travail,
For there to come is nere impossyble.
For which that land is called inuisyble,
Because only of his remosion,
And yet yt is a rich regyon.
Of gold and silver also and of stones,
And habundaunte of plentee for the nones.
It is so full of treasour and of good.
And has his scyte on the rich floude,
Ynamed Tygre not fer from Eufrates,
As says mine auctour that called is Dares.
From which land in steel armed clean,
A thousand knights came with Phylomene.
The worthy king whose shildes out of dread,
Were of cuirboilye in Guydo as I read.
With gold depainte and fret with stones rich,
that in this world I trow there was no^e liche,
Out of the floudes chosen by deuyse,
Which have their course out of Paradyse.
The which king a Gyaunt of stature,
And of his making passing all measure.
Strong and deliver also as I find.
And fro the land yt marches upon Inde,
King Perses came with many knightly man,
And he also that with his hand him wan,
So much honor the noble king Menon,
And eke his brother called Sygomon.
Which from the land of their subiectiowne,
Of dukes, earls, and knights of renown,
Three thousand brought all in plates shene.
With speres round whet full square and kene
From Ethyope came this noble route.
And from the kingdom also out of doubt,
That Thereo of Dares called is,
Came the kyngfull prudent and full wise,
The manly man named Theseus,
And eke his son that hight Archylogus.
A thousand knights in their company,
And Theseus full nyghe was of allye,
To Pryamus by dissent of blood.
And kings twain passing rich of good,
And renowned of knighthode as by fame,
Albe that Guydo reherseth not their name.
Yet in this storye he makes mention,
That from Agresta the little regyon,
A thousand knights they brought unto Troy,
The greeks pride to daunte and to acoye.
For they were chosen and pycked for ye nones.
And from: he land beyond the Amazones,
Lyssynya the king Epystrophus,
So wise, so worthy, and inly virtuous.
Passing of counsel and discreciowne,
And with all this full worthy of renown.
He preued was also in special,
And in the arts called lyberall,
He learned was and expert a right.
Notwithstanding he was a worthy knight.
In werre and peace manfull and right sage,
Albe that he was run far in age.
And as the storye makes rehersayle,
A thousand knights cladde in plate and mayle,
To Troy town I find that he ladde.
And with him Guydo says that he had,
A wonder archer of sight meruaylous,
Of form and shap in manner monstrous,
For like mine auctour as I rehearse can,
Fro the navel upward he was man,
And lower down like a horse yshaped,
And thilke part that after man was maked,
Of skin was black and rough as any bear,
Covered with here fro cold him for to were.
Passing foul and horrible of sight,
Whose eyes twain were sparkeling as bright,
As is a furneis with his read leuene.
Or the lyghtnyng that falls from yt heaven,
Dredefull of look and read as fire of chere,
And as I read he was a good archer.
And with his bow both at even and morrow,
Upon greeks he wrought much sorrow.
And gasted them with many hydous look,
So stern he was that many of them quoke,
When they him saw so ougly and horrible.
And more loathsome than it is credible.
That many one has wounded to the death,
And caused them to yelden up the breath.
On greeks side as ye shall after here.
And in this wise assembled been yfere,
Kings, Dukes, and Earls of renown,
From sundry lands within Troy town,
That been ygathred and come fro so far,
As says Dares to help them in this werre.
That were in number as he makes mind,
Two and thirtye thousand as I find.
Of worthy knights and lords of estate,
That sith the world was fourmed and create,
Ne was seen I trow in one City.
Together assembled of so high degree,
Nor of knights so great a multitude.
And yet this Dares sothly to conclude,
In his book makes of them no mind.
That came to Troy out of smaler Inde.
Nouther of them most famous of renown,
That were with Priam yborne of Troy town.
That finally if it be trewly sought,
Sith ye hour that this world was wrought,
I dare affirm under Phoebus sphere,
So many worthy were not met yfere.
Of manly men flouryng in lustynesse,
So fresh, so young, and as by lyklynesse,
In every point of shape and of arraye,
For to do well. for sothly this is no nay,
Who list consider upon outher side,
For through the world where men go or ride,
The flower of knighthode and of worthiness,
Of chyualrye and of high prowess,
Assembled was without and within,
Fully assented the werre so to begin.
Wherefore ye lysters takes now good head,
That you delight in this book to read.
First for how little that this werre began,
How light the cause for which so many a man,
Has lost his life in myschyefe pyteously.
And yet no man can beware thereby.
Almost for naught was this strife begone.
And who list look they have hereby naught won,
But only death alas the hard stound.
So many knight caught his dethes wound,
Without recure or any remedy.
And for a woman if I shall not lie,
Began all this strife it was the more pytie.
That so great mischyefe or aduersytie,
Of mortal slaughter ever should betyde.
Better had be to have set aside,
Such quarelles all dear enough a myte,
And let the^ pass or yt the vengeance byte.
For wisdom were to cast before and se,
If such sklaunders might eschewed be,
Or the venym gynneth for to ripe.
For though ye men with horns blow and pype,
When the house is fyred in his hete,
Of the spark to late is then to treat,
That caused all wherefore at the gynnynge,
The remedy is put of every thing.
As every wight may deem in his reason.
And while that greeks lay at Tenedon,
Them to refreshe and to rest in peace,
The worthy king that hight Pallamydes,
With thirtye ships out of greeks land,
Stuffed with knights full worthy of their hand,
The best choice of all his regyon,
Aryued is up at Tenedon.
Whereof the greeks when they had a sight,
Reioysynge them were right glad and light,
Having regard unto his worthynesse.
Where they before had made heaviness,
For his absence that he was so long.
And some of them grutched at him strong,
For he ne kept his mouster at Athene.
But for to show that he was all clean,
Of any spotte in his conscience,
Full manfully in open audyence,
Like a knight he began him self excuse,
Stoppyng all tho that thereon list to muse.
Of his absence showing the cause why,
That for sykenesse and sodeyne malady,
He was constrained his presence to withdraw
And for they saw that sycknesse has no law,
They held excused fully his absence.
And for he was of most reverence,
Among greeks so no wight the secounde.
And was also full wise and eke habounde,
Of gold and good auyse and prudent,
That what so ever he set on his intent,
Knyghtly and wisely he would aye well achieue.
And what soever he began he nolde it leave,
Maugre his foen in no manner wise.
Till that he saw a fine of his empryse.
And for he was most of opinion,
Among greeks and reputacion.
They him besought that he would be,
Of their counsel auisely to forse,
What were to do in every manner thing.
And he assenteth unto their axynge.
Benyngly of his great gentilnesse.
And greeks than did their business,
To proceed withouten more delay,
Them to enhaste in all that ever they may,
To gyn a syege and differ it naught.
And sundry ways they serched have and sought
In their wits how from Tenedowne,
They may remeue toward Troy town.
From the haven where their ships be.
And some thought most commoditee,
For best exployt by night pryuely,
Toward Troy town that stood but fast by,
Proudely to sail with their ships all.
And some said great peril might be fall,
Toward night for take the sea,
Lest with derkenesse they ennosed be.
In their passage knowing not the way.
Whereof great harm after fall may.
And thus diverse of opinion,
Procedyng not to no conclusyon,
For in effect their purpose not ne held,
But still abyden lodged in the fyelde.
Like as they had entryked be with dread.
Till on a day the worthy Dyomede,
Of the greeks seeing the cowardyse,
Even thus he his counsel began deuyse.
Syres quod he that be here now present,
If that he list all by one assent,
Goodly consider aduertyng prudently,
What I shall say tofore you openly,
Which of knighthode have so noble name,
sothly me seems we oughte^ have great shame,
Which hold our self so mighty and so strong,
And in this land soiourned have so long,
Nigh all this year and dursten in no wise,
Remove hense for very cowardice.
What have we do naught else certainly,
But to our foen granted folyly,
Even at their lust space and liberte,
To make them strong and oportunite,
Us to withstand plainly at the hand,
And so they will ye may well understand.
For day by day to our confusiowne,
They sought ways full wisely up and down,
To get them help in the mean space,
And them enforced about in every place,
Their large Cite with bars and with palis.
Their walls mascued and again our skalis,
Trusts thereon made great ordinance.
And with all this of our governance,
They have espied seeing that for dread,
We have no heart manly to proceed,
In our purpose to hold with them the werre.
And aye the more they se that we differ,
The more they will catchen hardiness.
Us to resyste with all their business.
Also I se and trust it verily,
That if we had before hand manfully,
As we began knightly forth continued,
Our Journey had better be fortuned.
If suddenly with strong and mighty hand,
They unadvised we had into their land,
Without abode before this time arrived.
Of which a while we must be deprived.
And delayed where first the victory,
To our honor with palm of high glory,
We might sothly ne had be our slouthe,
Our will complyshed this the plain truth
Where maugre us or we to land ariue,
With strong defense they will again us strive.
And put us of or we the stronde may win.
For aye the more we tarry to begin,
The more in sothe for me list not lie,
We put our self echone in Ieopardye,
What should I said or fage from ye truth.
For our tarying and our cowarde slouthe,
Are likely after to turn us to great sorrow.
Wherefore betimes on the next morrow,
My counsel is our ankers up to pulle.
In this matter no longer that we dulle.
But to enarme our ships for the werre,
And at the vprise of the morrow sterre,
Let us ordain with knightly apparayle,
Out of this haven with the wind to sail.
Of manly heart and lusty fresh courage.
Our course holdinge and our right passage,
Toward Troy and landen openly.
What ever fall for trust sykerlye,
Without scarmishe we may not ariue.
For they of Troy descend will as bliue,
Like manly men to mete us in the berde.
But for all that let us not be aferde,
But dread avoyde and manhod set before,
That cowardice ne enter at no bore.
For to adaunt the manhood of your heart.
And with that word greeks began aduerte,
The manly counsel of this Diomede,
And in effect to proceed in deed,
Unto the point and for nothing will spare,
And in what wise anon I will declare.
How the greeks la^ded tofore Troy, where they were stoutly fought with all.
Ca. xxi.
THe next morrow wonderly betime,
Or Phoebus rose long or it was prime,
When it began full merrily to dawe.
The greeks host to shipward ginnen draw,
With manly heart fully deuoyde of dread,
Only through comfort of this Diomede.
But alder first anon as they awake,
The lords wisely began their counsel take,
And concluded among them euerichone,
Which of their ships should ye formest gone,
And on the sea how they should them guye.
So to ariue that no man them aspye.
This was devised at a certain mark.
The night past at singing of the lark,
Greeks ben shipped without more tarying.
Both high and low rathe in the dawning.
And first tofore an hundred ships of toure
Stuffed with many worthy werrioure,
Began proudly sail as they had in charge,
And their baners broad bright and large,
Were displayed out on every side,
As they depart the fomy wawes wide.
That to sight whelmen up so grene.
And next to them for werre enarmed clean,
Another hundred followed fast by.
Which bare their sails passing proudly.
In which there was full many worthy knight
Armed in mayle and in plates bright.
And after follows holy their nauye,
That as I trow such a company,
Of worthy knights and lords of degree,
Was never before seen upon the sea.
And Eolus was to them fortunate,
And eke Neptune made tho none debate,
with wind nor trouble among ye stern wawes,
The attempre wether full merry to the^ dawes.
That in a tide as they sailed tight,
Of Troy town they caught anon a sight.
Whereof in heart full glad and light they be.
But when Trojans first their ships se,
So proudely sail a litell from the stronde,
And saw how they cast thenn for to land,
They bode no more but arm them hastily,
In plate and mayle and Iackes richly,
With Irous heart and that was done anon,
And took their horse and forth in have they gone
Out at the gates and made no tariynge,
For they ne bide prince duke nor king.
Nor other lord to guide them or govern,
But have them forth so many and so yerne,
Through out the field so great a multitude,
Among whom were no folks rude,
But manly men thriftely be said.
So clenly armed on the large plain.
That when ye greeks began them first behold,
The great number made their hertes cold.
For there was none so manly them among,
So young so fresh so hardy nor so strong.
Of high estate nor of low degree,
That he ne was astoned for to se,
The hardy Troia^s so proudly down descend.
To let Greeks that they not assende.
That well they wist and seem utterly,
There was none other mean tariue by,
But only death or manly for to fight,
Or cowardly take them to the flight.
For other conduyte plainly none there was.
But sharp sword and speres in this case.
Till suddenly the hardy fierce king,
Prothesalius which in his gouerninge,
Formest of all an hundred ships ladde,
Began have him for Ire that he had,
To win the land first if it would be.
To mete with them so great desire had he.
But such a wind began in the sail drive,
Of his ships when he shope to ariue*
That he unawarely s(...) upon the land.
On the getteys and the dry sonde,
That his ships shiuered all asonder,
And some dreynt to broke here and yon^er.
And devoured of the wawy see,
That it was routhe and pity for to se.
For greater part as tho gone to wrake,
And whiles some were busy for to take.
The dry land with filth and mudde ylade,
Trojans of them full cruel slaughter made.
Maugre their might greeks so constrained,
That with their blud the wawes were ystayned
So mortally that sothly to behold,
Among the sonde pale dead and cold,
The greeks lie with wou^des fresh and grene.
And all the air with shote of arowes kene,
Yshadowed was ye Phoebus beams bright,
Upon the soil was derked of his light.
And new always Trojans them assail,
That to greeks plainly this ryuayle,
So mortal was and so unfortunate,
So vnwelfull and disconsolate,
So undisposed through infelicitee,
That I trow never erst out of see,
Ne came none host more harder to the land.
But for all that greeks ne would wonde,
For life nor death manly to aryue.
And so befelle of adventure as blyue,
Three hundred ships ye next after sewe,
Aduysedly and in a time dew,
Be entered and in haste not to fast.
And stryke sail and their ankers cast.
For they were there strongly enbatayled,
In their londyng lest they were assailed,
And wisely first they set their Arbalasters,
And their gonners and their best archers.
With pauysers for to go aforne,
Knightly to land though troia^s hadde^ sworn,
The contrary proudely them to let,
Yet for all that fyersly up they set,
The grekishe shote made them to withdraw.
And many of them on the land lay slawe.
That maugre them the stro^de they recure.
And such as might most manfully endure,
Was set before till they the land have take.
And all attones such assaute they make,
Upon Troyans and tho began the fight.
When Prothesylaus ye noble worthy knighte,
Wonder lyfely and right passing strong,
With the greeks that entered in among.
The hardy trojans and every where the^ sought
For he of arms meruayles on the^ wrought,
Thilke day through his worthiness,
That many Troyan he brought in distress,
Where as he went they felt full vnsofte.
Through whose manhod greeks were alofte,
For thilke day no had his knighthod be,
The greeks had in great aduersite,
Be vanquished by fatal purueyaunce,
And finally brought unto vttraunce.
Yout abacke plainly this no lie,
But what avails all his chiualrye.
His worthiness or his fierce courage,
What might it help or do advantage.
Sith. vii. thousand greeks had ado
With an hundred thousand Trojans tho.
It marvel was how they might endure,
In any wise the stronde to recure.
Or so few for to hold a field,
But in them self one thing they beheld,
Full prudently which tho gave them heart,
That they saw they mighten not asterte,
To escape with life if they woulden fle.
For at their back was nothing but the sea.
And them to fore an host so great and huge,
And other way was there no refuge,
But dye attones or fight manfully.
Wherefore they cast and shope them knightly,
Like manly men their lives rather ieoparte,
Than cowardly from their foen depart.
To lose their ground and drenchen in the sea.
And thus as long as it would be,
Greeks defend them for above their might,
Albe that many killed were in this fight.
That the streams of their red blood,
Ran in the sonde large as any flode.
So cruelly Trojans on them set.
With spear and swerd full sharp ground and whet.
That routhe was and pity for to think,
Till they almost drove them to the brinke.
Where the greeks in mischief and distress,
In great anguishe and passing werinesse,
Them self defend mate and full ywery.
Where they should have peryshed utterly,
Recureles in sothe for evermore,
Ne had Archelaus and worthy Prothenor,
From their ships aryued unto land.
Of sudden hap with them for to stand.
And yet they had full great aduersyte,
For to ariue through the cruelte,
Of the Trojans but yet the land they win.
And greeks than cruelly begin,
Again their foen to standen at defense,
With manly force and with great violence.
Tho began increase the blody werre new,
That all ye soil depeynted was with the dew.
That first was grene turned into red,
On each side so many one lay dead.
Upon the ground of his life depryued.
But duke Nestor all suddenly arrived,
With his knights fell and full Irous,
And of heart right melancolious.
With his speres and archiers out aside,
He entered in stern and full of pride.
With sword and are ground sharp and kene.
They ran yfere and met upon the grene,
And hoked arowes always flewe among,
And shaftes shiuer brast and turn wrong.
And with their toles steled and well whet,
The long day they have together met.
And the slaughter new always began.
On every half of many worthy man.
With wounds large and despytous.
For Prothenor and king Archelaus,
With swerdes stiff among the renges kerue,
That many Trojan made for to sterue,
They were that day so passingly Irous.
And them tauenge inly desirous,
Never seasing in their pursewing,
And to releue them Alagus the king,
Ylonded is and eke king Attalus,
Which on Trojans were full envious.
Brenning of ire as the fiery glede,
And upon them of very old hatrede,
With their knights suddenly be fall,
And in their ire bitterer than gall,
Cruelly there they their foen oppress,
And of assent did their business,
Maugre them backwarde to resort,
Amide the field as I can report,
There was no choice so they were co^streyned
Of very force and of manhood payned,
To withdraw to their confusiowne.
But than in have down from Troy town,
Of worthy knights freshly armed new,
With deuyses of many sundry hew,
Without abode shortly to conclude,
There came down so great a multitude,
Each his arms depaynte upon the shylde,
That in their coming glittereth all the field,
Of their armure as the son bright.
And when that they were entered in to fight,
Greeks metynge felly by envy,
They set upon fret with melancolye.
With such a will of heart and of courage,
With such furye in their mortal rage,
That to accord was none other mean.
But slaught and death them to go between.
Through stroke of axe of dagger and of spear.
That of force compelled the greeks were,
Them return backwarde to the stronde.
To whose rescuse anon there came to land,
The king Vlixes with his hole nauye.
And full knightly with his chiualrye,
Toward Trojans enhasteth him anon.
And of one heart the greeks with him gone,
And their courage holy they resume,
And began their foen felly to consume.
Unto the death their damage to revenge.
That no wight may justly them challenge,
Of manhood so well they have them borne.
To acquit again their harms done beforne
At which time like a fierce Lyowne,
Among Trojans ranging up and down,
Vlixes went with his sword in hand.
He kills sleeth and knightly began to fond,
Thilke day like a man be found.
And here and there with many mortal wound,
Upon Trojans he wrought all this wrack.
The^ bering down on foot and on horse back.
In his ire his strokes were so kene.
At which time worthy Philomene,
Lord and king of Pafflagonye,
When he beheld with his company,
So many Trojan of Vlixes slawe,
Toward him anon he began him draw,
On horse back and with a spear round,
Out of his sadyll bare him to the ground.
But Vlixes rose up anon right,
Taking his horse like a manly knight,
The which anon as Philomene has said,
Took eft a spear and rode to him again.
So mightily and with such violence,
That finally there gayneth no diffence,
But that he smote him even through ye shield,
The which flewe asonder in the field.
And through his plates without any fail,
The spear head and rested in the mayle.
That forged was of stele full shene and bright,
Which to perce the spear head has no might.
So trewly made was the haberiowne.
But with that stroke Vlixes was bore down.
Yet efte again he hastes up anon,
Ne of this stroke herme felt he none.
And raught a spear sharp whet and ygrounde,
And Philomene he gave such a wound,
With all the might of his arms twain,
Of yrous heart with so great a pain,
That through his sheld both ye plate and maile,
He smote him up through his auentayle,
Into the gorge that the stock began glyde,
That from his horse he fell down aside,
Full peryllously pyght upon his head.
His knights wenyng sothly he were dead.
Which took him up and laid him on a shield,
And bare him home in have out of the field.
With great danger or they might him wyn,
Through the greeks with their lord to twyn.
And for Trojans supposed sykerly,
That Philomene withouten remedy,
Had be dead they were astoned all.
That if this case that day ne had befall,
Of Phylomene greeks on the stronde,
Had be outrayed arruing up to land.
Through the knighthod this is doubtless.
Of Phylomene whom that Vlyxes,
Unhorsed has with a mortal wound,
In knightly wise Trojans to confound,
Whereof they were astoned euerychon.
But Thoas than and Agamenon,
Of Greeks hooste lord and emperor,
Aryued is unto their socoure.
With all his knights and Menelaus,
And eke the worthy Thelamonious.
Called Ayax is to land come.
And they at leisure have their horse nome,
While other greeks Trojans occupye,
Sore fighting and they began fast hye,
Toward them making no delay,
All in a frushe in all the have they may,
They ran yfere and their speres bracke,
With heart enuyous upon horse back.
There might men the worthy knights se,
On their stedes each at other flee.
With styffe swords shaftes great and round.
With hedes square the points kene ground.
There might men se in their furyous tene,
So many knights dead upon the grene.
But most the slaughter and confusyowne,
Fell thilke time of them of the town.
The greeks were so mighty and so strong.
And in the field this contynueth long,
Til Prothesylay the strong mighty king.
Which all the day in skarmishe and fighting.
Full like a knight had occupied be,
Again Trojans in his cruelte,
Of manhood only and of worthiness.
Of adventure in his werynesse,
Him to refreshe and to taken air,
And to abrethe him making his repeyre,
To the stronde where he did aryue,
Where as he thought his heart began to ryue,
Of cruel ire and also of pity,
That he has caught only for to se,
His men slain endlonge on the stronde.
And some of them coming up to land,
Dreynt in the sea among the flodes deep.
For which thing he began anon to weep,
Full pyteously all were it not aspyed,
Whose woeful eyes might not tho be dried,
For the constreynt which sat so nygh his heart.
Till at the last among his pains smerte,
So cruel ire began his heart enbrace,
That suddenly with a despytous face,
Without abode thought how that he,
Upon their death would avenged be,
Or finally attones with them deye.
And on his stead he took the right weye,
Toward his foen full yrous in his rage,
And line right he holds his passage,
Swift as grayhounde yt renneth out of lose,
And where he saw that greatest was ye prefe,
He preceth through amiddes of the field,
And with the sword yt in his hand he held,
That ground was to kerue and to byte,
Full mortally about him began he smite.
That these Trojans might him not asterte,
That he ne ryueth some unto the heart.
And some he wounds sothly to the death,
And some he made yelden up the breath.
And some also vnhorseth cruelly.
And whom he met that day utterly,
From his horse he made him to alyght.
For where he rode they fled out of his sight,
And his presence as the death eschew,
But still in one he began them after sewe.
In his chase like as a wood lion,
For thus he plays with them of the town.
Till Perseus of Etheopye king,
Came from the Cite suddenly riding,
With many a knight and many lively man,
At whose coming of new there began,
A fresh skarmyshe furyous and wood.
That many greek that day lost his blood.
So fell assaute Trojans on them make,
Among them the Ethiopes blake.
To manly bare the^ fighting here and there,
That where the Trojans were before in fere,
Remounted be and of new assured,
yt through their help they have ye feld recured
And made them lose also much again,
As they tofore wonnen on the plain.
For they so hole and so mightily,
Kept them together and so auysely,
Governed them with glaue spear and shield,
That greeks were compelled in the field,
Maugre who grutche of necessyte,
To the stronde backwarde for to flee,
Almost dispayred mate and comfortles.
But in that while king Pallamides,
To their rescous came to aryuayle,
All lusty fresh enters into battle,
With his knights and his hole maynee.
Taking their horse tho fast by the sea,
And proudly thense embushed all at ones,
With spear and sword yground for the nones,
By wise government in their doing.
Have so oppressed at their in coming,
The manly Trojans that it was a wonder,
To se them lie slain here and yonder.
And this continues til among the prese,
Of adventure that Pallamides,
Brenning aye in his furious hete,
Amid the field happeth for to mete,
A worthy knight called Sygamon,
Which brother was to the king Menon.
Neuewe also as Guido does rehearse,
This manly man to the king Perce.
Which Greeks had that day sore oppressed,
By his knighthod as it is expressed,
For he the greeks to his worthiness,
Had often sithes brought in great distress.
The same day to his great increase.
But of Fortune alas Pallamydes,
As I you told has in the fyelde him met.
And with a spear square and sharp whette.
When he of knighthod was most in his pride,
He rode at him and smote him through ye side,
And with that last deadly fatal wound,
From his stead he bare him to the ground.
And on the plain of his blood all red,
Pallamydes left him pale and dead,
Among them that of Troy were.
And forth he rode and bare down here and there,
All that ever in his way stood.
He was on them so furyous and wood.
Maugre Trojans tofore him on the plain,
Made resort to the wall again,
His manly knights always fast by,
On him awayting full ententifely.
Ready to hand at every great emprise,
But tho began the noyle to arise,
The woeful clamor and the pyteous cry,
Of them of Troy the which utterly,
Again greeks mighten not sustene.
The mortal sword was so sharp and kene,
Of the noble worthy famous knight,
Pallamydes that with his great might,
The long day has yborne him so,
Again his foen and so knightly do,
In his person through his high renown,
That chased has almost to the town,
Trojans echone and manly made them flee.
The noise of whom is entered the Cite,
The hydous cry and the mortal shoute.
Whereof amened Hector yssueth out,
Furyously in all the have he can,
The son of Mars this knight this ma^ly man,
Of all worthy yet the worthiest.
That ever was and the hardiest.
For as Phoebus with his beams clear,
Among the sterres right so did he appear,
Excellyng all in steel armed bright,
On whom it was a very heavenly sight.
For it was he that both nigh and terre,
Of worthiness was the lode sterre.
The which when he entered into field,
Like as I read bare that day a shield,
The fyelde of which was of pure gold,
With three Lions in storye as is told.
Of whose color is made no mention,
But as I find by description,
They were passant if I report a right,
Borne on the breast of this Trojan knight.
That was ye ground and rote of high prowess.
And flower accounted of all worthiness.
The which so manly without more abode.
Among his knights to the greeks rode,
So like a man that they in his cominge,
Astoned were as he began in thringe.
Among the^ which kills down and slethe,
And whom he met there was not but death,
Before his swerd greeks go to wrake.
And their wards of knightly force he brake,
Maugre their head and severed the^ a sonder,
And bare all down ridyng here and yonder.
And casually he meteth in his way,
Prothesylaus which all the long day,
Had sore fought against them of Troy.
And slew all tho that comen in his way.
This hardy knight this worthy fierce king,
Which on Trojans was ever pursewyng,
He had to them so hertely great envy.
The which thing when Hector began espy,
And of his knyghthod began to taken head,
Toward him tho turns he his stead,
And line right of hasty Ire he rode,
And with his sword disteyned al with blood,
He cloue his head through his basenet.
With such a might that his stroke nas let,
By force of mayle nor of thick plate,
But finally as was his mortal fate,
the swerd of Hector through nerve bone and vain
This worthy king parted has on twain.
For utterly there gayneth none armure,
Again the stroke of Hector to endure.
But that this king so full of worthiness,
Strong mighty and of great hardiness,
Received has his last fatal wound.
And lies now dead parted on the ground.
And Hector forth among the greeks rides,
And whosoever his stroke so abides,
Refute was none nor diffence but death.
And many greek thus that day he sleyth,
For which of them tho in his way stood,
His sharp sword he batheth in his blood.
That also far as they might him se,
As the death from his sword they fle.
So mortal vengeance upon the^ he wrought.
And many a greek at his fellow sought,
And began enquere what he might be,
For all their life they could never se,
None so knightly have him in battle.
And plainly dempte as by supposayle,
It was Hector the noble warryour.
Which of knighthode bare away the flower,
Among all that ever yet were borne.
For there nas greek that him may stand aforne
Of all that day he began them so enchace,
To the stronde even before his face.
For they ne durst his mortal stroke abide,
And when he had this on every side,
The greeks chaced to the wawy sea,
Wounded and mate in great aduersyte,
Then him to rest this Troyan knight anon,
Like Mars himself home to Troy is gone.
AT whose partynge greeks efte presume,
Manly again their hertes to resume.
And of new their fomen to assail.
And to inparte if it would avail,
Life and death to set at outraunce,
On fortunes list if she would auaunce,
Their part again in recure of the fyelde.
And the^ enforce with might of spear and shield,
Anon forthwith and maken no delay,
To win again on Troyans if they may.
For.viii. times sythen they begone,
The field they have that day lost and won.
Like as fortune list to do their cure,
Up or down for to turn her eure.
For as her whele went about round,
Right so that day they wan and lost their ground.
But specially they weren most desmayde.
When Hector came which has the^ so outraide,
Through his knighthod made their hertes ryue,
And to resort where they did aryue.
And thus continued mauger all their might,
While in the field was this Troyan knight.
Till Phoebus chere began to westre down,
That he repaired is into the town,
Which had greeks wrought before full ill.
But now the hardy cruel fyres Achyll,
Aryued is with his knights all,
Myrmydones whom men are wont to call.
Which from the sea taken have the plain,
At whose coming greeks have again,
The fyelde recured and put them self in prese
Only through help of worthy Achylles.
Which is so felly Troyans fall upon,
That he of them has slain full many one.
For three thousand in steel armed bright,
With him he brought ready for to fight.
Knights echone full worthy of renown.
Which with Achylles greeks champyowne,
Have merciless in their crueltee,
Slain many Troyan out of the City.
They were so fervent in their mortal Ire.
So enuyous of hate to desire,
New and new for to shede their blood.
For Achylles thought it did him good.
With his sword ye Trojans blood to shede,
And on the soil to se them lie and blede.
Rowthlesse in his melancolye.
For he to them has so hot envy,
Without their death that it may not quench.
And he his sword full deep has made drenth,
Throughout the day in the Troyans blood.
And batheth it as it were in a floude.
Which forged was and ywhette so knene.
That many river sothly on the grene,
Ran here and there of the hurtes sore.
And with his knights always more and more,
Pursued them before him as they flee.
Hard to the walls of Troy the cytee.
Where dolefully they made a pyteous cry.
And in this while I find in the storye,
The greeks host holy is aryued,
Like in Guydo as it is descryued.
Of men of arms such a multitude,
And of knights shortly to conclude,
That from their ships of new landed be,
That they of Troy astoned were to se,
And abashed began to wexen all,
For suddenly there gynneth on them fall,
On every half passyngly great prese.
And ever in one this hardy Achilles,
With his sword made their sides red,
For here and there lay the bodies dead,
He wounded some at enter of the gate,
And knightly there with them he began debate.
And furyously this fell cruel knight,
The children slew in their fathers sight.
That to behold it was great pity,
And yet the slaughter tho greater had be,
Numbrelesse of them of the town,
Perpetually to their confusyowne,
Lykely for ever to have be overcome,
If Troylus ne had to rescuse come.
Yenge, fresh, lusty, and inly desirous,
With whom come Paris and Deiphobus,
And many worthy their party to socoure,
So that the greeks tho ne might endure,
Against them to standen at deffence.
For all their pride nor maken resystence.
Worthy Troylus so well yt time him quytte.
For this in soth what greek that he hytte,
Outher he maymeth or he made him deye.
Wherefore as death they fled out of his weye.
And fyerse Achylles with his company,
For it was night homewarde began him hye.
Toward greeks with glory and honor,
And they receive him like a conqueror.
Which at that time so happily were met.
And they of Troy have their gates shet.
And made the^ strong throughout al ye town,
And in this time king Agamenowne,
Yserched has a place couenable,
Which to him was thought most agreeable,
By liklyhod and most convenient,
For every lord to pytchen there his tente.
And in a fylde that was full large of space,
Most competent as for lodgyng place,
In dew scyte set for the Cite,
Each lord was signed where as he should be.
And began anon ordeyne mansyons,
Pytched their tents and pauyllyons,
And such as there might no Tentoryes have,
From storm and rain them self for to save,
They devised other habytacles.
Tiguryes and small receptacles,
To shroude them in and all the night also,
From their ships they hadden much ado.
Or they might well have their horse to land,
And to ordeyne where they shulden stand.
And they also busye for to carye,
Other things that weren necessary,
And nedefully unto a syege long.
And eke they made tie their ships strong,
For in the port their ankers have they cast.
And of assent they busyed them full fast,
For to confyrme of one entenciowne,
To set a syege tofore Troy the town,
And thereupon a bound assured fast,
For to abide while their life many last.
Finally without repentance.
And prudently they made their ordinance,
As they best could all the long night,
They beat their fyres which brennen wonder light,
And at a space divided fro the fyres,
They set up like to these barriers,
And round about where their lodgyng was,
They paled them all the fyelde compase.
And to acheue the fine of their purpose,
They slyly wrought and kept the^ self aye close.
And the king that no treason fall,
Let make watch without his tents all.
Of such as had rested them before.
And his mynstrelles he made ouermore,
As says Guydo all the long night,
To keep their tides tofore the fyres bright.
Meryly to sown their Instruments,
And them he made rest in their tents,
That had before weary be of fight.
And in the sea were faynted of their might.
And others eke he made in their armure,
Awayte wisely again all adventure.
That no deceit were found upon no side.
And thus this king knightly can provide
In his aduyce that nothing him escape.
And all the night I find how he did wake.
Till on the morrow that the rows red,
Of Phoebus chare gonne for to sprede,
And thus each thing disposed as it ought,
I will proceed to tellen how they wrought.
Ceryously without and eke within,
With your support the third book begin.
Thus ends the second book.
The third book.
Of the first battle wherein Hector showed him self in valyauncye tofore all
other. Capitulo.xxii.
WVhen Aurora with her pale light,
Under ye mantel of the mirke night.
And the curtyne of her hewes fade,
Yshrouded was in the derke shade,
Abashed rud die as I can defyne,
Only as she that is Femynyne,
For ashamed durst not tho be seyne,
Because she had so long a bed leyne,
With fresh Phoebus her own chosen knight.
For which she hid her sothly out of sight.
Till his stead that called is Flegonte,
Enhasted him above our Orizonte.
And Appollo with his beams clear,
Has recomforted her oppressed chere.
This to say after the dawning.
When Tytan was up in East rysinge.
Of his hete atempre and right soft,
Their hemisphere for to glade a lofte.
The same hour the Troyan champiowne,
Governor of werres of the town,
Worthy Hector which in the Cite,
Next Pryam had of all the souereyntee,
The town to guide by knightly excellence,
For his manhood and his sapyence.
Of Troyan knights lord and eke cheuetaine,
Which has commanded in a large plain,
To high and low he exceptynge none,
Kings, princes, and lords euerychone,
The same morrow for to mete yfere,
In their array to mustre and appear.
Like as they were of name and of estate.
Beside a temple whylom consecrate,
To the goddess that called is Dyane.
Most honored in this rich phane.
There to array them in all the haste they can,
Like the deuyse of this knyghtly man.
And in this plain passing fair to se,
Was set amydde of Troy the Cite.
Smoth and right fair and full of fresh flowers.
Where all the worthy noble werryours,
Of Troy town together assembled be,
And many other to behold and se,
The famous knights arm them in yt place.
And some of them began full streyte lace,
Their doublettes made of lynnen clothe.
A certain fold that about him goth.
And some also dempte most sureste,
To arm them for battle of areste,
And did on first after their desires,
Sabatons greues cussues with voyders,
A pair brech alder first of mayle,
And some there were eke that ne would fail,
To have of mayle a pair brase.
And therwithall as the custom was,
A pair gussettes on a pety coote,
Garnished with gold up unto the throat.
A paunce of plate which of the self behind,
Was shot and close and thereon as I find,
Enuyron was abordure of small mayle,
And some chose of the new entayle,
For to be surmyd of all their foes,
And hole breast plate with arere dors.
Behind shet or else on the side,
And on his arms rynged not to wide,
There were voyders fretted in the mayle.
With cords round and of fresh entayle,
Vambras with wings and rerebras thereto,
And thereon set were besaguys also,
Upon the head a basenet of stele,
That within was locked wonder well,
A craftye sight wrought in the viser,
And some would have of plate a bauer,
That on the breast fastened be aforne,
The canell piece more easy to be borne.
Gloves of plate of stele forged bright,
And some for they would armed be more light,
In thick Iackes covered with satyne.
and some would have of mayle wrought full fine,
An hawberion of late wrought cassade,
That with weight he be not over lade.
Him self to welde like a lyfly man,
And some will have of chose geseran,
On his boublet but an hawberyon.
And some only but a sure gepon,
Over his polrynges rechinge to the knee.
And that the sleues eke so long be,
That his vambras may be cured ner.
A pryckynge palet of plate the cover.
And some will have also no vyser,
To save his face but only an aser,
And some will have a pair of plates light,
To welde him well when that he shall fight.
And some will have a target or a spear,
And some a pauade his body for to were.
And some a targe made strong to last,
And some will have darts for to cast.
Some a poilax headed of fine stele,
And pycked square for to last well.
And some a sword his enemy for to mete,
And some will have a bow for to shete.
Some an arblast to standen out a side,
And some on foot and some for to ride.
Array them self their fomen for to sail,
And many one was busye for to nail,
His fellows harneys for to make it strong,
And to dress it that it set not wrong.
With points tasshyes and other manner thing,
That in such case longs to armynge.
I have no conning every thing to tell,
And unto you were to long to dwell,
Where I fail ye mot have me excused,
For in such craft I am but little used.
And ignorance does my pennelette,
In order dew my terms for to set.
And often chau^geth such harneys and deuyse,
And ye that be therein expert and wise,
Disdeyne not that I speak in this place,
Of their armynge for all is in your grace.
Right at your list correct it euerydell.
And when Hector saw that al was well,
And every man armed and arrayed,
This worthy knight no longer has delayed,
Aduysedly his wards for to make,
And prudently badde they shulden take,
Their ground in haste to put all in certain,
And stand in order endlonge on the plain.
So that no man found were recheles.
And the gate called Dardanydes,
Without abode Hector made vnshette,
And after bad that men should do fette,
To his presence that it were done in haste,
Cyncynabor his brother borne in baste.
And unto him first of euerychon,
And to a lord that named was Glaucon,
The kings son of Lycye and his heir,
With many baner auaunsed in the air,
To these two Hector gave the guarde.
And governance of the first ward.
In which he has a thousand knights set,
With speres round and swords kene whette.
And on their breast full many rich shyelde,
And they were chosen out in all the field,
Among the best that endure might.
Again greeks manly for to fight.
And unto them Hector bad anon,
In gods name that they shulden gone.
Out at the gate sothly as I read.
And lest they fill in mischief or in need,
He assygned in the self place,
With manly chere to the king of Trace,
Wisely on him to be awaytyng.
A thousand knights to have at his ledyng.
In a wynge knyghtly to abide,
To wait on him upon every side,
And with him his son Archylogus,
Of his age a man right virtuous,
To fulfill that longs to a knight,
For both he had heart and also might.
And next to them Hector began deuyse,
The next ward to the king of Fryse,
That in his time called was zantipus.
And unto him strong and desirous,
He assygned to wait on his banere,
Three thousand knights armed bright and clear.
With which ward king Alcanus also,
Of Hector was commanded for to go,
And to his byddyng he mekely did obey,
And full knyghtly taken have their way,
Out at the gate passyngly arrayed.
Toward greeks with baners all displayed.
And their penons vnrolled euerychone.
And Hector then assygned has anon,
To the noble young lusty fresh and free,
His brother Troylus so goodly on to se.
Which in knyghthode had all suffysaunce.
The third ward to have in governance.
With three thousand knights young of age,
Flourynge in force hardy of courage.
Such as he was of custom wont to lead.
To whom Hector of very brotherhead,
Full goodly spoke and said at his partynge.
Brother quod he my heart is so loving,
Toward the of very kyndnesse,
That though I have in party great gladness,
Of thy manhood that so far is kouthe,
And the knyghthode of thy grene youth.
Yet doubtless I in my fantasye,
Full often a day stand in iupardye,
Of pensyfehead and in busye dread,
When I remember upon thy manhead.
Lest thy courage be to vyolent.
Of thy life to be neglygent.
Thy self to put to far in adventure,
Of surquidrye so much to assure.
In thy force knightly to a sterte,
Every peril in thy manfull heart.
Having regard in such mortal strife,
Of wylfulnesse nouther to death nor life.
Nor aduertence to thy sauacyowne
But as fortune turns up and down,
Her whele meuable hye and after low.
In Martes Ire as the wind does blow.
Which causes me full often syghe and think,
And to wake when that I should wynke.
Reuoluynge aye thy hasty wylfulnesse.
But gentle brother for any hardynesse,
Thus ylke day upon every side,
I pray the so wisely to provide,
For hate or ire thy foes pursuynge,
Not to excede more than is setting.
But let prudence keep the in a mean,
And wisdom eke hold again the reyne.
Of thy heart and thy fyerse courage,
That fyred have thy grene tender age.
Deuoyde of dread each peril to endure,
That our enemies of thy mysauenture,
Rejoice not mine own brother dear.
And mighty Mars I pray of heart entere,
Thus every day on the Troyans ground,
From their hands the to keep sound.
Like as I would that he did do me.
To whom anon with all humilite,
In manly wise this young lusty knight.
This worthy Troylus in heart fresh and light,
Answered again and said with glad cheer,
Mine own lord and my brother dear,
And god tofore I fully shall obey,
And all fullfyll what you list to seye.
Now unto me of your gentilnesse,
And not decline through none recklesnesse,
In any point from your commandment.
But with hole heart in all my best entente,
I shall take heed and plainly do none other.
Than ye have said mine own lord and bother.
So loathe me were offend you or grieve.
And in this wise he lowly took his leave.
And forth he rode so like a manly knight,
That to behold it was a noble sight,
Among his men he haueth him so well.
Three thousand knights armed all in steel,
Enuyron rode with Troylus into fyelde.
And as that day he bears in his shield,
Passant of gold three Lions rychely.
The champe of asure wrought full craftly.
And by the gate he issued out anon,
And with him ladde his knights euerychon,
To the greeks holdyng the next way.
And Hector hastes all that ever he may,
Prudently his wards to ordeyne.
And to the noble worthy brethren twain,
To king Hupon and Andelius.
Assygned he the story tells thus,
The fourth ward to guye and to wysse.
And in the land that called was Larysse,
The brethern two there had reigned long.
And this Hupon was passyngly strong,
And of stature like a chaumpyowne.
And save Hector in all Troy town,
Was none to him egall as of might.
More deliver nor a better knight.
And on his foen passing despytous.
Which with his brother Andelyus,
Four thousand knights had for to lead.
And seven thousand sothly as I read,
And to them like as write Guydo,
Worthy Hector assygned has also,
One of his brothern called Dimarchus,
A noble knight in arms right famous.
And had in manhood passing excellence,
And of Hector they taken have license,
And rode their way among all the prese,
Through the gate of Dardanides.
The fyfte ward to have at his ledyng,
Was by Hector committed to the king,
That of Cesoyne lord and prince was.
And to his brother called Pollidamas.
These Cysones were of hye stature,
And might in arms passyngly endure.
Upon whom full many man beheld.
And their king bare nothing in his shyelde,
But a fyelde of Gules as I find.
Of other sign Guydo makes no mind.
And forth he rode a full stern pase,
This noble king and Pollydamas,
When they had of Hector lene take.
Which ever in one full busye was to make,
The syxth ward with all his diligence.
And to the king called Pretemense,
That was full worthy both in werre and peace,
And to a duke that hight Sterepes,
Which was also full worthy of his hand,
He took the folk of Poenye land.
Them to govern in the fyelde that day.
The which people has in custom aye,
Without plate hawberion or mayle,
On swyfte horse their fomen for to assail.
With mighty bows and arrows sharp ground.
Through an harneys mortally to wound.
And with this folk of Hector eke also,
Deyphobus assygned was to go.
In the fyelde to guide them and to lead.
And on their way they fast began them speed.
But or they pass by Dardanydes.
Full discretely Hector for them chese,
Panysers cladde in mayle and plate.
Them commaundyng at yssuyng of the gate,
And with the archers in to fyelde to gone.
And many worthy well armed euerychone,
To awayte on them that they were not lore.
For this folk that I of spoke tofore,
Of Poenye hadden none armure.
But prudent Hector for to make them sure,
Out of Agrest the mighty regyowne,
Has chosen out full worthy of renown,
The best knights of them euerychon.
And with the kings Esdras and Phylon,
Assygned them for to taken head.
To the fotemen when that they have need.
The which Phylon ordained full rychely,
Rode in a chere all of Yuery.
Of which the wheles wrought full curious,
Were of a tree ycalled Hebanus,
The which tree grows far in Inde.
Black of hew and also as I find,
When it is korne this tree will were anon,
Of his nature hard as any stone.
When it is grave either round or square.
And of pure gold roued was this chare.
Fret with perle and many rich stones.
That such an other I trow now there none is.
In all this world if I shall not feign,
And it was ladde of mighty knights twain.
Men of arms within eke and without,
Armed in steel rydyng round about.
These worthy kings Esdras and Phylon,
And Hector has called to him anon.
One of his brethern what so that be fall,
To be guide and leder of them all.
The name of whom was Pytagoras,
And to the great Troyon Eneas,
Of whom tofore made is mention,
Hector by good deliberation,
The seventh ward assygned has to keep.
And upon stedes lusty for to lepe,
Of such as were used much to ride,
Full manly knights to have by his side.
Which with Ewpheny unto Troy town,
Come so far from their regyowne.
To succor them and that for Hectors sake.
And when they had of him leave take,
They rode full proudely forth with Eneas.
Out at the gate a wonder knightly pase,
The broad fyelde till they have atteyned.
And in this while Hector has ordained,
Like mine auctour as I can rehearse,
The eight ward of the folk of Perce.
Worthy knights manly and right wise,
The which were committed to Paryse.
On him that day tawayte busyly.
To whom Hector tho full beningly,
Spoke and said thus at his departing.
Oh brother mine in all manner thing,
When thou art passed by Dardanides,
This day to far put the not in prese.
Among greeks nor in iupardye.
Lest thy toen in mischyefe the espy.
To whom they have of old and new date,
In their hertes full fresh and mortal hate.
The fire of which their breast has so enbrased
That it were hard out to be araced.
Wherefore brother look that thou ever be,
In any wise not to far fro me.
But keep the nigh that no misauenture,
Fall upon the so that I may succoure,
This day to the mine own brother dear.
To whom Paris with full humble cheer,
Answered and said that in every thing,
He would obey unto his bidding.
And rode his way anon with his meyne,
Into the field out of the Cite.
The ninth ward in order for to dress,
Which he thought him self for to lead,
In which he put sothly as I read,
Five thousand knights borne of Troy town.
The worthyest and greatest of renown.
And passyngly famous in knighthode.
Borne by descent on the Trojans blood.
And of his brethern takes with him ten,
Such as he knew the most manly men.
That were forayne from stock of regallye,
Out of the line borne in bastardye.
Whom Hector had in great chyerte,
For the knyghthod he could in them se.
And when he had by knightly purueaunce,
All his wards set in governance,
Like Mars him self fast began him speed,
Without abode for to take his stead,
Which was in books called Gallathe.
Of all horse having the soueraynte.
As far as men ride in any cost,
Of whom Dares makes so great a boste,
Of shape of heyght and also of fayrnesse,
Of strength of look and of great swyftnesse,
So like an horse performed out and out,
And with a wire men might him turn about.
Like as Dares makes menciowne,
Of who^ Hector rydeth through troy town.
Armed at all that came him wonder well.
From foot to head full rychly euerydele,
That shone as bright as son on summers day.
And to Pryam he held the right way,
And when that he was come to the king,
He reherseth in order every thing,
How he has done and all his ordinance,
And lowly said so it be plesaunce,
To your noble royal excellence,
I have chosen with busy dylygence,
A thousand knights full of suffysaunce,
With five hundred to have attendaunce,
On your person always where ye be,
With all footmen that be in the Cite,
That shall awayte on you ever in one.
Wherefore my lord as fast as we are gone,
Lowly I pray to your worthiness,
To sewe us by good aduysenesse.
Out at the town always eke that ye,
Together keep your knights and meyne.
This I beseech with all my full might,
Within the bounds where as we shall fight.
That ye suffer none of them pass,
But keep ye hole in the self place,
Atwyxe us and this strong Cite,
If we have need that ye may aye se,
Us to releue keeping you aside,
And specially there for to abide,
Where most is lyckly our party to sustene,
For ever among there shall men go between,
Of our exployt the truth to report.
For which part Mars list the field to sort.
Of his power this ilke day fatal,
For ye shall be our castle and our wall,
And our refuge to save us from all smerte,
And specially one thing ye aduerte,
That no deceyt fraud nor treasowne,
Compassed be behind to the town,
Of our foen through our recklesnesse,
Whiles that we don holy our business,
Against them in the field to fight.
In all wise thereto have a sight.
That nothing turn unto our damage,
Through their engine but work as ye sage,
With victory that we may conclude,
So that greeks with fraud us not delude,
By no engyne of unware vyolence.
Hopyng always that it is none offense,
To your highness that I have here said.
And with that word Pryamus abrayde,
Beningely of cheer and countenance,
And said Hector my sothfast suffysaunce,
My fynall trust and supportacion,
In thy discreat disposycion,
Holy I put as thou list ordain,
For next god if I shall not feign,
My faith my hope and all my sikernesse,
And my welfare in very sothfastnesse,
Committed be hole into thy hand.
And governance plainly of my land,
As thou ordaynest it must needs be,
And this prayer I make now for the,
To the gods above celestyall,
The to preserve in party and in all,
From each myschiefe and aduersyte,
That thou may home ayene to this Cite,
Repair in honor with laud and victory,
So that the praise renown and memory,
Of thy name be put in remembrance,
Perpetually thine honor to auaunce,
And fare now well mine own son dear.
And Hector tho with full humble cheer,
His leave took and forth he rode anon,
Among his lords and knights euerychone,
As he that was the root of noblesse.
Of knyghthode ground of strength and hardynesse
The very stock and thereto inuincyble,
For as much as it was possible.
That nature might to him grant or kind,
Touching manhood in books as I find,
He had in him soueraygne excellence,
And governance meddled with prudence.
That naught asterte he was so wise and ware,
And in his shield I find that he bare,
Upon his breast this Trojan champyon,
The chyefe of gold of gowlys a lion,
Depeynt therein and in his baner beat,
The self same and so amydde the street,
He took the way to Dardanydes,
That to behold huge was the prese,
Noise of trumpettes and of claryons,
Baners vnrolled and long fresh penons,
Of red and white grene blewe and black,
And in this wise Hector has ytake,
The field without with heart and hole entente,
As Mars him self had tho be present.
And they that he as Guydo makes mind,
Rode with in ward that left was behind,
Of his manhood he would not abide,
But smote his stead sharply in the side,
Of fell courage he has his horse so payned,
The first ward that he has atayned.
By vale and hylle tofore in the frounteres.
Not astoned of the fell cheares,
Of the greeks nor platly not aferde,
But like a knight even before their berde,
He began prease in as their foo mortal.
And in this while upon Troy wall,
In sundry places on the high toures,
As fresh besene as May is with his flowers,
The ladies be ascended of the town.
So fair so young standinge enuyrowne,
The queen Heleyne passing fair to seen,
The kings daughters and goodly Pollycene,
And many other which of womanheade,
In heart weren full of busy dread,
Inly agaste and of fear afraid,
When they beheld in the fyelde displayde,
The broad baners that some of tenderness,
Some of love and some of kyndnesse.
Pale and dreadful for their lords were.
And some their faces hyden eke for fear,
That were not bold to lift up their syghte,
For to heholde the armure clear and bright,
So glytterynge aye again the son shene,
Their hertes tender might not sustene,
And in their dread thus I let them dwell.
ANd of greeks forth I shall you tell.
If so be ye list abide but a while,
For now must I my fordulled style,
Again dyrect to Agamenon.
Well may I make an exclamacion,
On ignorance that staunt so in my light.
Which causes me with a full cloudy sight,
In my making to speken of the werre.
For lack of terms I must nedely err,
Conningly my wards for set,
Cruel Alecto is busy me to let,
The nyghtes daughter blinded by derknesse,
By craft of arms the truth to express,
In order dew a field to descryue.
And Chauncer now alas is not alive.
Me to refourme or to be my read,
For lack of whom slower is my speed,
The noble Rethor that all did excelle,
For in making he drank so of the well,
Under Pernaso that the muses keep,
On which hylle I never yet might sleep,
Uneath slombre for which alas I plain.
But for all this there is no more to said,
Though my wede be not pollymyte,
As of colors forth I will endyte,
As it comes even to my thought,
Plainly to write how ye king has wrought,
The manly knight the great Agamenon.
Like as the latin makes mention.
What trowen ye that he in his entente,
Was found slow other neclygente,
On greeks half his wards for to make,
Nay nay not so for him list to wake,
That time more sothly than to sleep,
For like a king that day the field to keep,
No neclygence might his heart fade,
For in that day I find that he made,
Six and twenty wards by and by,
So well devised and so prudently,
That no man might amend his ordinance.
And of the first he gave governance.
To the manfull noble Patroclus,
That with him ladde mine auctour tells thus,
Myrmydones so mighty and so strong,
With all the folk that to Achilles long.
Beside thylke that were of his meyne,
Which that he brought out of his country,
At his cominge to the siege of Troy,
And he rode forth with them on his way.
Into the syelde and made no delay.
Now fell it so on the same day,
That Achilles kept him in his tente,
And for sycknesse that day out ne went.
For his lechesse made him to abstene,
For his wounds fresh were and grene.
That he caught on the day tofore,
Which for to heal of their akyng sore,
He by counsel kept him self close,
And from his bed that day not ne rose.
In hope only the better to endure,
When that he was restored unto cure,
But all his men he took to Patroclus,
Which was in arms passyngly famous.
And by descent come of great kynrede.
And was also of him as I read,
Hoboundaunt of gold and of richesse.
And far commended for his gentilnesse,
And had a name of high dyscrecion,
Now were they aye of such affection,
Of entyre love truth and faythfulnesse,
So great desire and inward kyndenesse,
Busy thynkyng and so great feruence,
So much friendship with thoughtful aduerte^ce,
So huge brennyng so passing amerous,
Betwyxt Achilles and this Patroclus.
That their hertes were locked in a cheyne,
And what soever if I shall not feign,
The tone has wrought as brother unto brother,
In heart it was confermed of the other.
For will and goods weren both commune,
And to the death they ever so contune,
Without change their love so abode.
And Patroclus forth anon rode,
Into the fyelde with Myrmydones,
And in his tente abides Achilles.
The secounde ward to king Menon,
Assygned was by Agamenon.
And to the worthy king Ydumenee,
And to a Duke called Menestee,
Three thousand knights in steel armed clean,
With all the folk that comen from Athene,
Assygned were with them for to go.
The third ward to king Ascalapho.
And to his sone that hight Phylomene,
With the knights that came from Cumane,
The fourth ward without more lettynge,
To Archelaus the noble worthy king,
To Prothenor and to Securydan,
Which in his days was so strong a man,
Assygned was holly to these three,
And all the knights with them for to be,
Of Boece the mighty land famous.
The fyfth ward to king Menelaus,
With all the folk of the regyowne,
Called Spertence of full high renown,
And of yles that were adjacent.
All these with the baner went,
Of Menelay fresh and couragyous,
The.vi. ward to king Epystrophus,
Was assygned and to the king Gelyde,
With many worthy rydyng by his side,
Of the prouynce and the famous isle,
That called is in Guydo Fordesyle.
The seventh ward to Thelamonius,
Called Ayax the great king famous,
Was assygned shortly to termyne,
With the folks that from Salomyne,
He with him brought and many another mo.
And four Earls with him went also,
Theseus and eke Amphymacus,
And the third that called was Doxus,
And the fourth named Polyxarye.
The.viii. ward if I shall not tarry,
By good advise that day assygned was,
Unto the king that called was Thoas,
Ayax Cileus the.ix. ward tho ladde,
And the tenth king Philoctetes had,
And to the king the.xi. he did assign,
That sothly was both of birth and line,
So renowned and of so great increase,
The mighty king called Pallamides,
King Naulus son highest borne of blood,
And Duke Nestor full famous in knighthod,
The.xii. ward ladde on greeks side.
Melancolyke and surquedous of pride.
And king Honux son of one Maberte,
Into the fyelde by him self aparte,
In order had of wards the thyrtene,
Proudly musterynge endlonge on the grene.
Again Trojans ready for to fight.
And eke the king that Vlyxes hight,
Ladde with him the fourtene as I read,
And eke Humelius the king did led,
The fiftenth mine auctour writes thus.
And a Duke called Curibulus,
The sixtenth had in governance that day,
In which the knights of king Prothesylay,
Assygned were by great ordinance,
To enforce them to do vengeance,
Upon the death of their worthy king.
By Hector slain at greeks ariuinge.
And king Rodus ladde the seuentene,
And he that was the king of Occymene.
The eyghtenth ward had at his ledinge,
He zantipus that was of Lyde king.
Had to keep committed to his guard,
On greeks side the.xix. ward.
And the twenty mine auctour lerneth us,
Had the king called Amphimacus.
Like a king to guide them and to wysse.
And Philoctetes that king was of Larysse,
The one and twenty ladde eke as I read,
The two and twenty had king Diomede.
And Eneus king of Cyparye,
That was whylom so noble and so worthy,
The three and twenty had in gouernayle.
And the Trojans proudly for tassayle,
The.xxiiii. with sword spear and shield,
King Prothecatus lad into the field.
And Carpenor of Carpedye the king,
In werre expert and right wise in workynge,
The five and twenty rich and well besayne,
On greeks side brought into the plain,
The six and twenty sothly and the last,
As he that could se before and cast,
Every thing by good inspection,
The wise king the great Agamenon,
Had with him this prudent werriour,
As he that was ordained Emperor,
Of greeks host as wysest of echone.
And in this wise forth the greeks gone,
In the field with pomp full royal,
With thensignes and tokens marcyall.
Have take their ground passingly araied,
And on their standerdes richly tho displayed.
Broad baners and many fresh penowne,
Again the wind ye made an hidous sown.
And right dreadful plainly for to hear,
And there men saw many cristes clear,
And many tufte of gold and silver shene,
Meynt with feathers red, white, and grene.
And devises wonder meruaylous,
And such of folks as weren amerous.
The tokens borne to show openly,
How they in love brent inwardly.
Some high empryse that day to fulfylle,
And there were herd the loud noyses shryle,
Far in the field and the dreadful sownes,
Both of trumpettes and of claryownes,
That kalendes bin of sheding out of blood,
And with the noise almost for rage wood,
The fomy bridelles and the mouths blede.
And furious neyhing of many bastard stead.
Praunsyng of horse upon either side,
With the ensygnes that might be of pride.
On greeks party and on Troy also,
In knightly wise for to have ado.
Every ward standing in his place.
The first asunder but a little space,
Began to approach with all their full intent,
And Hector tho full impatient,
Formest of all on the side of Troy,
The ire of whom no man might accoye.
But like a Lion in his hungry rage,
Issued out furyous of vysage,
Toward greeks on his mighty stead,
That with his sporres made his sides blede.
His knightly heart so inly was toforne,
Of mortal ire and as he rode forne,
Brenning full hot in his melancolye,
The which thing when greeks began espy,
Patroclus then withouten more abode,
Of surquedrye before the wards rode.
Out all toforne in both hoostes sight.
For to encountre plainly if he might,
With worthy Hector when he him saw a fer,
And as line right as is Dyameterre,
Rode unto him in his hateful tene,
And with a spear sharp ground and kene,
Throughout his shield tho of enuyous rage,
He smote Hector without more damage.
Except only that the head of stele,
That was before whet and forged well.
Through plate and mayle mightly began to glace
But to the skin for nothing might it race.
Albe it came with passing violence,
Yet to Hector it done has none offense,
Out of his saddell ones him to flytte.
For though that he sturdely him hitte,
He might not backward be^d or bow his chine
Nor on no party make him to incline.
But fatally to his confusyon,
This mighty man this Trojan champion,
In his Ire aye brenning more and more,
Upon him the hate aye fret so sore,
Left his spear mine Auctour writes thus,
And with a sword rode to Patroclus,
Auysed fully that he shall be dead,
And furiously began aymen at his head,
And roue him down there was no manner let
Into the breast through his bassenet,
As says Guydo with so great a pain,
That with his stroke he parted him i^ twain
His mortal sword whetted was so kene.
That Patroclus might not sustene,
Upon his horse but fell down to ground,
As he that caught his last fatal wound.
Being present his knights euerychon,
And delyuerly upon him anon,
Worthy Hector from his stead adowne,
Descended is like a wood Lyowne,
Of hateful ire brenning as the fire,
Having in heart inly great desire,
To spoil him of his armure there anon.
In which there was full many rich stone,
Both of rubies and of Sapphires ynde,
For that days plainly as I find,
Kings lords and knights this no nay,
To battle went in their best array.
And sothly Hector when he first began se,
The multitude of stones and perre,
On Patroclus so oryent and sheyne,
Upon his arm he hinge his horse reyne,
The mean while while he of hole entente,
To catch his pray was so diligent.
Of couetise in their alder syghtes.
Till king Meno^ with three thousand knighes,
Armed in steel round about him all,
Is suddenly upon Hector fall,
The dead corpse of Patroclus to save.
That his purpose Hector may not have.
At lybertye the rich king to spoil,
Which caused him in anger for to boil,
To whom the king that called is Menon,
Irous and wood said among echon,
Oh gredy Liowne Oh wolf most rauinous,
Oh hateful Tygre passing enuyous,
Of aueryce Oh beast insaturable,
And of desire sothly vnstaunchable.
Upon this pray thou shall not now ye feed.
Go else where to sewen for thy mede.
For trusts well in conclusyon,
Fyfty thousand to thy destruction,
Of one intent plainly will not fail,
Thine hateful pride attones for to assail.
And suddenly with speres sharp whet,
On every half they began him besette.
Maugre his force his might and his manhood.
Enforsyng them to reave him of his stead.
That sothfastly of great violence,
He was constrained for all his strong defense,
As says Guydo to fall upon his kne.
But through his might and magnanimite.
He of manhood has his horse recured,
And maugre greeks is so far assured,
In his strength and in his great might,
That he recured like a worthy knight,
His stead again amiddes of all his foen,
And right as line he rode to king Menon.
Full desirous on him avenged be.
In his furye of hasty cruelte.
For thereupon was set his hole delight,
That in his mortal cruel appetite,
In very sothe he had him slain anon,
Save that the king that called was Glaco^,
Came him to rescue with king Theseus.
And his sone that hight Archilogus.
As I have told Menon to reskewe.
And three thousand knights began him sewe,
Full assented attones in battle,
For life or death Hector to assail.
In awayte unware on him to set.
But all this while with who^ that ever he met,
With his sword he killed and bare down.
That finally there gayneth no raunsowne,
For any greek that durst with him mete,
But or he went he felt it full vnswete,
He made a way about him every where,
That they him fled as the death for fear.
For where he rode he made a patth full plain
And as I read to Patroclus again,
He is repeyred to spoil him if he might.
Amid the field in the greeks sight.
As he that would his pray not lightly let.
Till Idume the mighty king of Crete,
With two thousand cladde in plate and mayle,
Worthy knights Hector to assail,
Whiles that he was so inly desirous,
As I have told to spoil Patroclus,
And new again to his confusion,
Like as I find came king Merion,
And or Hector might of them take heed,
They of force reft him of his stead.
That sothly he there was none other boot,
Compelled was for to fight on foot.
And of knighthod his heart he resumeth,
And with his sword about him he consumes,
All that withstand both the horse and man.
And furyously this Trojan knight began,
Arms legs and shoulders by the bone,
To hew of amid his mortal fone.
That greeks might before him not sustene,
And as I read that he slew fiftene,
Of them that were busy him to take.
And such a slaught he began among the^ make,
That they ne durst abide before his face.
And Merion in the self place,
This mean while took up Patroclus,
With heavy cheer and face full piteous.
And on his stead he laid it him beforne.
And to his tente anon he has it borne.
Always greeks in their cruel mode,
About Hector furyous and wode,
Felly abode fyghting upon foot,
Of which some felt it full vnsote.
That presumed upon him to press.
But of manhood they ne woulden cesse,
Him to beset round on every side.
Having a trust in their great pride,
Finally at mischief him to take.
For they dempt he might not escape,
Their hands shortly by none adventure,
Nor his stead by lyklyhede recure,
For of force they casten him to let.
And all attones began on him to set.
And specially among them euerichone,
I find in sothe how that there was one,
A grekishe knight of right worthy fame,
And Carrion plainly was his name,
That him enforced Hector to oppress,
When he was most in mischief and distress.
Beset with greeks him enuyroning,
Till of fortune aye on him awaytinge,
The long day in that fell fight,
To his rescuse there came a Trojan knighte.
Midde of greeks when he was beset,
And hent two darts sharp and kene whet,
And furiously first he shoke the toen,
And through ye heart he smote this Carrion,
That the darte into the field began glide.
By playte and mayle throughout outher side.
That fatally of that deadly wound,
This Caryon glode anon togrounde.
Among an hundred knights of his ferys.
Before conspyred with their fell chearis.
To have slain Hector by some manner way.
But eft again this young knight of Troy,
Full deliver raughte another spear,
And cast at one that he saw yfere,
Auaunce him self on Hector in the field
And through his plates plainly and his shield,
Line right that he ne should asterte,
Of very might roue him through the heart.
And after that in all the have he could,
Upon Trojans he began to cry aloude,
To enhaste them knightly to succoure,
Worthy Hector that stood in adventure,
Among greeks having no refute,
Sole he him self of help destitute.
At which cry on greeks all unware,
First of all came worthy Cincibare.
That brother was to Hector borne in baste,
Ridinge him self tofore in all haste.
And ye knights of whom he tho was guide,
Wonder proudly pricking by his side.
Suddenly together one and all,
In a froshe be on the greeks fall,
That had Hector round beset about.
And through manhood of this great route,
That be enbushed on them at the back.
Three hundred knights of which yt I spacke,
For astoned began them to withdraw.
But thurty first cruelly were slawe.
And maugre them Hector of manhede,
Amid the field taken has his stead,
And entered is in among the prees,
As he that day of knighthode pereles.
While he held his blody sword in hand,
All tho that there in field again him stand,
There was no help plainly nor no read,
But that he brake and karfe a two the threde,
And the knotte of cruel Attropos.
Only for he was let of his purpose,
At his leyser to spoylen Patroclus.
Therefore in Ire wood and furious,
Full cruelly greeks quytte he their mede.
Which from his face fast began them speed.
Whose sharp sword bathed in their blood,
Was dyed red for it did him good,
Upon them tho avenged for to be.
For that day a Lion played he,
Upon greeks his manhood for to haunte.
For he their pride so mortally began daunte,
That they him fled where so that he rode,
Making all hot the streintes of their blood,
Endlonge to run and shede upon ye grene.
Till the time the duke of great Athene,
That called was whylom Menesteus,
With three thousand knights full famous,
Of whom he was both lord and guide,
The fyelde has take upon the left side.
For a deceyte in full secret wise.
Where Troylus was with ye folk of Frise.
Which has that day who so list to seek,
By his knighthode killed many greek.
Like a Tygre gredy on his pray.
Troylus bare him all the long day,
Sleynge of greeks many worthy knight,
And while that he was busyest in fight,
Again his foen with king Antipus,
And the king that hight Alchanus,
Upon greeks ylyche fresh and new,
Making their sides all of blody hew.
By one assent these three through their ma^hed,
And specially upon his bay stead,
Where so ever that this Troylus rode,
Every greek that his sword abode,
Suddenly he made for to sterue.
Through their plates he began so deep kerue.
And this continued till duke Meneste,
Of Troylus saw the great cruelte.
And the slaughter that he of greeks made,
Of hasty ire with face pale and fade,
Hent a spear and threw it in the rest.
And Troylus smytte even amydde the breast,
So sternely that maugre his renown,
To the earth anon he bare him down.
In the mids of his mortal foen,
That cruelly him besette anon,
And him to treyne laid out hoke and lase,
Round about in manner of compase.
With spear and darte and swords forged bright
But he him self deffendeth like a knight.
With great manhood his honor to auaunce,
Albe his life was hanged in balaunce.
Where he stood and felt full vnswete.
In point of death among the horse fete,
With great awayte of duke Meneste,
How this Troylus might have take be.
Of mortal hate casting in his thought,
At myschyefe take that he escape naught.
On every half he was so besette,
With sword and spear kene ground and whette.
Alone alas mortally bestadde,
They seized him and forth they have him ladde.
Till Mesers a worthy knight of Troy,
Began to cry as he stood in the way,
Sore abashed in right furyous wise,
Oh ye noble worthy men of Fryse,
Manly knights aye preued in the fyelde,
Most renowned both with spear and shield
Consider now unto your high fame,
And aduert the glory of your name.
How this day through your neclygence,
By the power and mighty vyolence,
Of the greeks Troylus is ytake.
Sool in the fyelde for ye have him forsake.
That shall rebounde to your alder shame.
For ye in soth greatly are to blame,
If he that is of worthynesse the flower,
Betake of greeks for lack of your succoure.
That but if ye taken hasty wreche,
Shameful report your honor shall apeche,
Perpetually and say thereof amys,
In your defaute that Troylus taken is.
Which named be so worthy and famous,
And with that word the king Alcamus,
Of melancolye felt his heart ryue.
And in his ire hente a spear blyue,
And pryckyng after enchasteth what he might
Till he of them plainly had a sight.
That busy were Troylus for to lead.
And he full knyghtly syttyng on his stead,
Ran one through that he fell down dead,
And efte again pale and nothing read,
In his rancour no longer would he let,
But a greek the first that he met,
Through the body smet he with a spear.
That men might se thereof the point a fere.
By breast and plate through the shulder bone,
That to the ground he fell down dead anon.
And tho forthwith the worthy Fryses all,
Came flokmele down and on the greeks fall,
So myghtely that maugre their diffence,
They set upon with so great vyolence,
That Troylus is from all danger free.
And through their knightly magnanimyte,
They maden him there to recure his stead.
And specially helpyng in this need,
Was zantipus the strong manly king.
Which of disdain at his coming,
On Meneste he began his spear grate.
And through his shield mayle and thick plate,
So sore he smote that this Meneste,
Had be dead ne had his armor be.
Which for Ire began tremble tho and shake,
That Troylus was from his hands take,
And escaped to be prisoner.
Dispyte his berde and maugre his power.
Wherefore he began of hasty hot envy,
On his knights furyously to cry,
That were so mighty renowned and strong,
To pain them for to venge his wrong,
Upon Troyans to mete them in the face.
And they in have began mightily enbrace,
Their sharp speres ground for to byte,
And felly foyne and together smytte.
For tho began the great mortal werre,
The fire brast out shene as any sterre.
On basenettes and their plates bright,
That through ye field flaumeth ye fereful light
To life nor death they took tho no head.
And down the plain both in length and breadth
The wards began proudly to auale.
And with lokes right enuyously pale,
They aproche and assemble yfere.
In hate brennyng that no man may stere.
And began hurt with spear sword and darte,
And mortally upon every part,
The slaughter began greatly for to rewe,
And ylyche always new and new,
Hector greeks through his worthynesse,
Where he rode manly did oppress,
And mercylesse slow them and bare down,
Now here now there without excepciowne,
So furyously that routhe was to see.
And then of new duke Meneste,
Repaired is with full enuyous heart,
From his hondes that Troylus so a sterte,
And for the slaughter eke of his meyne,
That where he rode busy was to slay.
The trojan people when he might them mete
For him tauenge for nothing would he let.
Till casually among all the prese,
A knight he met that hight Myseres.
Which in dispyte of this Meneste,
Had at the rescuse of worthy Troylus be.
And maugre him put him from his pray,
And so befell on the self day,
As they mete again of adventure,
That Meneste by his cote armure,
Marked him by arms that he bare.
And suddenly or that he was ware,
And or that he might taken any head,
Furiously on his mighty stead,
And with a spear amyd the renges all,
Bare him over and made him for to fall.
Mauger his might to the earth adowne.
And than I find how the king Hupon,
Descended is the storye list not lie,
Two thousand knights in his company,
Which on greeks felly began to set.
And in ye berde king Prothenor them met.
And Archelaus the noble werryour,
Of Boece the lord and governor.
With help only of this Prothenor,
Like to a Tygre or a wood Bore,
Began Troyans assaylen to the death.
And many one him self that day he sleeth.
But king Hupon through his chyualrye,
Full fell that time in his melancolye,
Full many greek gave his dethes wound.
And thus they began each other to confound.
Such mortal hate among them there was
Till of fortune a knight Pollydamas,
On Troy side son of Anthenor,
With his knights and him self tofore,
Is on greeks right envious of pride,
Amyd their wards fallen in a side,
And began them break and knightly to disseuer,
Again whose sword they might not persevere,
He was on them so inly furyous.
And him to help came the king Remus,
With a wynge on that other part,
Breakyng in with many spear and darte,
Again greeks with three thousand knights,
That to behold how felly that he fyghtes,
It was in sothe unto them of Troy,
A very lust and heavenly aioye.
To see how greeks brake there asondre,
That the noise loud as any thonder,
In the fyelde of strokes began arise.
And while Remus as ye have herd devise
Upon greeks was so enuyous,
Into the fyelde came Menelaus,
With his worthy knights of Spartense,
Again Remus to maken resystence.
And full proudely making no delay,
This worthy Remus and king Menelaye,
On horse back with sharp speres whette,
Amydde the field been together met.
And through their manly prowess and renown,
From horseback each bare other down.
For none the stroke of other tho might shone.
And in that while of Anthenor the son,
Pollydamas lusty fresh and light,
As he that was in his deliver might,
And desirous to honor to attain,
Met in the field the neuewe of Heleyne,
The mighty duke called Mereus.
Flouringe in youth and right virtuous.
Fresh armed new and lusty of courage,
And was in sothe but twenty year of age.
Which of so young was a noble knight.
Right renoumed both of heart and might.
But of fortune it befell alas,
The Trojan knight Dan Pollidamas,
With a spear through shield maile and plate,
Hytte him so that by cruel fate,
Among greeks that he fallen is down dead
Of which thing when Menelaye took head,
And saw him lie slain on the grene,
In his heart remembrynge on the queen,
The queen Heleine to whom he neuewe was.
For dole of which a full deliver pas,
To Remus rode in his cruelte,
Also far as he might him se.
And full knightly met him in the berde,
And smytte at him with his sharp sword,
Upon the head in his hateful tene,
That on his stead he might not sustene.
His wound was so passingly mortal,
That with the stroke and the perilous fall,
His knights wend dead that he had be.
And hent him up and began to fle,
To Troy ward with him a great pase.
But it befell that Pollidamas,
The manner of them when that he beheld,
Made them repair knightly into field,
Except that some as they in bidding had,
Worthy Remus home to Troy ladde.
Pale and dead with his wounds wide,
And tho came in on the greeks side,
Celydys the lusty fresh king.
Of whom Dares says in his wrytinge,
And for a sothe in his book list tell,
How Celydys all other did excel,
Both in beauty and in semelyheade.
Of shape of port and of goodlyheade,
Surmounting all as Dares list descriue.
As in fayrnesse all tho that time alive,
All his limbs compact were so clean.
And as I read the young fresh queen,
Of feminye which was of beauty flower,
King Celidys loved as paramoure.
That upon him was holy her plesaunce.
He was so printed in her remembrance.
For chief resort sothly of her heart,
Was upon him each hour to aduerte.
For finally he departed naught,
Day nor night nor hour from her thought.
For he was fully all her own knight.
But of fortune he lusty fresh and light,
Smote his stead sharply in the side,
Of surquedrye and proudly began to ride,
Of mortal hate a full furyous pase,
Right as line to Pollidamas.
And with a spear made him for to flytte,
From his sadell in which he tho did sytte,
He marked him with so great a might.
And eft ayene this noble trojan knight,
Pollydamas with a despitous face,
Or Celidys departed fro the place,
With a sword so smyt him on the head,
From his stead that he fell down dead,
Which to greeks was great confusion.
And all this tune fierser than a Lion,
Hector greeks knightly began enchase,
And often made them for to lose their place.
Where ever he rode of necessyte.
Before his sword he made them for so fle,
Such vengeance he has on them take.
That they the field were feign to forsake,
And to pursewe would he never fine,
Till among the people of Salomine,
Hector met the worthy king famous,
That was their lord and hight Thesalus,
That many Trojan that day had yslawe.
And as Hector toward him began draw,
King Tenter eke that was of greece also,
A manly knight and prudent both two,
Raught a spear in all the haste he can,
And at unawares he to Hector ran,
And through his shield plate and mayle of stele,
The spear head forged was so well,
So sharp square and so kene ygrounde,
That he to Hector gave a perilous wound.
But as Hector tournen began his stead,
Proud Center to aquite his mede,
He full wisely in all the haste he might,
Was right far severed from his sight.
Whereof Hector melancoleous,
And of heart wood and furyous,
For the akynge of the wound grene,
In haste tauenge the constraynte of his tene,
What greek after shortly that he met,
That was so bold his way to with set,
Without mercy he was his death anon.
And as I read he encountered one,
Which of pride his purpose would diuerte
Whom with his sword he roue to the heart,
Through his herneys of melancolye.
The which stroke when greeks began espy,
They astoned of one entencyon,
Peryllously be set him enuyron,
And such assaute began about him make,
Though their manhod if they might him take
And of accord with great multitude,
Cruelly they began him to include,
By lykelyhode in that mortal strife.
He might not escapen with the life,
On him they were so fell and enuyous.
Till that a king which hight Theseus,
On greeks side only of gentylnesse,
Such routhe caught upon his dystresse,
To se him stand so nigh upon the wrake,
Thus unto him of manly pety spoke.
OH flour of knyghthode rote of hardynes,
Well of manhood stoke of worthynes,
Whylyst ye not to have none aduertence,
Thy life to save of knyghtly prouydence.
But wylfully where most is to dread,
Thy life Iupardest and take list no head,
In mortal peril how thou art besette,
Among so many closed and yshette.
Alone alas deuoyde of all socoure,
And to thy self will do no favor,
But as fortune lyketh to ordain,
That every wight ought to complain,
To behold that such a worthy knight,
Which through the world cast so clear a light
In worthiness and will him not withdraw,
Reklesly this day thus to be slawe,
So pyteously thy person for to lose,
Withdraw thy hand yet sith you may chese,
Thy high prowess compels me to preye,
At such myschefe that thou not ne deye.
And when Hector of him began take heed,
He thanked him of his goodly head,
And maugre sothly the power and the might,
He from the greeks like a worthy knight,
Eft escaped is mydde of all his foen.
And went his way through them euerichone.
His blody sword always in his hand,
And in his way Pollydamas he fond,
Full like a man with all his busy pain,
Defend him self again the kings twain,
Menelay and Thelamonius.
Which upon him were full furyous.
And with a spear this greek this Thelamowne,
Pollydamas smote to the earth adowne.
Compellyng him there was none other bote,
Again them two to fight eu on his foot.
Assented fully on him to be wroke.
And first they have hewn and to broke,
The mighty charnelle of his bassenet,
And when his vyser after was of smet,
And his face naked was and bare,
They fell on him in that mortal snare,
And have him take the storye can deuyse,
And sent him forth in full cruel wise,
Toward greeks with many worthy knight.
But when Hector thereof had a sight,
And saw the myschefe of Pollydamas,
He cast fully to socoure in this case,
And prycked after wooder than Lion,
And where he rode about him enuyron,
With his sword he made a large space,
Till that he came to the self place,
Among greeks furyous and wood,
Pollydamas the self time stood,
Socourles deuoyde of remedy,
Till that he on Hector cast his eye,
That greeks made hastily withdraw,
And thirty first of them has he slawe.
And severed them maugre all their pride,
Tofore his sword they durst not abide.
Against him nor make none obstacle.
But of knighthode by very high miracle,
Pollydamas in myschyefe first awhaped,
From grekeshe hand freely is escaped.
But freshly tho the king Epystrophus,
Menelay and Thelamonyus,
With all their knights together hole and close,
Again Troyans to getten them alose,
Be of new entered in battle.
With great strength and passing apparayle,
That mightily Troyans they compel,
In their way that they dare not dwell.
Notwithstanding their great worthynesse.
Nor of Hector the knightly high prowess.
That fought so manly that time as I read,
But cowardly they have slain his stead,
That he constrained was to fight on foot.
That many greek felt full vnsote.
For there was none that about him stood,
With his sword that he ne shadde his blood.
Though he so thycke about was be layne.
He voyded them and made a space plain.
In compass round behind and eke before,
And on his fete so well he has him bore,
That day. that greek was none certain,
That hardy was hand on him to layne.
He was so strong and sturdy as a wall.
And when his brothern called natural,
Saw him a foot amyd of all his foen,
On a frushe they fell in euerychon,
And founden him the story makes mind,
Deffende him self as Tygre does in Inde.
And him to help through their high renown,
They fallen first on king Thelamowne.
For he on Hector was so cruel found.
They gave to him many blouddy wound.
Till one of them named Dyndaron,
Has so far among the renges gone,
And bore him so only of manhead,
That he has won a passing mighty stead.
And brought to Hector sothly there he stood
Among greeks all bathed in their blood.
The which in haste full knightly he be strode,
And the^ among like Mars himself he rode.
Full many greek making for to sterue.
And with this sword whetted for to karue,
He daunted has their envious pride.
Till Deyphobus entered in a side,
Into the fyelde with a knightly chere,
And with him brought many good archer,
Of Boeme which with their arrows kene,
And with feathers of Pecock fresh and shene,
Upon greeks have the fyelde recured.
In their shot they were so much assured.
That through mayle and thick plate of stele,
They perced have their harneys every dele.
And Deiphobus full like a manly man,
To king Tentran on horse back tho ran.
And furyously began his sword enbrace.
And wounded him even amyd the face.
Through the vyser in his fell tene.
On horse back that he might not sustene,
And thus on greeks the Troyans are iron,
That they again has the field ywonne.
They were on them so yrons and so wood,
But Theseus full knightly them withstode,
With the knights that he with him ladde,
And as I read Hector a brother had,
The story says that hight Quintilene,
Young fresh and lusty armed bright and shene,
Which with the king called Modernus,
Is proudely fall upon Theseus,
And these twain together of assent,
Be fall on him with great aduisement,
That finally to his unhappy chance,
With their knyghthode brought him to outtraunce,
And cast shortly that he shall be dead.
Of whose purpose as Hector began take heed,
He unto them of very gentery,
With all his might loud began to cry,
Besechyng them for nothing that he deye.
And lowely they his byddyng did obey.
And them withdrewe for to do vengeance,
For Hector had fully remembrance,
Now Theseus the same day tofore,
Toward him so goodly had him bore,
When he him saw in mischyefe and dystresse,
And knightly thought quyte his gentilnesse.
Like as it longs to every gentylman.
And Theseus full lowly tho began,
To thank Hector that he was escaped.
But king Thoas tho has fast yraped,
Into the fyelde with other knights many,
And specially with them of Calydony,
Came Phyloctetes the mighty king also,
Again the Troyans for to have ado,
And first Thoas with a spear ran,
Furyously to Cassybellan,
One of the sons of king Pryamus.
And gave him tho a wound so grievous,
Without recure that he fell down dead.
Of which stroke when Hector began take heed
In his heart began his death complain,
And in all haste did his busy pain,
On his brother avenge him if he might,
And many one he made to a light,
Through his knighthod from his horse back
That sothfastly all went to wrake,
On greeks side what came in his way.
So worthily he bare him all that day.
Till duke Nestor is entered in to fight,
With five thousand in steel armed bright,
Again the Troyans greeks to socoure,
And with him met of very adventure,
The king Esdras so mighty and so bold,
And king Phylon in his chare of gold,
With all the worthy noble chyualrye,
That from Agresta came with Iaconye,
The kings son of the same land,
Full renowned and worthy of his hand.
And as they semble and together ran,
The same time many worthy man,
Has lost his life upon either side.
And of the slaught with large wounds wide
All the soil of bodies that lay dead,
Like a river ran with streams red.
With their cheres grysely pale and fade,
That in the blood men might go and wade,
To the ancle the slaughter was so huge.
And king Phylon socour and refuge,
Unto Troyans so bare him in that strife,
That many greek he made lose his life,
The same day so well his sword was whette.
But he unawarely was so sore besette,
With multitude of greeks round about,
That of his life he plainly stood in doubt.
For lykely was he might not escape,
And of greeks he should anon be take,
Ne had the help be of worthy Iaconye,
That to Esdras loud began to cry,
Alas quod he of routhe and pity,
Worthy Phylon the king shall taken be.
Among greeks through your necligence,
But in all haste ye do your diligence,
For to rescue this noble worthy king.
And all attones without more taryinge,
Maugre all tho that maden resystence,
From greeks sword by mighty vyolence,
They have rescued the noble king Phylon.
And at his large with them he is gone.
Of his escape wonder glad and light.
And Hector than with many lusty knight,
Returned is and Deiphobus also,
Pollydamas and many an other mo,
Of Troyan knights that desire new,
To causen greeks sore for to rewe.
For of assent they fully them purpose,
In such mischief greeks to enclose,
That if they might few should escape.
And thereupon knightly they them shape,
And them began freshely for to assail,
That in the field greeks began to fail,
Of their power and to lose their land.
That finally through the mighty hand,
And the force of the Troyan knights,
The greeks had maugre all their mightes
Be brought that day to confusyowne.
But Menelay and king Thelamowne,
When they them saw febly and apeyre,
They of knyghthode made them to repeyre,
And so like men they have the^ self deffended,
Till Eneas from Troy is descended.
With Ewfremus the duke the manly man,
And with their knights of new they began,
Efte again greeks to oppress.
And Hector aye through his worthynesse,
Like a Lion with a stern face,
Ever in one so began them to enchace,
That compelled of great necessytye,
They were echone before his sword to fle.
And constrained right of very need.
Of which thing when Ayax began take heed,
He had in heart great compassyon,
To se the slaughter and confusyon,
On greeks side Guydo makes mind.
And began to look at his back behind,
And saw where many ward stood abroad,
And many baner and penowne that abode,
Amyd the field hole and not for broke,
That ready were attones to be wroke,
If need were on them of Troy town,
In which wards without excepciowne,
Was hole the flower of greeks chyualrye.
To whom anon Ayax began him hye,
As he that was in heart sore agreued,
And with his cry he has the^ so commened,
That they in haste them comen to reskuse,
Among whom was there no reffuse,
And as fast as they began assemble,
Of noise of horse the earth began to tremble,
Furyously as they together flynge.
There might men the strokes heren ringe,
Of speres sharp through the harneys borne,
And through sheldes wrought of stele and horn
Into the breast sturdy square and broad.
And there I find how that Ayax rode,
To Eneas and he to him also,
So great envy was atwyxe them two,
That not but death might their ire apease.
For in heart another might have ease,
Till with speres sharp ground and whette,
On horse back they together met,
And at copyng so sore have they hytte,
That eueryche other to the earth smytte.
That to behold was a knightly sight.
And after they both on foot fight,
By lyklyhead tho in their wood rage,
Other to fall in full great damage,
Among the horse because that they stood,
Upon the soil all over spredde with blood.
But Phyloctetes is to Ayax come,
And has him up among the horse ynome,
That knightly fought as made is memory,
For sothly else Trojans with victory,
Had had the fyelde plainly for to said.
Till Philoctetes with his wards twain,
Even in the face manly them withstode.
And with a spear he first to Hector rode.
And upon him the shafte I find he brake,
But sothly he upon his horse bake,
Kept him so well for all that fell stroke,
Remeuinge not but sturdy as an oak,
Sat in his sadell vpryght with his chine,
And with a spear right as any line,
Into the body deep through the shyelde,
Philoctetes he smote into the field,
That of his life his knights were in doubt.
But tho came in with so great a route,
King Humerus and Vlixes eke,
And with them brought many worthy greek.
Ten thousand knights manly men echone,
That began Trojans for to assail anon.
And cruelly on every half certain,
With multitude they have them so belayne,
That dispayred and disconsolate,
And of long fight a waped and a mate,
Began withdraw faynted in battle,
And eke their horse sothly began to fail,
That on their side all went up so down.
But Paris tho with them of Troy town,
Is entered in in full manly wise,
And first he met with the king of Fryse.
That to Vlyxes nigh was of allye,
Whom Paris smote with so great envy,
That he him slew whereof greeks were,
Sore abashed and after with a spear,
Vlyxes rode to avenge him if he might.
And first when he of Paris had a sight,
Into the breast he began his spear throw,
That finally for he bare to low,
Failing of Paris sothely as I read,
Under him he slew his mighty stead.
That maugre him he to ground is gone.
And he on him would have fall anon,
But Troilus tho met him in the berde,
And furyously with his sharp sword,
He smote Vlyxes throughout his viser.
That like a condyte or a small river,
Down by his face of blood the streams ran.
But Vlyxes tho like a manly man,
Of that stroke astoned not at all,
But on his stead stiff as any wall,
With his sword so mightily began race,
Through the vmber into Troylus face.
That he him gave a large mortal wound,
Of which stroke passingly ioycounde,
The greeks were supposing in their thought,
How Trojans finally were brought,
Unto outtraunce and sothly so they had,
Save that Hector with knights which he lad,
And with him Paris and Deiphobus,
And al his brethern i^ knighthod most famous
Troylus also for all his last wound,
That was always so noble knight yfounde.
All at ones be joined into one,
And upon greeks suddenly be gone.
And worthy Hector alder first began,
Greeks to enchase that before him ran,
Like as beasts that fled fro the death,
And ever in one thus he kills and sleyeth,
Whom he met or durst his stroke abide.
And on his foen with fresh wounds wide,
The slaught he made always to renew,
And thylke day in blody rosen hew,
He has their plates and their harneys steined,
And thought it had blood from heaven rained.
The soil redder might not tho a ben,
And aye ylyche as a swarm of been,
The greeks flockmele fled out of his way.
And Guydo says that all that ylke day,
Hector had formest on the plain,
In the frounter of the greeks layne.
That behind the knights of his guard,
For lack of him were all out of ward.
Wherefore when he had sought full long,
And greeks saw of new wexen strong,
To his knights he is again repeyred.
Which in them self greatly were dispayred,
For his absence. but tho when they him se,
Full inwardly recomforted they be,
And with glad heart have their lord received.
And their gladness when he has perceived,
Spoke unto them full affectiously.
And likewise prayed them full beningly,
To remember knyghtly in their heart,
And consider wisely and aduerte,
First the wrongs that greeks have them do.
Of yore ago and ouermore also,
If greeks had that day the victory,
Farewell for aye the honor and glory,
Of Troyan blood in conclusyowne.
For finally we and eke our town,
Shall mortally tournen to ruin.
And our honor that was wont to shine,
Throughout the world and our worthiness,
Eclipse shall and tournen to dercknesse.
But ye this day like as men you quyte.
Wherefore I pray that no man ne atwyte,
Your high renown of any cowardice,
To set upon in full manly wise,
And not to spare for dread of death I pray.
And they echone full lowly began obey,
To his desire withouten longer tale.
And entryng in by a certain vale,
Upon greeks these worthy knights all,
Following Hector suddenly be fall,
Full mortally or that they were ware.
And Hector tho no greek would spare,
But every where to their confusyon,
He killed and slew about him enuyron.
And his knights riding by his side,
Made their foen maugre all their pride,
To lose their land and flewe out of their sight.
Till that the king which ye Thoas hight,
On greeks side inward began him dress,
And of new fulll knyghtly began oppress,
Them of Troy this knight this manly man.
That had before slain Cassybellan,
One of the sons of king Pryamus.
But as he rode of fortune it fell thus,
That all the brethren on a frushe he met,
Which of assent enuyron him besette,
And from his sadell that many greek beheld,
Among the horse smyt him into field.
And of they rent first his basenet,
And cruelly they had his head of smet.
For he unarmed all at myschief stood.
Save that the Duke furyous and wood,
Of Athenes riding tho a great pase,
Reskued him in this mortal case,
With his knights that about him rode.
And him to help without more abode,
With a spear sharp whet and kene.
First of all he fell on Quintiline,
That busy was Thoas to have slawe.
And the bretherene made also withdraw,
When Quintiline of his horse was throw.
But Paris the^ drew up his mighty bow,
And to this Duke let an arowe glyde.
And through his plates hit him in the side,
Upon a rybbe that made him sore to blede.
Of which stroke he ne took no head,
Because only that he so fervent was,
Amid his foen to help thus king Thoas,
Among the horse that was bore to ground,
In point of death with many mortal wou^d.
Only for he was naked on the head.
But this Duke fully deuoyde of dread,
Of his knighthod in this perilous case,
Amid his foen has help the king Thoas,
And with his life made him scapen fre.
And Hector aye of cruel enmitee,
Iliche fresh for nothing would leave,
Upon greeks his manhood for to preue.
Enforsing him to their destructiowne.
And as he rode among them up and down,
King Humerus has a bow take,
And to shote began him ready make.
And hatefully therein set an arowe,
And to Hector he marked has so narowe,
That he smote him even amid the face.
But or he might any ferther pace,
Hector smyt him with so great a pain,
That with his swerd he roue his head atwayn.
The death of who^ when the greeks know.
Mine auctour says they have an horn yblow
That unawarely with that dreadful sown,
Seven thousand knights came at ones adowne
About Hector without more abode.
But of force through them all he rode.
Maugre their might that him tho withsette.
And slow all tho that his way let.
And would do stynt plainly till he came,
To his father the worthy king Pryam.
With many worthy full famous of renown,
That with his knights fast by the town,
Lay all the day with men on horse and foot,
As he that was of knighthod crop and root,
And kept him close in full high prudence,
Till Hector came unto his presence,
And him besought in this great need,
With three thousand that he would him speed,
Upon greeks in their full rage,
To fall on them at most advantage.
ANd the^ in haste this worthy Priamus,
With his knights fresh and desirous,
Toward greeks has the way ytake,
And such a mordre began upon them make,
That many greeks lay dead on the plain.
For Pryamus has them so sore belayne.
On every half through his great might,
That they full fast fled out of his sight.
So sore of new he upon them set.
And as I find they tohether met,
Hector and Ayax of cruel adventure.
And on their stedes strong and wonder sure,
The storye says in all the haste they konne,
Like wood Lions they together run.
With so great might yt were they lefe or loathe,
Upon the plain they were unhorsed both.
And in this while Menelay the king,
Suddenly as he camen ridinge,
He slew of Troy a worthy admyrall.
And thus the slaughter passingly mortal,
Renewed aye for that Celidonas,
The neuewe slew of the king Thoas.
And Mada^ met mine auctour writes thus,
A grekyshe king called Cedeus.
Which with his sword such a stroke him set,
That through ye vmber out his eye he smette.
And Sardellus that was of Troy eke,
The same while slew a worthy greek,
A lord of name and of high prowess,
Although Guido his name does not express.
And then also came Margaryton,
On Troy side again Thelamon,
And both two inly set a fire,
Of high disdain and of hateful ire.
As they met on horse back both yfere,
King Thelamon sothly as I lere,
Gave unto him a deadly wound cruel.
But tho came in the Trojan Phanuell.
And Prothenor smote down of his stead,
And thus the sons plainly as I read,
Of Pryamus nothing not dismayde,
The greeks have on every part outrayed.
And so knightly all the day them borne,
That many greek fatally has lorne,
His life in sothe of hate and enmyte.
And king Anglas is fall on Meneste,
Of Athenes Duke and gouernoure,
And with a spear of ire and old rancoure,
He ran and smet him tho amyd the shyelde.
But for all that his sadell yet he held.
And for that the Duke spear had none,
He with a sword to Anglas rode anon,
And through yt owmber roue of nigh his nase
That he astoned stood as in a mase,
When that he saw the condyte of his blood,
So stream out but for all that he rode,
Out aside fully deuoyde of fear,
Unto the time that he staunched were.
But Deamor his own brother dear,
When he beheld his mortal blody cheer.
Of high disdain he rode to Meneste,
And him vnhorseth but up anon sterte he,
And or he might fully up arise,
Another brother in full creuell wise,
Is fall on him so that of them three,
Attones weten upon Meneste,
Fully in purpose he shall lose his life.
But he so knightly bare him in that strife,
Against them that wonder was to se.
And upon him most cruel of them three,
Was one Thoas eldest of echone.
Which him to sleye was busy ever in one.
For all to broke they have his basenet,
But when that Tenter saw him so beset,
A grekishe king as made is mention,
Had in his heart great compassyon,
And thought plainly of manhood him releue
And if he might his fomen for to grieve.
But all for naught was his busy pain,
For Hector tho fallen is on both twain,
Upon Tenter and on Meneste,
And had them slain ne had Ayax be.
Which unto Hector fast began him hye,
A thousand knights in his company,
Him to withstand and Meneste to save.
From his hands if he might him have.
But Paris tho and the king of Perce,
With five thousand as I can rehearse,
Of worthy knights and many trojan mo,
Be unto Hector all at ones ygo.
In thryfty wise cydyng on a row,
For Paris made a trumpet to be blow,
At which there came knightly enbattayled,
Many Trojan full well apparayled,
Which in the field of Hector were conveyed.
For of one heart they fully have obeyed,
Unto the bydding of this Trojan knight,
All fresh and new to begin a fight,
Upon greeks as far forth as they can.
Of whom was slain many manly man.
And aye the slaughter pyteously renews,
That many greek sore in heart reweth,
Their great loss and destructiowne,
Wrought upon the^ by them of Troy town.
And specially of Hector as I find.
Which on that day as Dares makes mind,
With his hand a thousand knights slow.
That never were adawed of their sow,
For greek none dare in his way dwell.
For with his sword he coud them so compel,
To lose their ground of necessyte,
And like as sheep before the wolf to fle.
And as I read amiddes this victory,
Hector has met under a Tentoree,
Among greeks Mereon the king.
To whom he spoke without more tarying.
Oh thou tratoure thy hour aprocheth fast,
For thou art come sothly to thy last,
Thy fatal day has his course yronne,
For trust well or westrynge of the son,
I cast platly to quyten the thy mede.
And with my swerd in haste thy blood to shed.
For thou so bold were on me to day,
Me to disturben of my rich pray,
At the spoylyng of king Patroclus.
That for cause thou were presumptious,
Me to disturb thou shall anon be dead.
And down he sterte and smote of first his head.
And him to spoil also began him haste.
But Meneste came on him as fast,
When he beheld trauerse at his back,
And with a spear in which was no lack,
Smote him in with so great violence,
Without sight or any aduertence,
Of worthy Hector or any taking head,
The wound of whom sore began to blede.
But out he went and made it fast bind.
And Meneste stale away behind,
Not in purpose sothly if he may,
To mete Hector of all that ylke day.
But when that he was ybounde sore,
His wound to staunche that it blede no more,
More furyous than he was erst tofore,
Repeyred is with anger al to tore,
So aye the ire on his heart fret.
That he bare down all that ever he met.
Slayth and kylleth he was so mercyles,
All tho that put them self in the prease,
Or hardy were with him for to mete.
For in his book like as write Darete,
For very sothe and in the storye says,
If it be so that men may given faith,
And full credence of possybylyte,
As in Guydo clearly ye may se,
After that he caught his latter wound,
Finally the greeks to confound,
So as it is affermed in certain,
A thousand knights with his hand were slain,
Without them tho that I spoke of rathe.
And new always he began his sword to bathe,
In greeks blood that suddenly they be,
So ouerlayne through his cruelte,
That greek was none of high nor low estate,
That he ne was awhaped and amate,
Of his knighthod and manly excellence.
For there was none to maken resystence,
Nor utterly that durst take on hand,
Of all that day Hector to wythstande.
And as is made also mention,
Thylke day king Agamenon,
As says Guydo came not into field,
For causes great his presence he withhelde,
On greeks side that al goes up so down,
Hector on them so plays the wood Liowne.
That to their tents they fled for socours,
And they of Troy proudly as victours.
Sewed after them by traces of their blood,
And there they wan treasour and great good.
And spoiled them in full great dystresse,
Of their armure and of their richesse,
And fell on them or that they were ware,
And home to Troy all that good they bare.
For finally that day with myschaunce,
Greeks had be brought unto outraunce,
Without recure in sothe for evermore,
On every part they were belayde so sore,
Through the manhood of Hector and ye might,
With help of many other worthy knight,
That so felly again the greeks wrought,
For to such mischief plainly they the^ brought,
That ne had be their own pyteous slouthe,
Of pride only and of folly routhe,
They had of them at their volunte,
That day for ever had the soneraynte.
And recured through their high renown,
Lordshyppe of them and dominacyowne,
Which should have last and be continual,
Victoryously and perpetual.
Have endured save that cruel fate,
Is ready aye with fortune to debate,
Again things that gynne in wilfulness.
To make them fine aye in wretchedness.
Through their enuyous disposytion,
Of sudden chance and reuolucion,
And unware tourning of her false whele,
That will not bide when a thing is well.
Alas freyle deuoyde of sykernesse,
The cause was dimmed so with dercknesse,
That has trojans through false opinion,
Yblinded so in their discrescion.
And specially fordercked so the sight,
Of worthy Hector the prudent manly knight.
To se before what should after sewe,
By good advise the mischyefe to eschew.
That followed them at the back behind.
Alas they were wilfully made blind.
The same day when they sytten soft,
By victory on the hill alofte.
That they ne could of neclygence not se,
The after fall of their felycite.
So put abacke was their aduertence.
For lack of reason and of high prudence.
For they their hap have voided and their grace,
That presently were set before their face.
For in a man it is not commendable,
If fortune be to him favorable,
And blandeshing with a forhead clear,
To smyle on him with a plesaunt cheer,
Only of favor for to help him out,
When he in myschyefe is beset about,
If he refuse his hap of wylfulnesse,
Fortune avoiding through unkindness,
When she ministers to him of her grace,
Another time he shall not her embrace.
When he has need to her help at all,
To succor him or he catch a fall.
But rather then for his ingratitude,
Frowardly with mowes him delude,
When he best weneth to stand in sikernesse.
Fortune is aye so full of brotilnesse,
Remouable and ready for to flytte.
Her welfull hour yt who list not admytte,
With her favor for to be allied,
Another time it shall be denied,
When he were leuest find her favorable.
For in some hour sothly this no fable,
Unto some man she grants his desires,
That will not after in a thousand years.
Peraunter ones condescende,
Unto his will nor his lust him send.
As it has fall this day unhappily,
To worthy Hector that so wilfully,
Wrought of head greeks for to spare,
Fatally when they were in snare.
For he of them like a conqueror,
With victory tryumphe and honor,
Might have brought through his hye renown
The palm of conquest into Troy town.
Which he that day refused folylye.
For as he rode this Hector cruelly,
Among greeks slow and bare all down,
Casually he met Thelamowne,
I mean Ayax nygh of his allye,
That of hate and cruel hot envy,
To Hector rode like as he were wood,
Albe to him he was full nygh of blood.
Yet for all that this young lusty knight,
Did his power and his full might,
Without fayning to have borne him down.
Whose father hight also Thelamowne,
That him begat the storye tells us,
Of Eryon sister to Pryamus.
And this Ayax flourynge in young age,
Fresh and deliver and of great courage,
Set on Hector of knyghtly high prowess.
And as they met both in their woodnesse,
On their stedes these manly champyons,
Eueryche on other like Tygres or Lions,
Began to fall and proudly to assail,
And furyously severe plate and mayle.
First with speres long large and round,
And afterward with swerdes kene ygrou^de.
And fyghtyng thus long they do contune,
Till it befell of case or of fortune,
Token or sign or some appearance,
Or by natures kyndly influence,
Which into hertes does full deep mine,
Namely of them that borne be of one line.
Which cause was peraunter of these twane.
Naturally their rancour to restrain,
And their ire for to modefye,
Only for they so nygh were of allye,
Vnwyst of other and thereof unsure,
Till they were taught only of nature.
For naturally blood will aye of kind,
Draw unto blood where he may it find.
Which made Hector kyndely to aduerte,
To be meued and stered in his heart,
Both of knyghthod and of gentilnesse,
When he of Ayax saw the worthynesse,
Spoke unto him full beningnely.
And said Cosyn I say the trewly,
If thou list greeks here forsake,
And come to Troy I dare the undertake,
To thine allies and to thy kynrede,
Thou shall be there withouten any dread,
Full well received in party and in all,
Of them that be of the blood royal,
Sothly decended and highest of degree.
That it of right shall suffyse unto the,
And kyndely be to the great plesaunce,
For to repair unto thine allyaunce,
Of gentle heart sithe nothing is so good,
As be confedered with his own blood.
For I conceive by thy worthynesse,
Which nature does kyndly in the impresse,
Of Trojan blood that thou art descended.
Which of greeks long has be offended.
Wherefore I read to leave them utterly,
And he answered again full humbly,
That sythen he of birth was a greek,
And was of youth among them fostred eke,
From the time of his natiuitye,
And taken had the order and degree,
Of knighthod eke among them aforne,
And over this bound was and sworn,
To be true as to their nation.
Making of blood none excepcion,
He swore he would conserve his beheste.
And to Hector he made this request,
That if that he of manfull gentilnesse,
Would of knyghthod and of worthiness,
Show unto him so great affectiowne,
To make them that were of Troy town,
Only withdraw greeks to pursewe,
And for their tents make them to remewe,
And resort again unto the town.
Of knighthode routhe and compassyowne,
Without assaylynge or any more affraye,
Made on the greeks for that ilke day,
Sithe unto them ought enough suffyse,
That of the field in so knightly wise,
They were of manhead fully possessours,
And of their fomen finally victours,
Like as tofore fully is defyned.
To whose request Hector is enclyned.
Alas the while of hasty wilfulness,
And made anon without auysenesse,
Amydde the field trumpet for to blow,
Whereby Trojans fully mighten know,
His will was that they should the^ withdraw,
After custom plainly and the law,
And the vsaunce both of nyghe and far.
Among them that be expert in werre.
When they were most fervent for to fight,
Upon greeks for to preue their might.
And had them chaced low to the stronde,
That they were weak of power to withsta^de
For they of Troy all of one desire,
Began set on with shot of wild fire,
To brenne their ships and of high mischau^ce,
Finally to put them at outtraunce.
And so they had this the very troth,
Ne had Hector had upon them routh,
Making Troyans repair ayene to town,
Ungraciously to their confusyowne.
As the story shall after specifye,
For tho he put alas in iupardye,
Life and death which else might have be sure,
And which again they shall never recure.
How the greeks through their suite opteyned of king Pryam a trewce for eight
wekes and of their battayles after the trewce ended. Capitulo.xxiii.
THey have matter to complaynen sore,
For fro that day farewell for evermore,
Laud victory and fro them of the town,
To them denied by disposyowne,
Of mortal fate which contrary,
In this matter me list no longer tarry.
For they of Troy be entered their City,
And shet their gates for more surety,
For of that day like as made is mind,
Thus was the end in Guydo as I find,
They wend have done peraunter for the best.
And when the son was ygo to rest,
They took their ease all that ylke night,
Till on the morrow Tytan clear and bright,
Shadde his beams on their hemispherye,
Making the day for to show merye.
At which time Troyans anon right,
They that were hole and lusty for to fight,
Began arm them in purpose full that day,
Their foen to mete platly if they may.
For that was hole their will and plain intent.
And eke they had in commandment,
Tofore of Hector ready them to make.
Out of their sleep a morrow when they wake
Of which thing they were not neclygent,
But to Pryam the greeks have ysent,
There messangers the same day or pryme,
To take trewce only for the time,
Of eight wekes the which Pryamus,
With Hectors will the story tells thus,
Has granted them and by auctoritye,
Of all the wise that were in the City.
In which time while they leyser have,
The greeks began to burye and to grave,
The bodies that before weren slawe,
Like their rytes in their paynem law.
With all their might and their busy cure,
For some brent and some by sepulture,
Enclosed were like their estate in all,
And thus they held the feast funeral,
Fro day to day during aye the peace.
In which space I find how Achelles,
Of Patroclus the death has sore playned.
As he that was with tears all be rayned,
So inwardly he loved him in heart.
That for the anguyshe and the cruel smerte,
He long abode in lamentacion,
And did make by great affection,
A large toumbe for a remembrance,
Myd the field as tho was the vsaunce,
Among greeks with great reverence.
Like the honor and the excellence,
Of royal burying. so this Patroclus,
Ygraue was and Protheselaus,
In their toumbes korue of marbyll graye.
And nigh together in a plain they lay.
The work about them rychly was ywrought
And to the earth they were together brought.
Solempnely like the obseruaunces,
Of their rytes with the circumstaunces,
Of greeks used sothly in tho days.
Fro point to point as longs to their lays.
Of such as weren of estate royal,
So holden was the feast funeral,
Of these two whiles the trewse does last.
And they of Troy busyed them full fast,
With all their might and their bufy eure,
The grene hurtes and wounds for to cure.
By their advise that were in surgerye,
Full well expert to shapen remedy,
Their swolle sores to soften of their pain.
That in the space of these months twain,
They were restored to health in every thing,
In which time Priamus the king.
Such sorrow made for Cassybellan,
In his heart that no wight ne can,
Him recomforte of his heuinesse.
For day by day of inward tenderness.
Full pyteously he began to sobbe and weep.
And the body he made for to keep,
Above the earth for a certain space,
Till he had chosen out some worthy place,
To his burying and his sepulture,
And as Guydo us fully does assure,
In Venus temple rich as any shryne,
He made his men a toumbe for to mine,
In marbell greye and metal rychely,
In which he put full solempnely,
The dead corpse of this Cassybellan.
Being present full many manly man.
In the phane of Cytherea.
The which thing when that Cassandra,
Within her self considered and beheld,
And saw up offered his helm and eke his shield,
His sword also and unto Mars his stead,
Of inward woe she felt her heart blede.
Heryng the noise and the pyteous cry,
The tender weeping and sorowyng utterly,
Of them of Troy and lamentaciowne,
Which for their friends throughout al ye town,
They began to make that were slawe before.
With sodeyne rage her heart was all to tore.
So inwardely she might her not restrain,
Furyously to cry and to complain,
And said alas full often and welawaye.
Oh woeful wretches that ye be this day,
Unhappy eke and graceles also,
Unfortunate and inly woe bego.
How ye may suffer the great harms kene,
Which ye are lykely hereafter to sustene,
During the syege in this town belocke,
Seeing your foen ready to be wroke,
About you beset on every side.
To be venged on your great pride.
I wot right well ye may them not eschew.
That they ne shall unto the death pursewe,
You euerychone besyeged in this place.
Without mercy rewth or any grace.
Alas alas why will ye besy be,
Ye woeful wretches shet in this Cite.
With the greeks for to seken peace,
Or the sword of vengeance mercyles.
On high and low do execuciowne,
And or this noble worthy royal town,
Euersed be and ybrought to naught.
Why list ye not consider in your thought,
How the Modres with their children small,
In streets shall with face dead and pale,
Lie murdered there through greeks cruelte,
And young maidens in captivity,
Be weep shall in myserye and woe.
Their seruitute and this town also.
So famous rich alas it is pity,
With greeks fire shall destroyed be.
In short time sothly this no were.
Heleyne of us alas is bought to dear.
Sith for her sake we shall euerychone,
Poor and rich exceptyng never one,
An end make woeful and pyteous.
The ire of them shall be so furious.
Upon us all there is none other mean,
Save only death us to go between.
This was the noise and the pyteons cry,
Of Cassandra that so dredefully,
She began to make about in every street.
Through ye town whom ever she might mete
Like as she had be out of her mind,
Till Pryamus fast made her bind,
And shytte up it as the more routhe,
She was not hard albe she said troth.
For neither wisdom nor discrecion,
Counsel nor wit prudence nor reason,
Troth nor read withouten any lie,
Nor the spirit of true prophecye.
Avails not nor all such sapyence,
In place where there is no audyence.
For be a man inly never so wise,
In counsaylyng or in high deuyse,
In workyng outher or in eloquence,
Each thing to se in his aduertence,
Or it be fall before in his reason,
Amyd the eye of his discrecion.
Yet for all this it is the more dole,
Without favor he holden is a fool.
For vnfauoured wisdom vayleth naught,
Neither troth how dear that it be bought.
As Cassandra for all her wise read,
Dispysed was and taken of no head.
Of them of Troy to their confusyon,
But cruelly ythrowen in prison,
Where as a while I will let her dwell.
And of greeks forth I will you tell.
ANd first of all how Pallamydes,
Began to grutche against them yt chese,
He being absent king Agamenon,
To have lordshyp or domynacyon,
On them all namely sith that he,
Was not worthy to such dignite,
For to govern so great a mighty host.
Throughout the world come from every cost,
Of kings, princes, so worthy of renown.
For he thereof had indignaciowne.
And said himself was of more poustee,
Among greeks and greater of degree,
Concludyng that by no manner weye,
To his power he ne would obey.
In peace and werre as by subjection.
Sith he ne was at his election.
Platly affyrmyng how there were but three,
When he was chose kings of degree,
Where as thurty were that time absent,
For which he swore it was not his intent,
Nor according with his opinion.
In any wise that Agamenon,
Of greeks should have such governance.
Lo what myschyefe lies in varyaunce.
Among lords when they not accord.
For to draw fully by one cord.
Envy is cause of such dyuysyon,
And couetyse of domynacyon.
That eueryche would surmounten his fellow,
This cursed vyse often has withdraw,
Hap and grace in many regyon.
For when discord and false discencion,
Allied ben in hertes for to strive,
Among lords that kingdom may not thrive.
Till they reformed be again to peace.
Among them self plainly this no lease.
Of which thing greeks token head,
And thought not good ferther to proceed,
In the matter that Pallamydes,
Ymeued had among all the prese.
And through their wit they set all in quyete,
And made him his rancour for to let.
And to accord fully in his heart.
But now must I my style again dyuerte,
Unto the werre and tell on the manner,
After the trewes how they met yfeare.
Like as the storye makes mention.
The worthy king the great Agamenon,
When the trewes were passed and ygone,
In all haste he began ordeyne anon,
With all might and waker dylygence,
Deuoyde of slouthe and all neclygence,
To set his wards full auysely.
And to Achylle he full prudently,
The first ward co^mytteth for to lead,
And the second unto Diomede.
The third also to king Menelay,
And the fourth on the same day.
He had Meneste the duke of Athene,
At his lodyng in steel armed clean.
And other wards following by and by,
Agamenon the king full manfully,
Ordained has how they shall proceed,
As he that was in all his work and deed,
Full circumspect both in werre and peace.
And worthy Hector was not reckles,
To set his wards of them of the town.
In knightly wise of discreciowne,
And to Troylus so young fresh and light,
The first ward with many lusty knight,
He has assygned and other wards set,
So prudently they ne might be no bet.
And forth in have him list no longer bide,
With many worthy rydyng by his side.
Out at the gates he went of the town,
Toward greeks this Troyan champiowne.
And first when he saw the fyerse Achylle,
He ne could no longer keep him still,
But smote his horse felly in the side,
And toward him cruelly began ride.
The which thing with a dispyteous eye,
When Achylles sothly began espy,
Again Hector of manfull hardynesse,
With heart enuyous began his stead dress.
And in the fyelde together as they met,
With round speres the points kene whette,
At the encountryng of knightly excellence,
Eueryche other through great vyolence,
By very force bare other unto ground.
As full often it happeth and is found,
When strong does mete with his peregall.
There is no more but eueryche had a fall.
But Hector first of strength most assured,
His stead again has anon recured.
And left Achylle tho of gentilnesse,
And in great have forth he began him dress,
Among greeks and where so that he rode,
He killed and slew all that him with stood.
For with his sword he made their wou^des wide
And through the breast and some through the side,
He perced has and waged them for ever,
And sheltrou^s brake and made them to disseuer.
For in his heart him thought it did him good,
To has his sword in the greeks blood.
And this continued till that Achylles,
Caught his stead again among the prese.
And entered in among them of Troy,
And with his sword he made large weye.
Sleeth and bare down whom yt ever he met,
For there was none hardy him to let.
Till it befell in his melancolye.
Hector he met rydyng suddenly,
And when they saw each other come a far,
Without abode eueryche caught a spear,
And ran together there was no more a rest.
But Hector first smette him in the breast,
That his spear plainly this no tale,
All to shyuered into pieces small.
That Achilles of necessyte,
To ground goth it would none other be.
And unhorsed at the earth lay.
And Hector then in all the haste he may,
Enforced him for to catch his stead.
But many a greek in this great need,
Came to rescues of this Achylles.
And for his love put them self in prese.
Through help of who^ his horse he does attain
Enhastyng him with all his might and pain,
To be avenged of his great iniurye.
And suddenly in his wood furye,
With a sword full sharp ground and whette,
He smote Hector upon the basenet,
That from his sadell he made him to remewe
The which stroke he might not eschew,
But for all that this noble worthy knight,
Of very force through his great might,
Maugre his foen his sadell has recured.
As he that was in manhood most assured.
And suddenly in heart he wexed so wroth,
That in arage to Achylles he goth,
And with his sword so smyt him on the head,
Through the basenet that the blood all red,
By his face began to ronnen down,
Like a river his chekes enuyrowne.
But he him self deffendeth as a knight,
And tho of new began the cruel fight.
Atwene them two to se that it was wonder.
For every stroke great as dent of thonder,
Range in the air for none would other spare.
And this the soth in their fight they fare,
Like wood Tygres or Bores in their rage,
Or stern Bulls when they be savage.
That it semyd in very sothfastnesse,
If these two so full of worthynesse,
Contune long in fighting and endure.
The tone or both of cruel adventure,
Must have be dead of necessyte.
The which thing had great petye be.
Because they weren worthy knights both.
But while that they in fyghtyng fell and wroth,
Most busy were the greeks tho begin,
With their wards for to enter in.
And they of Troy the storye makes mind,
On their party left not behind,
But in the fyelde enhaste them euerychone.
In knightly wise to mete with their fone,
That with the prease here and also yonder,
The knights two severed were a sonder.
And tho came in stern Dyomede.
With the knights which he there did led,
Full lustly and in the selue place,
With whom has met proudly in the face,
Worthy Troylus on his horseback.
That never had yet in manhood lack.
And as they country the storye does us lere,
Eueryche unhorsed knightly has his fear.
But first his horse recureth Dyomede,
And in all haste began him for to speed,
Tassayle Troylus stondyng upon foot.
And when he saw there was none other bote
And knightly yet as did erst any man.
Against him to deffende tho he began.
But Dyomede hot as any fire,
Wonder enuyous and hateful of desire,
With his sword of rancour for the nones,
The rich Cercle full of Inde stones,
That was that time on Troylus basenet,
Full cruelly has raced of and smet.
But Troilus nolde for that him wtdrawe,
For him deffendynge he has the stead slawe,
On which sat that time Dyomede.
That mauger him he must alyght need.
And when they were on foot both twain,
They did their might and their cruel pain,
Eueryche of them other to assail.
With swords sharp so that plate and mayle,
They began to severe and a sonder race.
As wood Lions with mortal chere and face,
Till the Greeks strong stout and fell,
As mine auctour in his book can tell,
Have through their might caused Dyomede,
All suddenly to recure his stead.
And Troyan knights on the the other side,
Have Troylus brought a stead for to ride.
And when they were horsed both two,
Without more they efte together go.
With strong foynes and yfeare ran,
Each at other as felly as they can.
Till at the last cruel Dyomede,
Like as ye may in mine auctour read,
Were it by case hap or adventure,
In which no man fully may assure,
Or by fortune with her false vysage,
Had that time of Troylous avauntage.
For he on him was fallen at myschyefe,
The which thing to him was no reprefe,
Though he him took among so great aroute
On every half with greeks set about.
Sith doubtous ever is the fine of fight.
Now up, now down, now derk, and after bright,
For no wight may be aye vyctoryous,
In peace nor werre nor ylyche eurous.
Let every man sith hap it set in doubt,
Take his turn as it comes about.
Though troylus now was take of Diomede,
An other time he shall him quite his mede.
For as the storye tells in this place,
This Dyomede but a little space,
Troylus ladde forth as prisoner,
That to reskewes in steel armed clear,
Many Troyan came pryckynge in this need,
That maugre all the might of Dyomede.
They Troylus have from his hands take,
And tho began the slaughter for his sake,
On every half that wonder is to tell,
Of the Troyans and the greeks fell.
Than into fyelde is entered Menelay,
Which on Troyans all that ylke day,
Full busy was avenged for to be.
To them he had so cruel enmyte.
And when Paris saw him in the fyelde,
Toward him the right way he held.
And of purpose they their wards set,
Each on other till they together met.
And tho the skyrmyshe and the slaughter began,
On outher part of many manly man.
And all this while Hector ne would cease,
Among greeks cruelly to prease.
And new and new of him as I read,
Alyke fresh the blood of them to shede.
For of his sword the traces were ysene,
That the greeks ne myghten not sustene,
To resyste nor stand before his face.
But where he rode aye they gave him place.
Till that a knight which Boetes hyghte,
Young of age when he had a sight,
How Hector slew the greeks mortally,
On every side having no mercy.
He preased in to increase his name.
Perpetually to purchase him a fame.
And furiously in heart not aferde,
He cast platly to mete him in the berde.
The which thing when Hector began aduert,
So high rancour enbraced has his heart,
That with his sword of indignaciowne,
He rofe him even to the navel down.
Fro the crown with so great a pain,
That in the fyelde he parted lay in twain.
And Hector tho assygned has his stead,
To a squire and bad he should it led,
To Troy town without more abode.
And all this while furyously he rode,
Among greeks and ever mercilese,
He slew all tho that put them self in prese.
And shed their blood of heart despiteous.
The which thing when king Archylogus,
Rydyng beside saw and began espy,
How Boetes his cosyn and allye,
So cruelly was of Hector slawe,
Toward him in have he began him draw.
Upon his death avenged for to be.
And rode at him with great cruelte,
Fully in purpose Hector for to quyte.
And suddenly as he began at him smite,
Hector unawarely hit him on the head,
So myghtly that he fell down dead.
Parted on two by cruel adventure.
Notwithstanding his mighty strong armure
Again his stroke it was of no deffence,
For it was given with such violence,
That it help him in no manner thing.
And then anon Prothenor the king,
Of hateful ire and fool hardynesse,
Of surquedye and of hastiness,
Of melancolye and indignacion,
Caught in his heart a presumpcion,
To assail Hector of in ward folyshe pride,
And goth to him attrauerse on the side,
Furyously with a dispiteous heart.
That his commonge he might not aduerte,
Only for he came at his back behind.
And unawarely in Guydo as I find.
And Hector smote from his horse to ground,
In whom there was so much manhod found
That he anon with a knightly heart,
Without abode into his sadell sterte,
And right fyersely Prothenor purseweth,
That finally his hand he not escheweth,
For with his sword he marked him so well,
Through the basenet by his breast of stele,
That into twain without any fail,
He roue him down into his paunce of mayle.
And he fell down in full pyteous wise.
Of which stroke the greeks sore agryse.
And specially the hardy fierce Achille,
When he beheld lyked it full ill.
For Prothenor was nygh his cosyne,
And descended of the same line,
For death of whom he has such heaviness,
So inward thought and so great distress,
In all this world he ne wist what to do.
For him he had so much pain and woe.
And for the death of him Archilogus,
To be avenge he was full desirous.
And in his heart many way he cast,
And in the wards began to seek fast,
With many greek on Hector to have fall.
Conspyred fully in sothe among them all,
Of one entente Hector to assail.
But all for naught it would not avail,
He was that day so cruel in his rage,
They might of him have none advantage.
And Trojan knights by favor of Fortune,
Upon greeks so mightily contune,
Through conueyeng of Hector and his might,
That they anon have put them to flight.
And to their tents maugre who that strive,
In their pursuit forwou^ded they them drive.
That here and there they lay as in a swowe,
And many a greek merciles they slow.
The long day till it drew to night.
And sothly then for very lack of light,
These trojans knights full worthy of renown
About Hector repayren to the town.
And enter in with honor and with glory,
That day of greeks having the victory.
And thus I leave them in their town within,
And forth of greeks to tell I will begin.
When Hesperus the fair bright sterre,
Against eve has cast his streams fer,
And in the west rathest began appear,
When the twylight with a pale cheer,
In manner morneth thabsence of the son.
And night aprocheth with his coopes dunne.
The same time when Titan took his leave,
That clerks call Crepusculum at eve,
Which is not else but the mean light,
Of Phoebus absence and the dercke night.
And twylight hatte for it is a mean,
Of day and night departing them between.
Fully another but of both ymeynt,
Or the heaven be clustered and depeynt,
With bright sterres in the eueninge.
AT which time Agamenon the king,
For his lords suddenly has sent,
To come echone anon into his tente.
And when they were assembled all yfeare,
Tryst and heavy with a ruthful cheer,
They began ye slaught of Hector to complain.
Affirming plainly they ne may attain,
Unto victory while he were alive.
Wherefore they began to conspyre blyue,
The death of him in many sundry weye.
Echone concludynge while he were in Troy,
It was not lykely greeks for to win.
For he alone of them that were within,
Was chief deffence and protectiowne.
And soueraynly vpholder of the town.
Their mighty Castle and their strong wall,
And unto greeks deadly foe mortal.
For they ne might his great force endure,
Nor never aryght again their foes be sure.
He standing hole they said in no degree,
Nor while he floureth in felycitye.
Wherefore echone of one entencion,
They condiscende to this conclusyon.
That by some slyght of awayte lyinge,
When he were most busy in fighting,
Among them in myschyfe or distress,
That Achylles do his business,
With all his might unawarely him to assail.
That him to slay for nothing that he fail.
And greeks all began their prayer make,
To Achilles for to undertake.
Of this Empress finally the suite.
Through his manhood that it be execute,
The hasty death of their mortal foe,
And Achylles without words mo,
Their request assenteth to perform.
And to their lust began holy him confourme.
From that time let him beware I read,
To be to hasty this journey for to speed,
Upon Hector his power for to kythe.
Lest fortune awronge her face wrythe,
To look on him with a froward cheer,
Him to bring unto his hands nere.
Through sort or hap of Hector folylye,
To put his life of death in Ieopartye.
Lest unto him it hap even lyche,
To fall him self in the same dyche,
That he for Hector compassed has and shape,
For it is wonder if that he escape.
Since Hector had without any dread,
As brennyng ire and as great hatrede,
To Achilles his death for to puruey,
If he him found or in any place to say,
Conuenyent for execucion.
I trow there should gain him no raunson,
Nor other mede his heart to quyete,
But only death when so that they mete.
This the end and fine of my mattere,
As in this book after ye shall hear.
And thus Greeks made have an end,
Of their counsel and anon they wend,
Eueryche of them home to their lodging,
And took their resten till in the morninge.
How the trojans took king Thoas prisoner and led him captive to Troie. Ca.
xxiiii.
When Aurora the silver drops shene,
Her tears shad upon the fresh grene,
Complaining aye in weping and in sorrow,
Her chyldrens death every somer morrow,
That is to say when the dew so soote.
Enbawmed has the flower and eke the root
With lusty lycoure in April and in May,
When that the lark messenger of day,
Of custom aye Aurora does salve,
With sundry notys her sorrow to transmewe.
Or Phoebus rise with joy and gladness,
Through hermonye to leave her heaviness,
Taking her leave with saint John to borow,
The same time Greeks by the morrow,
With lusty heart early did arise,
And armed them in all their best wise.
For they them cast that day for to gone,
Into the field to mete with their fone.
And Hector has the same morrow also,
I cast him fully with Greeks have ado.
And issued is knightly out of Troy,
In heart he has so great desire and joy,
The same day with greeks for to fight,
And with him ladde many lusty knight,
Of such as were of the Cite borne,
And forth he rode him self all aforne,
And Eneas with many a worthy,
Followed after wonder fast by.
And Paris the^ and next him Deiphobus,
And sith Troylus that was coragious,
With all the wards made of Troy town,
In which as Dares makes menciowne,
Within his book there were on Troy side,
Of fighting men yt went and that did ride,
And hundred thousand armed for to go,
Into the field and fyfty thousand mo.
Which have them cast that day or at eve,
Of one intent Greeks for to grieve.
And so they met strongly on other side,
And began assemble and together ride,
Full cruelly and with great hatrede.
And with them tho that Paris had to lead,
He entered in full mighty strong archeres,
Of Perce land with many Arbalasters,
That with their arowes filed sharp and round,
And with quarelles square whette and ground,
Full many greek has reued of his life.
And amiddes of this mortal strife,
Agamenon into the field is come.
Toward whom Hector has ynome,
The right way and threw him from his stead,
Among his knights that he there did led.
He spared naught for all the great prese.
And therwithall anon came Achilles,
That in awayte of Hector tho had layne,
And suddenly with all his might and pain,
Hector he smote on the head so sore,
That with ye stroke mine auctour says no more
His basenet was bowed and ycrased.
Of which stroke Hector not amassed,
On Achilles should anon yfall,
Ne had Eneas with his knights all,
And worthy Troylus come and go between.
The which twain with their swerdes kene,
Began Achilles felly for to assale.
To hew his playtes and to perse his mayle.
And tho began the slaught on every side,
Of men of foot and of them that ride.
Like a condyte their wounds ga^ to blede,
And in this while cruel Dyomede,
Were it by hap adventure or case,
So as he rode met with Eneas,
And right anon as he had him found,
He smet at him and gave him such a wound,
That lykly was he should it not recure,
But if thereto be do the better cure.
And thereupon full despyteously,
This Diomede in his melancolye,
Repreued has this Trojan knight Enee,
And said to him all hayle for thou art he,
That whylom gave to Pryamus the king,
A fell counsel hasty and bytynge,
Me to have slain by sudden violence,
When I was last at Troy in his presence.
That trust me well and have it well in mind,
Amyd the fyelde if I the eft find,
Thou shall thy counsel mortally repent.
If that fortune hereafter will assent,
To bring the aryght unto my hand,
At good leyser here in thine own land,
I am full set thy labor for to quyte.
and here my troth this sword shall kerue and bite
So kenely thy Trojan blood to shede,
That finally death shall be thy mede,
The which I bear atwene my hands twain
And with that word he might him not restrayn,
This Diomede but rode all suddenly,
Upon Enee and tho so furyously,
He smote at him this hardy cruel knight,
With such a pain and so great a might,
That from his horse he made him for to fall.
Maugre the might of his knights all.
The which stroke he lyked but full ill.
And in this while Hector has Achylle,
Assailed so that through his basenet,
He perced has and with his sword him smet
And has so narowe brought him to ye point,
Of hye mychefe and in such disioynt,
Constrained him that of necessite,
He had him take ne had only be,
Sudden rescues of this chyualrous.
That called is the son of Tydyus,
I mean the fell fyrse Dyomede.
Which Achilles has helped in his need.
For he through force of his arms twain,
Smote Hector tho with so great a pain,
That he him gave a wound full grievous.
But he nothing mine auctour writes thus,
Astoned was this knight this manly man,
But with his sword in all the haste he can,
Smote Diomede so furyous and wroth,
That from his horse to the earth he gothe.
For all his pride and his surquidrye.
The which anon as Troylus did espy,
Without abode down of his stead alyght,
With Dyomede a foot for to fight.
And each of them in sothfastnesse than,
Aquyte him self like a manly man.
That another was in much nor in lyte,
In no degree of manhood for to wit.
And while they fought, Hector and Achilles,
Together met again among the prees.
And ran yfeare fyersly in their rage,
As wood Lions when they be ramage.
Right so in sothe they faired in their fighting.
And in that time Menelay the king,
Full proudly shope him Trojans for to mete,
Vlyxes eke and also Pollymete,
And after him came Neptolonyus,
Pallamides and eke Scelemus.
Duke Meneste, Nestor and Thoas,
Currynulus and Phyloctheas.
And Theseus as it is made mind,
With his knights proudly came behind.
And on the party of them of the town,
Came all the kings without excepciowne,
That were assembled into their d^ffence,
Again Greeks to maken resystence.
Except the knights which yt Hector ladde,
And the wards that he made had,
The same day as says the Latin book,
In knightly wise the fyelde when yt he took.
And tho began the fell mortal fight,
In which that day full many worthy knight.
In fates hands finally are fall.
And of fortune among the wards all.
Agamenon the noble mighty king,
All suddenly as he came riding,
Pantysylaus in his way he met,
Against whom anon his horse he set,
And he to him full knyghtly rode again.
And as they met there is no more to said,
On horse back whiles they weren wroth,
Of violence they were unhorsed both.
And Menelay Paris met of new,
The which two well together knew,
Full desirous each other for to dear.
But Menelay caught first a spear,
And hytte Paris with all his busy cure.
But for surenesse of his strong armure,
And mighty plates his wound was but small.
Which in effect grieved not at all.
But with that stroke unto ground he gothe.
Of which fall Paris wexed wroth,
Wonder confuse and also red for shame,
Lest the report in hinderyng of his name,
Came to the ears of queen Heleyne,
How he that day might not atteyne,
With Menelay to hold chaumpartye,
Lykly to sown unto his vilanye.
The which at heart grieved him full sore.
And Adrastus the king withouten more,
So as he rode the king Vlyxes fond,
And knightly both they fought ho^de to ho^de,
And as they fought down to the earth low,
From his horse Vlyxes has him throw.
And full proudly in sign of his victory,
He sent his horse home to his Tentorye.
And in that time among all the prese,
Full suddenly king Pallamydes,
Is fall on Hupon with his locks hoar,
And in his ire wounden him so sore,
That he fell dead and grouelyng to ye ground.
His mortal sword was so kene ygrounde.
Beside whom Neptolonius,
Assailed has king Archylogus,
The which him self manly began defend,
But as they faught and many strokes spe^de,
In their diffence it would be none other.
Eueryche of them has unhorsed other.
And tho came in riding on his stead,
Pollidamas and began to taken head,
Among the renges a little him beside,
Where as the king Pollamides does ride.
And fiercely tho full like a manly man.
He smote his stead and to him he ran.
And maugre his might and his worthiness,
As the storye plainly bears witness.
Only to venge the death of king Hupowne,
From his stead he proudly bare him down.
And in his rancoure and his cruel hete,
Of that despyte began him to rehete,
And tho beside the king Scelenus,
Of deadly hate and heart full yrous,
With king Carras by adventure has met,
And furyously from his stead him smet.
And then also the king Philomene,
Is on the Duke fall of Athene.
That maugre both his manhood and his might
He has his horse berafte him in this fight,
And lad with him proudly by his side,
Where as him list that it should abide.
And Philoctetes the worthy king also,
The self time with Remus had ado.
And every other sothly as I read,
His fellow made to voiden from his stead.
And Theseus the king that was so strong,
Amid the fyelde so as he rode among,
In great prese has met Curyalus.
The worthy king of knighthod most famous
And both two in arms wonder strong,
By them self fought at leyser long,
Til each other with wounds fresh and grene,
His fellow threw from horsback on ye grene.
And afterward I find how they two,
Upon foot knightly had ado.
They were in arms so inly desirous.
And of manhood passyngly famous.
And all this while the sons naturell,
Of Pryamus bare them wonder well,
Among Greeks up and down ryding,
And prudently together abiding,
Made a slaught of greeks full pyteous.
Of kings, dukes and lords right famous.
And as I read how worthy Thelamowne,
That time met king Sarpedowne,
And with their speres squared full sharply,
Eueryche has wounded other mortally,
Through shield and plate and haberion of mayle.
That as the storye makes rehersayle,
How their harneys wexed of blood red,
And how they fell almost both dead.
At great myschyefe among the horse fete.
Of whose bleding the soil began wexe wete,
Through their harneys as it began destylle
Whiles king Thoas and the fyerse Achille,
As they that were of kynne and allied.
Amyd the fyelde Hector have espied,
Where as he faught beset amyd his foen,
And upon him of one accord they gone,
And mortally if that it would avail,
On every half they began him new assail.
And of hate in heart borne of yore,
They have beset this Trojan knight so sore.
That they alas from his head has smet,
By violence his rich basenet,
And wounded him felly on the head.
But for all that he ne took none head,
This worthy man flower of chyualrye,
But him defending tho so myghtely,
King Thoas smet him in the face so,
That with a stroke he rafte his nose a two.
And shorted it by the half dele.
To which stroke the brother naturele,
Of manly Hector fast began them hye,
To succoure him when they first espy,
His great myschyefe and at their in coming,
They so manly bare them in fightyng,
Again Greeks ye Thoas they have take,
And Thelamon so they made a wake.
With new assaute of sharp wounds kene.
That he was take and left upon the grene.
And of his men borne home to his tente.
And king Thoas home to Troy is went,
Maugre greeks which may hi^ help no more
For Deiphobus and also Anthenore,
Have sent him forth to Troy the Cite.
And Menelay tho began to se,
So as he rode Paris stand aside,
And shope him shorty of hate and cruel pride.
If it would fallon on his chance,
Suddenly to given him mischaunce.
But he was ware and kept him self so narow
That Menelay he marked with an arowe,
The head of which with venym was enoint,
Intoxycate at the square point,
That the king of that dreadful wound,
All dispayred of his men was found.
Which in great haste bare him to his tent.
And he anon for surgyens has sent,
Which first the head took out of his wound,
Albe it was yperced full profounde,
Through his harneys deep into the bone.
But cunningly they did their craft echone,
To draw it out with their instruments,
And subtylly with certain oyntmentes.
They serched have the wound enuyron.
To make it clean from corrupcion.
And prudently first they token head,
That the venum further not proceed.
Round in compass cleansed it about,
And after that bound it sure without,
And defensyues made on every side.
And Menelay no longer would abide,
And bad in haste to bryngen forth his stead,
In purpose full Paris to quite his mede,
If he him find the self same day,
Him list no longer put it in delay,
What ever fall of his grene wound.
And forth he rode till he has him found,
By adventure unarmed in the fyelde,
Without sword pollax spear or shield,
Or bow in hand were it of recklysnesse,
Or to refreshe him after werynesse.
And Menelay a spear anon has take,
And in his ire felly began it shake,
Toward Paris by great auysenesse.
And should have slain him as by lyklinesse,
Ne had Eneas which all this thing beheld,
Bore of the stock with his strong shield,
To defend him in this adventure,
Destytute and naked of armure.
Paris that time in such peril was,
Wherefore in haste has this Eneas,
Ordained knights armed bright in steel,
About Paris for to keep him well,
From all myschyefe and confusyowne,
Him to conueye unto Troy town,
Right in despyte of king Menelay,
Which in awayte so for Paris lay.
Whom Hector had ytaken suddenly,
And unto Troy ladde him utterly.
Ne had Greeks come in his defense,
Against him to maken resystence.
Of which Hector as they came in his weye,
Full many Greek made for to deye.
And the remnaunt put unto the flight,
That through his ma^hode yt day and his might,
Trojans made the Greeks for to fle,
Unto their tents of necessytee.
And them to sewe ne would never leave,
But slay and kill till it drew to eve.
That Phoebus began fast for to weste,
To draw the^ home they thought for the best.
For Tytan was at his going down,
When they began enter into Troy town.
Their gates shet they to their lodging wend.
And of this day thus they made an end.
Till on the morrow that the rows red,
Of Phoebus carte began to over sprede.
Before his vpryste in the Oryent.
At which time king Pryamus has sent,
For such as were with him most pryue.
And of his counsel inwardly secre.
And specially he sent for by name,
For worthy Hector ye greatest was of fame
For Paris eke and for Deiphobus,
And for Troylus fresh and desirous.
For Anthenor and for Pollidamas,
And for the Trojan called Eneas.
For he that day cast him not to gone,
Into the field to mete with his foen.
And when they were to his paleys come,
These lords have the right way ynome,
Unto the king within his closet.
And when the vssher had the doors shet,
And eueryche had like to his degree,
His place take and his dew see,
This worthy king as made is mention,
Began to declare his hertes mocion,
And his meninge before them specifye,
And said syres in whom I most affye,
To you is known how ye king Thoas here,
Is in this Cite taken prisonere.
And is as yet belocked in prisowne,
Which ever has be unto Troy town,
An enemy great unto his power.
And us offended aye both far and nere.
In many wise albe we little retche,
As far as he his force might do stretche.
And now with Greeks came to besiege our town,
As he that wills our destructiowne.
And thereupon has do his business,
Wherefore of dome and of rightwysnesse,
Both of reason and of equite,
I say plainly as seems unto me,
So that it be to you acceptable,
And that ye think my counsel co^me^dable,
Like as he has cast our death and shape,
I hold it rightful that he not escape.
But that by death he receive his guerdon.
For right requires and also good reason,
That death for death is skilful guerdonning.
Unto my wit and right well syttyng.
Say your advise now plainly in this case,
And first of all tho spoke this Eneas,
And said lord so it be none offense,
To your highness to give me audyence,
Through support here of the^ that be full wise,
I shall rehearse plainly my devise,
What is to work as in this mattere.
Me seems first my lyege lord so dear,
That your noble royal excellence,
Consydre should with full high prudence,
In every work and operacion,
To cast before in conclusyon,
The fynall end that may after sewe.
For to a wise man only is not dew,
To se the gynning and the end naught.
But both attones peysen in his thought,
And weye them so justly in balaunce,
That of the fine ensewe no repentance.
Why I say this and platly why I mean,
Is for that ye ought for to seen,
How king Thoas one of the pryncipall,
Among the greeks is and of yt blood royal.
If ye consydre descended as by line.
Wherefore if he have thus foul a fine,
As to be slain while he is in prison,
It happen might as in conclusyon,
That ye and yours that thereto assente,
Here afterward should it sore repent.
I preue it thus that by adventure,
Of fortunes rule that no man may assure,
Some of your lords were another day,
Of greeks take as it hap may.
Or of your sons full worthy of renown,
Or of kings that here be in this town.
Trusts me well that such like gentylnesse,
As ye to them shown in their distress,
They will you quyte when in case semblable,
Fortune to them they find favorable.
The which no man constrayne may or bind
Wherefore my lord haueth this thing in mind.
For if Thoas of short auysemente,
Shall now be dead through hasty judgment,
Another day Greeks will us acquyte,
And for rygour make their malice byte,
On some of yours who ever that it be.
And another spare high nor low degree.
Though he were peraunter of your blood.
The which thing for all this worlds good,
It might fall that ye ne would se.
Wherefore I read to let king Thoas be,
Honestly kept in your presowne,
Like his estate still here in this town,
Lest as I said that another day,
Some lord of yours as it hap may,
Casuelly were take of adventure,
By his eschaunge ye might best recure,
Without strife your own man again,
In this matter I can no more said,
But finally this is my full read.
To which counsayl Hector took good head,
And for it was according to reason,
He it commends in his opynion.
But Pryam ever of one entencion,
Stood always fix to this conclusion.
Plainly affirminge if greks may espy,
That we this king spare of gentrye,
They will arrecte it cowardyse anon,
That we dare not venge us of our foen,
For very dread having none hardynesse,
Nor heart another to do rightwisenesse.
Yet nevertheless after your assente,
That he shall live I will in mine entente,
To your desire fully condescende.
And of this counsel so they made an end,
Without more. save Eneas is ygo,
And Troylus eke and Anthenor also,
Into an hall excelling of beauty,
The queen Heleyne of purpose for to se.
With whom was eke Hecuba the queen,
And other ladies goodly on to seen,
And many maid that young and lusty was.
And worthy Troylus with this Eneas,
Did their labor and their busy pain,
For to comfort the fair queen Heleyne,
As she that stood for the werre in dread.
But for all that of very womanheade,
Thilke time with all her heart entere,
As she well could made to them good chere.
Having of conninge july suffysannce,
Both of cheer and of dalyaunce.
And Hecuba being in this hall,
Very example unto women all,
Of bounte having soueraygne excellence,
In wisdom eke and in eloquence,
Besought them tho wonder womanly,
And counsayled eke full prudently,
For any haste both of nigh and far,
Auysely to keep them in the werre,
And not ieoparte their bodies folyly,
But to aduerte and cast prudently,
In diffence knightlyy of the town,
Them to govern by discresciowne.
She spoke of faith and could nothing feyne,
And then of her and after of Heleyne,
They took leave and no longer dwell,
But went their way and forth I will you tell,
How the Greeks on the same morrow,
Among the^ self complain and make^ sorrow,
Their harms great in murmur and in rage,
The loss the costs and the great damage,
That they have there endured folylye.
Lasting the werre and wisten never why.
The death and slaught of many worthy man,
That there were dead since yt the werre began.
Hunger and thurst watch and cold also,
Full great vnreste sorrow, thought, and woe,
And all together for a thing of naught.
In sothfastnesse if the ground be sought.
This was the noise and rumor eke that ran,
Throughout ye host yt day from man to man.
And most among the pore soldiers.
Which bare the bronte ever of such shoures.
And the mischief of werre commonly,
And though they plain they have no remedy.
Of sundry things which sit them full vnsoft.
And thus greeks complained have full often.
Of many mischief that has on them fall,
The which they might have eschewed all,
If they ne had of folly gonne a werre.
Out of Greece not come half so far,
To their mischief and confusyon.
This was that day their lamentacion.
Which to increase the same next night,
So derked was without sterre light,
So cloudy black and so thick of air,
Dimmed with skies foul and nothing fair,
So windy eke with tempest all belayne,
Almost for drenched with the smoky rain.
And in the field astoned here and yonder,
With sudden stroke of the dreadful thonder,
And with opening of the hidous leuene,
That it seemed in the high heaven,
The Cataractes hadden be undo.
For both the clouds and the skies two,
Suddenly wexen were so blake,
Like as the gods would have taken wrake,
And had of new assented be in one,
The land to drenche of Deucalyon.
And all this world without more refuge,
To ouerflowe with a fresh deluge.
The wind also so sternly began to blow,
That their tents standing on a row,
Forpossid were and ybeten down.
And furyously to their confusyowne,
The flodes raught the^ from their standing place
And bare them forth from thens a large space.
Whereof in myschyefe and in great distress,
In great labor and hertye heaviness,
The greeks bydde all the same night.
What for the tempest and for lack of light,
Till the floude began again withdraw,
The wind to appease and the day began dawe,
And the heaven began again to clear,
Without clouds freshly to appear,
And Phoebus eke with a fervent hete,
Had on the soil dried up the wete.
And the moisture enuyrowne on the plain,
And greeks had their tents set again,
And were adawed of their nyghtes sorrow,
Through the apering of the glade morrow.
They them arrayed nothing for the peace,
And into fyelde first went Achylles,
As ye shall here of entencyowne,
That day to fight with them of Troy town.
When dried was the lusty large plain,
with Phoebus bemes as ye have hard me sain
The trojan knights full worthy of renown,
Descended be and ycomen down.
And in the fyelde took their fyghtyng place,
But Achylles to mete them in the face,
Tofore went out like as I you told,
With his lords and his knights bold,
And first I find without more abode,
Unto Hupon furyously he rode.
I mean Hupon that was of his stature,
Like a Gyaunt as books us assure.
Whom Achylles with his sharp spear,
Through the body perced him so fere,
That he fylle dead his wound was so kene.
And after this the king Octamene,
As he fyersly on Hector would have gone,
Without abode Hector has slain anon,
And cruelly quytte him his fatal mede.
And sodaynely against Diomede,
As zantipus the worthy king began draw,
Full pyteously he of him was slawe.
And right anon the king Epystrophus,
And eke the king that hight Cedius,
Of one assent proudly in battle,
Begone Hector mortally tassayle.
And with a spear first Epystrophus,
Ran at him with heart despyteous,
And as Guydo also does deuyse.
Rebuked him in ungoodly wise.
At him so sore in heart he was a meued.
Whereof Hector furyously agreued,
Has mortally his wound made so large,
That him ne geyneth plate shield nor targe.
For he fell dead among his men echone.
To whom Hector bad he should be gone,
And to the Furyes deep down in hell,
Such proud words among them to tell,
For here quod he men take of them no head.
And thus when he was waged for his mede,
Anon his brother called Cedyus,
Such sorrow made for Epystrophus,
So hertye dole and so woeful chere,
That pytie was for to se and here.
So inwardely on his death he thought,
And with a thousand knights yt he brought,
To be avenged by manhood of them all.
Despyteously on Hector he is fall.
Where he him found fyghtyng with his foen,
That through the force of them euerycone,
So sore enuyrowne they have him beset,
That from his stead down they have him smit.
Whom Cedyus aye in his cruel rage,
When that he saw to his ouauntage,
Hector unhorsed and he on his stead,
His sword he left of inwardly hatred,
Markynge at him with so great a pain,
With all the force of his arms twain,
Fully in purpose withouten more delay.
To slay Hector plainly if he may.
But or his stroke descend might down,
Hector of hate and indignaciowne
With his sword that was full sharp whet,
From his shoulder has his arm of smet.
And after that he reuyd him his life.
Than Eneas amyddes all this strife,
Came rydyng in right wood and furious.
And as he met the king Amphymacus,
He fell on him and slew him in his rage.
And from the greeks holdyng their passage.
There be descended first Menelaus.
And after him king Thelamonius.
The great duke also of Athene,
In whom there was so much manhood seen.
Vlixes eke and cruel Diomede.
And eke also to help them in their need,
There came with them the king Machaon,
And alderlast the great Agamenon.
With all their wards and fell in suddenly,
Upon Troyans and they full manfully,
Diffende them self again the greeks proud
And put them of full knightly as they could.
And each on other sothly as they met,
With spear and sword enuyously they set,
So mortal hate there was them between,
And when the son was merydyen,
In mydday angel passing hot and shene,
The greeks began felly in their tene,
So myghtely to fall on them of Troy,
That they them made for to given weye,
Of very force and necessytye.
And Achylles so full of cruelte,
Among the renges as he began him draw,
The king Phylem enuyously has slawe.
And amyd of greeks the same time Hector,
Maugre them all slew king Alphenor.
And eke the king called Dorius,
On them he was so cruel and Irous.
That through virtue of his knyghtly hand,
Troyans won have again their land,
Upon greeks and made them for to flee.
And thylke hour from Troy the Cite,
Epystrophus full of manlynesse,
The field have take through his worthiness.
And on greeks proudely for the nones,
With his knights he fauleth all attones,
And severed them and made them for to twinne,
And began the fyelde fast upon them win.
Having that time in his company,
Among other that he tho did guye,
A certain archer the which as I find,
Was monstrous and wonderful of kind.
For from the myddell up unto the crown,
He was a man and the remnaunt down,
Bare of an horse likeness and figure.
And horses heir this monstre in nature,
Had on his skin growyng enuyrowne.
Full rough and thycke and of his voice ye sown,
Was like the neyhynge of an horse I read.
And though his face both in length and bread,
Of shape were mannyshe yet in sothfastnesse,
His color was semblable in likeness,
Unto the fyry hoote brennyng glede.
Whose cyen eke flawmyng also read,
As the blase is of an oven mouth.
And for he was in syghte so uncouth,
Where soever he was met in the berde,
Both man and horse sore were a ferde,
His face was so hateful and so odyble.
And his look so hydous and horrible.
And aye he had in custom and vsaunce,
As in books is made remembrance,
For to go unarmed into fyelde.
Without sword, spear, axe, or shield.
For he nothing could of that myster.
But as I find he was a good archer.
And bare a bow styffe and wonder strong,
And for he was also of tyller long,
His arrows were like to his tyller.
In a bushment trussed wonder ner,
By his side aye ready to his hand.
Where so he were outher on sea and land.
And as I find how that none armure,
Again his shot plainly might endure.
And there was horse stead nor couser,
That durst abide nouther fer nor ner,
But fled anon with all their full might,
As fast as they of him had a sight.
To them he was so passing odyous.
So like a devil and so monstrous.
And there was found none so hardy a knight
On horseback that had force or might,
To hold his horse when they might him se,
But that anon a back he would do flee.
And of this archer I find written eke,
That he that day slew full many greek.
And wounded them with his arrows kene,
Throughout ye plates forged bright and shene.
For there was none before him that abode,
But to their tents fast away they rode,
They might not his hydous look endure.
Till there befell a wonder aduerture,
While they of Troy by help of this archer,
Sewe on the chase to their lodgyng ner,
And slew of them in mischief and in dread,
Beside a Tent met him Dyomede,
With this archer of necessyte.
For it stood so that he ne might him flee.
No manner way nor a back remewe,
For life nor death he might him not eschew.
So many Troyan was tho at his back.
That in his flyinge he had go to wrack.
Wherefore anon this worthy Dyomede,
With cruel heart fast began him speed,
And toward him proudely for to dreffe,
But this archer by great aduysenesse,
First with an arrowe smytte Dyomede,
Through his harneys that he made him blede,
Of which stroke he wexed so wood and wroth,
That to this monstre so hydous and so loath,
He went a pase and him unarmed fond.
And with yt sword that he held in his hand,
He gave to him his last fattall wound.
That he fell dead grouelynge unto ye ground.
The death of whom greeks reioysynge,
And in all haste their hertes resumynge,
Began them self for to recomforte.
And into fyelde proudely they resort.
By conueyinge of Policenare,
The worthy Duke that so well him bare,
Upon Troyans that day in the fyelde.
But when Hector the slaught of him beheld,
Upon this Duke anon he began to set.
And on their stedes fyersly as they met,
Hector him slew of full great hatrede,
And after that on Gallathe his stead,
So as he rode forth among the prese,
Or he was ware he met with Achylles,
And with their speres long large and round,
In purpose fully each other to confound,
They ran yfeare yrous and right wroth.
That with the stroke they were unhorsed both
But Achylles with a dispyteous heart,
First as I read into his sadell sterte,
And busy was with all his inward pain,
Gallathe to taken by the reyne,
Thereof for ever Hector to depryue.
And bad his men to lead it home as blyue.
So that Hector there was none other bote,
Full like a man faught standing on his foot.
Among the greeks and his fomen all.
And to his knights loud he began to call,
For his stead that they shulden sewe,
And they in haste his horse to rescue.
Ben attones fallen upon Achylle.
And maugre him of force again his will,
They have from him berafte it on the plain,
And unto Hector restored it again.
Which in knighthod so much him self assures
In their dispyte his sadell he recureth,
Which afterward full dear they aboughte.
For like a lion all that day he wrought.
Among them rydyng here and there,
And as the death they fled his sword for fere,
Through whose manhod trojans efte begin,
Upon greeks the field again to win.
But it befell amyd their great fight,
That Anthenor a certain Troyan knight,
Among the prese is so fer ygone,
That of greeks he was take anon.
And to their tents sent in haste he was,
Albe his son called Pollydamas,
To rescue him did his dylygence.
So manfully that no neclygence,
Was found in him who so list to seek.
And that full dear a bought many greek,
The same day through his worthynesse.
But for cause only of derckenesse,
And for that it began draw toward night.
They made an end only for lack of light.
And greeks went home to their lodgyng,
And eke Troyans till on the morning,
That Phoebus began his bright beams show.
And Aurora new began to dew.
The herbs sote and the grene leaves,
Both on hayes and in fresh greues.
Silver bright with round perles fine.
That so clearly again the son shine,
And show them self so oryent and shene,
On hylle and vale and on every grene,
The rody morrow till the hot beams,
Of bright Phoebus with his fyry stemes,
Vapoureth up their moisture into air.
The wether clear agreeable and fair,
And attempre also of his hete.
When the Trojans cast them for to mete,
With their fomen platly if they may.
And out they went in their best arraye,
With their wards into fyelde by row.
Against whom greeks were not slow,
But shope them forth without longer let,
Till they together manfully have met.
And with their speres and their swords clear
They ran together with a dispyteous chere,
Till shyuered was a sonder many spear.
On sheldes strong them self for to were,
And ryuen was on pieces many targe,
And with axes round broad and large,
On basenettes as they tho smite and shrede,
Full many knight mortally began blede.
In sothfastnesse and as I tell can,
The same day was slain many a man,
On outher part but most of Troy town.
Albe Guydo makes no mencyowne.
Of no person as in special.
On nouther side but in general,
Save he concludes plainly that this fight,
Lasted fro morrow till that it was night.
The which Troyans have full dear abought.
For that day fortune help them naught,
But turned hole to their confusyowne,
And so they be repeyred to the town.
And to their tents greeks fast them speed.
Till on the morrow they senten Dyomede,
With Vlixes to Troy the city,
For a trewes only for months three.
If king Pryam thereto would assente.
And as they two on this message went,
A certain knight borne of Troy town,
That hight Dolon of great discreciowne,
And also was right famous of richesse,
Of curtesy and of gentylnesse,
His deuer did and his diligence,
Them to conueye unto the presence,
Of Pryamus in his paleys royal.
And in his sea most chyefe and pryncipall.
Where as he satte his lords enuirowne,
With many knight full worthy of renown.
They began to him first to specyfye,
Holy the substance of their embassadrye.
And of the trewes their intent they told.
If it so were that he assent would.
And the king benyngnely them herd,
And by advise prudently answerde,
That thereupon his honor for to save,
At good leyser he would a counsel have.
With his lords and fully him govern,
In this matter like as they discern.
And to conclude shortly euerychone,
Assented be except Hector alone,
Unto the trewes and would it not deny.
But Hector said that of trecherye,
Only of slaughter and false treason,
Their axynge was under occasyon,
First to burye greeks that weren dead,
And under color thereof out of dread,
Afterward them self to vyttayle.
For he well knew that their stuff began fail.
And enfamyned lest they shulden dye,
They sought a space them self to purueye.
By outward signs that he did espy.
Wherefore quod he me lyketh not to lie,
By apparaunce as I dare presume,
Whiles that we waste thus and consume,
Our stuff within as it is to dread,
They will provide of what yt they have need,
For all that is to them advantage,
Might be to us hyndryng and damage.
And whiles that they encreasen and amend,
We shall our store discrease and dispende.
Yet nevertheless how ever that it be,
Touching this trewes as for months three,
Sythen ye all assent and it accord,
From your sentence I will not discord.
In no wise as to be varyaunt.
And thus the trewes confirmed was by grant
On outher side they thought for the best.
Because they should in quiet and in rest,
The mean while ease them and releue.
And they that felt their wounds sore grieve,
Might leyser have their sores to recure.
And in yt mean while trewes did thus endure
They fell in treatee and in communyng,
Of Anthenor and of Thoas the king.
That Anthenor delivered should be,
For king Thoas to Troy the cite.
And Thoas should to greeks home again,
By this enchaunge as ye have herd me saine,
One for an other as it accorded was.
And in this while ye trojan bishop Calchas,
Remembered him upon his daughter dear,
Called Cryseyde with her eyes clear,
Whom in Troy he had left behind,
When he went thense as books maken mind:
For whom he felt passyngly great smerte,
So tenderly she was set at his heart.
And enprented both at eve and morrow,
And chief cause and ground of al his sorrow
For she was left behind him in the town.
Without comfort or consolaciowne.
As he cast sothly in his absence.
And specially for his great offense,
That he has wrought against the^ of Troy,
And as him thought he should never have joy
Till he his daughter recured has again.
Wherefore Calchas the story says certain,
In his wits many ways cast,
How he best might while the trewes does last,
Recure his daughter by some manner way.
And as I find upon a certain day,
In his port wonder humbly,
With weeping eye went full pyteously,
In his complaynyng of tears albe reyned.
Whose inward woe sothly was not feyned,
And on his knees anon he falls down,
Tofore the great king Agamenowne,
Besechynge him with all humilite,
Of very mercy and of high pity,
With other kings syttyng in the place,
To have routhe and for to do him grace,
And on his woe to have compassyon.
That he may have restitucion,
Of his daughter whom he loved so.
Praying them all their deuer for to do,
That through their prudent mediacyon,
For Anthenor that was in their prison,
With king Thoas she might eschaunged be.
If that them list of their benignite.
To his request goodly to assent.
And they him grant and forth anon they sent,
To king Pryam for to have Creseyde,
For Calchas sake and therewith al they leyde,
The charge for her wonder specially,
On them that went for this embassadrye.
To Troy town and to king Pryamus,
To whom Calchas was so odyus,
So hateful eke throughout all the town,
That this report was of him up and down,
That he a treatour was and also false,
Worthy to be enhonged by the halse.
For his treason and his doubleness.
And evermore they said eke express,
That he deserved has by right of law,
Shamefully first for to be draw,
And afterward the most horrible death,
That he may have to yelden up the breath,
Like as a treatour in as dyspyteous wise,
As any heart can thyncke or deuyse.
Eueryche affyrmyng as by judgment,
That death was none fully equypollent,
To his deserte nor to his falsenesse,
As young and old plainly bare witness.
Concludyng eke for his iniquyte,
That they would assent in no degree,
Unto nothing that might his heart please.
Nor of Creseyde for to do him ease.
They cast not to make delyueraunce.
Lever they had to given him mischaunce,
If they him might have as at good large.
But finally the effect of all this charge,
Is so ferforth driven to an end,
That Priamus has granted she shall wend,
With king Thoas shortly there no more,
Unto her father for Dan Anthenore.
Who ever grutche the king in parliament,
Has thereupon given judgment,
So utterly it may not be repealed,
For with his word the sentence was assealed
That she must part with her eyes glade.
And of the sorrow plainly that she made,
At his departing hereafter ye shall here,
When it again comes to my matere.
How during a trewes of.iii. months Hoctor walked into the greeks hooste, and
of the talk had betwyxte Achylles and him. Capitulo.xxv.
THe truse affyrmed as ye have herd devise
On outher side of them yt were full wise,
And full assented of them euerychone,
Till three months comen be and gone.
Like as I read on a certain day,
When agreeable was the morrow graye,
Blandyshyng and pleasant of delight,
Hector in heart caught an appetyte,
Like as Guydo lyketh for to write,
The same day he would greeks vysyte,
Full well besene and wonder rychely.
With many worthy in his company.
Of such as he for the nones chese,
And to the tent first of Achylles,
I find in soth that this Troyan knight,
Upon his stead has take the weye right.
Full like a man as made is mention.
Now had Achylles great affection,
In his heart both by day and night,
Of worthy Hector for to have a sight.
For never yet by none occasyon,
He might of him have full inspection,
Nor him behold at good lyberte.
For unarmed he might him never se.
But wonder knightly as well in port and chere.
They had them both as they met yfere,
And right manly in their countenance,
And at the last they fell in dalyaunce.
But Achylles first began abreyde,
And unto him even thus he said.
Hector quod he full pleasynge is to me,
That I at leyser naked may the se.
Sith I of the never might have sight,
But when thou were armed as a knight.
And now to me it shall be full grievous,
Which am to the so inly enuyous,
But thou of me there is no more to said,
Be slain anon with my hands twain.
For this in soth were holy my pleasaunce.
By cruel death to take on the vengeance.
For I full often in werre and eke in fight,
Have felt the virtue and the great might,
Of thy force. through many wounds kene,
That upon me full fresh been and grene,
In many place by shedyng of my blood.
Thou were on me so furyous and wood,
Aye compassynge to my destructiowne,
For many a mayle of mine haberiowne,
Thy sharp sword racyd has a sonder.
And cruelly severed here and yonder.
And mortally as I can signs show,
My plates strong persed and yhewe,
And my harneys forged bright of stele,
Might never yet assured be so well,
In thine ire when thou list to smite,
That thy sword ne would them kerne and byte,
Into my flesh full deep and full profounde.
As shows yet by many mortal wound,
On my body large long and wide,
That yet appear upon every side,
And day by day full sore ache and smerte.
For which thing me seems that my heart,
Enbolleneth new now when I the sea.
Of high despyte avenged for to be.
So am I fret of old envious rage,
That it may never in my breast aswage,
Till the vengeance and the fatal suit,
Of cruel death be on the execute.
And of one thing most is my greuaunce,
That when I have fully remembrance,
And in my mind consider up and down,
How thou have made fynall deuysyowne,
Of me alas and of him Patroclus,
So young, so manly, and so virtuous.
Whom I loved as it was skylle and right,
Even as my self with all my full might.
With as hoole heart and inly kyndnesse,
As an tongue may tell or express.
Now have thou made a departisyon,
Of us that were by hole affection,
Yknyt in one of hertie allyaunce.
Without partyng or disseueraunce.
So entyerly our faithful hertes twain,
Ylaced were and locked in a chain,
Which might not for none aduersyte,
Of life nor death a sonder twynned be.
Till cruelly thou made us depart.
Which through my heart so inwardly does darte
That it will never in soth out of my thought.
And trusts well full dear shall be bought.
The death of him and be nothing in were,
Perauenture or ended be this year.
For upon the only for his sake,
Of cruel death vengeance shall be take,
I the ensure without other bond.
If I may live with mine own hand,
I shall of death do execucyon.
Without abode or long delacyon.
For right requires without any dread,
Death for death for his fynall mede.
For I my self thereon shall be wroke.
That through ye world hereafter shall be spoke
How Achylles was venged on his so,
For Patroclus that he loved so.
And though that I be to the enuyous,
And of thy death inly desirous,
Ne wete me not nor put on me no blame.
For well I wotte thou art to me the same.
And have my death many day desired,
And thereupon inwardly conspyred,
And thus shortly as atwene us two,
There is but death without words mo.
When fortune list the time thereto shape.
I hope fully thou shalt not escape,
Trust none other I say the utterly.
To whom Hector not to hastily,
Answerde again with sober countenance,
Auysed well in all his dalyaunce,
As he that was in nothing rekles,
And even thus he spoke to Achylles.
Sir Achylles without any fail,
Thou ne ought greatly to marvel,
Though with my power and my full might,
With heart and will of very dew right,
Day by day I thy death conspyre.
And ever in one it compass and desire.
And do my labor early and eke late,
It to pursue by full cruel hate,
Thou ought not to wonder in no wise.
But fully know by sentence of the wise,
In no manner who so takes head,
Of ryghtwysenesse it may not then proceed,
That other I or any other wight,
Should do him love that with all his might,
My death purseweth and destruction.
And over this to more confusyon,
Has laid a syege about this Cite.
On my kinrede and also upon me.
And thereupon felly does presume,
With mortal hate of werre to consume,
Us euerychone ywysse I can not find,
In my heart as by law of kind,
Such one to love of right nor equity.
Nor have him chere sothly in no degree.
For of werre may no frendlyhead,
Nor of debate love aryght proceed.
For sothly love most in special,
Of faythfulnesse has the orygenall.
In hertes joined by conuenyence,
Of one accord whom no difference,
Of doubylnesse may in no degree,
Another in joy nor in aduersyte,
For life nor death asunder nor disseuer.
For where love is it contuneth ever.
But of hate all is the contrary.
Of which sothly from hertes when they varye
Proceeds rancoure at eye as men may se,
Debate, envy, strife and enmyte,
Mortal slaughter both to nygh and far.
Mother of which in sothfastnes is werre.
The fine whereof long or it be do,
Seuereth hertes and friendship cut atwo.
And causes love to be leyde full low.
But for all this I will that thou know,
Thy proud words in heart nor in thought,
In very sothe agasten me right naught.
And if I shall furthermore out break,
Without auaunt the truth for to speak,
I say the plainly hense or two year,
If I may live in the werres here,
And my sword of knighthod forth acheue,
I hope in sothe so mortally to grieve,
The Greeks all when I with the^ may mete
That they and thou shall feel it full vnswete.
If ye continue and the werres haunte.
I shall your pride and surquedrye adaunte,
In such a wise with my hands two,
That or the werre fully be ado,
Well many greek full sore shall it rewe.
For well I wot of old and not of new,
That the greeks gathered here in one,
Of surquedrye are found euerychone,
Only for lack of discrescion,
To undertake of presumpcion,
So high a thing a syege for to layne.
And your self to over charge in vain.
With empryses withouten any fable,
That been to you of weight importable.
And the peys of so great heaviness,
That finally it will you all oppress,
And your pride auale and low enclyne.
Which burden shall enbowe back and chyne,
And unawarely causen you to fall.
Or ye have done I say to one and all.
And over more be full in suerte,
Thou Achilles I speak this unto the.
That fatal death first shall the assail,
Tofore thy sword in any thing avail.
Against me for all thy worthynesse.
And if so be that so great hardynesse,
Courage of will, vygour force or might,
Meue thy heart by manhood as a knight,
To take on the as in derryng do,
For to darreyne here between us two,
Thilke quarrel how so that befall,
For the which that we strive all.
I will assent plainly to ieoparde,
Till that the death one of us depart,
There is no more but that these lords here,
Kings and princes will accord yfere,
That it be do fully by one assent.
And hold stable of heart and of entente,
So that the field only by us tweyne,
As I have said this quarrel may darreyne,
And ended be by this condiciowne
That if it hap through thy high renowue,
Me to venquishe or drive to outtraunce,
I will you make fully assurance,
That first my lord Priamus the king,
Shall unto greeks in all manner thing,
With crown and scepter holy him submit,
And in a point varye another flytte,
Fully to yield to our subiectiowne,
All his lordship within Troy town.
And his lyeges in captyuytye.
Shall go their way out of this cite.
And leave it quyte as to your governance,
Without strife or any varyaunce,
And thereupon to make securyte,
To deuoyde all ambyguyte,
Tofore the gods by oath of sacrament,
We shall be swore in full good entente.
And ouermore our faith also to save,
To assure you in pledge ye shall have,
The mean while and keep the^ on your side,
At your choice hostages to abide.
From Troy town of the worthiest,
That ye list chese and also of the best.
So that ye shall of nothing be in were,
Of all that ever that I say you here.
And Achilles without words mo,
If that you list accord thereunto,
That I have said thy honor to increase,
To make this werre suddenly to cease,
That lykly is for to last long,
Between Trojans and the Greeks strong,
Thou shall not only with honor and with fame,
Throughout the world winnen the a name,
But therwithall and that is not a lyte,
Through thy knighthod to many man profit,
That fro the death shall escape alive.
And to his country hole and sound aryue.
That lykly are by cruel adventure,
For to be dead if the werre endure.
Come of therefore and let not be prolonged,
But let the day atwene us two be joined.
As I have said in condiciowne,
If in diffence only of this town,
I have victory by fortune over the,
I axe not else but anon that ye,
Break up siege and the werre let,
And suffer us to lyuen in quyete,
Into Greece home when ye are gone.
To which thing Achilles there anon,
Hot in his ire and furyous also,
Brenning full hot for anger and for woe,
Assented is with a despytous cheer.
And began anon to Hector dress him nere,
And said he would deliver him utterly,
Fro point to point his axynge by and by,
And therein made none excepciowne,
But of hole heart and entencion.
His request accepted every dell.
And as it seemed leked it right well.
And for his part he cast his glove adowne,
In sign and token of confirmaciowne,
For life or death that he will hold this day,
Again Hector hap what hap may.
Unto the which Hector lyfely sterte,
And took it up with as glad an heart,
As ever yet did any man or knight,
That quarrel took with his foe to fight.
There can no man in sothe a right deuyse,
How glad he was of this high empryse.
Of which the noise and the great sown,
Ran to the ears of king Agamenowne.
And he anon him self came to the tente,
With all the lords of his parliament,
Where Achilles and Hector were yfere,
To wit their will as in this mattere,
Where they would assenten finally,
To put the quarrel full in Ieopardy,
Of other part atwene these knights tweyn
As ye have herd fully to dareyne.
And with one voice Greeks it deny,
And said they nolde of such a company.
Of kings, Dukes, and of Lords eke also,
Both life and death Ieoparte atwene two.
Nor to the course of fortune them submit,
That can all day her face change and flytte.
And some of Troy in conclusyowne,
Ieoparde ne would their lives nor their town
In the hands only of a knight,
To put all in adventure of fight.
Pryam except which sothly in this case,
Within him self fully assented was,
Plainly to put and set in Ieopardye,
Holy the honor of his regallye.
Supposing aye as made is memory,
That Hector should have had the victory,
Of this empryse if he took it on hand.
But for Priam might not tho withstand,
Again so many of one entencion,
That were contrary to his opynion,
Both of Greeks and on Troy side,
He held his peace and let it over slide,
And so the Greeks parted be echone.
And Hector is from Achilles gone,
Home to Troy where I him leave a while,
Whiles that I dyrecten shall my style,
To tell of Troylus the lamentable woe,
Which that he made to part his lady fro.
ALas fortune gery and unstable,
And ready aye for to be chaungeable,
When folk most trust in thy stormye face,
Like their desire the fully to embrace,
Then is thy joy away to turn and writhe,
Wpon wretches thy power for to kythe.
Record of Troylus yt from the whele so low,
By false envy thou have overthrow.
Out of the joy which that he was in,
From his lady to make him for to twynne.
When he best wend for to have be sured,
And of the woe that he has endured,
I must nedely help him to complain.
Which that in heart felt so great pain,
So inward woe and so great distress,
More than I have cunning to express,
When that he knew the partynge of Creseyd
Almost for woe and for pain he deyed.
And fully wiste that she depart shall,
By sentence and by judgment fynall,
Of his father given in parlyamente,
For which with woe and tourment al to rent,
He was in point to have fallen in rage,
That no man might appease nor aswage,
The hid pains which in his breast ga^ dare.
For like a man in furye he began fare,
And such sorrow day and night to make,
In complayninge only for her sake.
For when he saw that she should aweye,
He lever had plainly for to deye,
Than to live behind in her absence.
For him thought without her presence
He was but dead there is no more to said.
And into tears he began to berayne,
With which his eyes began for to bollen,
And in his breast the sighs tho up swollen,
And the sobbing of his sorrows deep,
That he ne can not do but rore and weep,
So sore love his heart began constrayne.
And she ne felt not a little pain,
But wept also and piteously began cry,
Desyringe aye that she might do dye,
Rather than part fro him out of Troy.
Her own knight her lust her lives joy.
That by her chekes the tears down destyll,
And fro her eyes the tears round drops tryl
That all fordewed have her black wede,
And eke untrussed her heir abroad ga^ sprede
Like gold wyre forrent and all to torn,
Yplucked of and not with sheres shorn.
And over this her fresh rosen hew,
Whilom ymeynt with white lylyes new,
With woeful weeping pyteously disteyned,
And like the herbs in April all bereyned,
Or flowers fresh with the dewes sweet,
Right so her chekes moist were and wete.
With cristall water up ascendinge hye,
Out of her breast into her heavenly eye,
And aye among her lamentaciowne,
Full often sithe she fell in swowne adowne,
Deadly pale fordimmed in her syghte,
And often said alas mine own knight,
Mine own Troilus alas why shall we part
Rather let death with his spear darte,
Through my heart and the veins kerue,
And with his rage do me for to sterue,
Rather alas than fro my knight to twinne.
And of this woe Oh death that I am in,
Why nilt thou come and help to make an end,
For how should I out of Troy wend,
He abide and I to Greeks gone,
There to dwell among my cruel fone.
Alas alas I woeful creature,
How should I there in the werre endure,
I wretched woman but my self alone,
Among the men of arms euerychone.
Thus began she cry all the long day,
This was her playnte with full great affray.
Her pyteous noise till it drew to night,
That unto her her own true knight,
Full tryst and heavy came agaynes eve,
If he might ought comfort or releue.
But he in sothe has this Creseyde found,
All in a swowne liyng on the ground.
And pyteously unto her he went,
With woeful cheer and her in arms hente.
And took her up and then atwene them two.
Began of new such a deadly woe,
That it was routhe and pity for to seen,
For she of cheer pale was and grene.
And he of color like to ashes dead,
And fro her face gone was all the red.
And in his chekes deuoyded was the blood,
So woefully atwene them two it stood,
For she ne might not a word yspeake,
And he was ready with death to be wreke,
Upon him self his naked sword beside.
And she full often began to the ground glyde.
Out of his arms as she fell a swowne,
And he him self began in tears drown.
She was as stille and dombe as any stone,
He had a mouth but words had he none.
The weary spyryte flykered in his breast,
That of the death stood tho under a rest,
Without maynpryse sothly as of life.
And thus there was as it seemed a strife,
Which of them two should first ypasse.
For death portrayed both in heart and face,
With color such as men go to their grave.
And thus in woe they began together rave,
Disconsolate all the long night.
That in good faith if here I should aryght,
The process hole of their both sorrow,
That they made till the next morrow,
From point to point do it specifye,
All to long it would me occupye,
Of every thing to make mention.
And tarry me in my translacion.
If so I should in her woe proceed,
But me seems that it is no need,
Sith my master Chaucer here before,
In this matter has so well him bore,
In his book of Troylus and Creseyde,
Which he maid long or that he deyed,
Rehersyng first how Troilus was co^trayre,
For to ascend up on loves stayre.
And how that he for all his surquedrye.
After became one of the compaynye,
Of loves folk for all his old game.
When Cupide had subdued him full tame,
And brought him low to his subiectiowne.
In a temple as he walked up and down,
When he his gynnes and his hooks leyde,
Amid the eyes cercled of Creseyde,
Which on that day he might not asterte,
For through his breast perced has his heart.
He went him home pale dead and wan,
And in this wise Troylus first began,
To be a servant my master tells thus,
Till he was after help of Pandarus.
Through whose comfort and mediacion,
As in his book is made relacion.
With great labor first he came to grace,
And so continues by many years space.
Till gery fortune began upon him frown,
That she fro him must go out of the town,
All suddenly and sithe him se.
Lo here the end of false felycite.
Lo here the end of worldly brotilnesse,
Of fleshly lust lo here thunstablenesse,
Lo here the double variacion,
Of wordly bliss and transmutacion.
This day in myrthe and in woe to morrow,
For aye the fine alas of joy is sorrow,
For now Creseyde with the king Thoas,
For Anthenor shall forth gone alas,
Unto Greeks and ever with them dwell.
The hole storye Chaucer can you tell.
If that ye list no man better alive,
Nor the process half so well discriue.
For he our english gilt with his says,
Rude and boystous first by old days.
That was full fer from all parfection,
And but of little reputacion.
Till that he came and with his poetrye,
Began our tunge first to magnifye,
And adourne it with his eloquence.
To whom honor laud and reverence,
Throughout this land given be and song,
So that the laurer of our english tongue,
Be to him given for his excellence.
Right as whilom by full high sentence,
Perpetually for a memorial,
Of Columpna by the Cardinal,
To Petrack frau^ceis was given in Italye,
That the report never after fail.
Nor the honor dirked of his name,
To be registered in the house of fame,
Among other in the highest sete.
My master Galfride as for chief Poet,
That ever was yet in our language,
The name of whom shall pallen in none age,
But ever yliche without eclipsing shine,
And for my part I will never fine,
So as I can him to magnifye,
In my writing plianly till I dye.
And god I pray his soul bring in joy,
And where I left I will again of troy,
The storye tell and first how that he Guydo,
Within his book thus speaks Troylus to.
Rebuking him full vncurteysly,
That he so set his heart folyly,
Upon Creseyde full of doubilnesse.
For in his book as Guydo list express,
That her tears and her complayninge,
Her words white soft and blandishinge,
Were meynt with fayning and with flatterye,
And outward farsed with many a false lie.
For vnderhid was all the varyaunce,
Cured above with feigned countenance.
As women can falsely teres borowe,
In their heart though there be no sorrow,
Like as they would of very truth deye,
They can think one and an other say,
As a serpent under flowers fair,
His venym hydeth where he does repair,
The sugre before the galle hid behind,
As propered is aye unto their kind.
To be diverse and double of nature,
Rathest deceyuing when men most assure.
For under color every thing they work,
The fair above the foul in the dercke,
They hid so that no man may espy.
And though so be that with a woeful eye,
They can outward weep pyteously,
The the other eye can laugh covertly.
Whose sorrows all are tempred with alleys,
And their color is ever meynt with rays,
For upon change and mutabylyte,
Stand hole their trust and their suerte.
So that they be sure in doubylnesse,
And always double in their sikernesse,
Seminge one when they best can varye,
Lykest to a cord when they be contrary.
And thus they be most varyaunt in accord,
And hoolest seem when there is discord.
And Guido says how there are few or none
That in heart apayed is in one,
And yet they can be it to one or twain,
To three or four in their speech feign,
Like as they were to one and to no mo,
Hoole in their love for well and eke for woe.
That eneryche shall of him self deem,
That he be next like as he does seem.
And thus in hope stands each in of them all,
The trewest aye redyest forto fall.
Who serves best next to be appayred.
And thus in change all their love is fayred,
Let no man trust but catch when he may,
Farewell to morrow though it be sure to day.
The fair of change lasts all the year.
But it is folly for to bye to dear,
Thilke treasour which hard is to possede,
But flies away when men thereof most need.
And if it hap that no chapman be,
As says Guydo yet all day men may se,
It shows out at large fenestralles,
On chaumbers high and low down in halles.
And in windows eke in every street,
And also eke men may with them mete,
At Pylgramage and oblacions,
At spectacles in Cities and in towns,
As says Guydo and all is for to selle.
But after him I can no further tell,
And eke he says in his sentement,
There is no fraud fully equypolent,
To the fraud and sleyghty compassinge,
Of a woman nor like in their workyng.
For who that set all his faithfulness,
Wening in them to find stablenesse,
He shall them find steadfast as the moon,
That is in point for to change soon.
If he be young they cast him in rage,
If he be old he falls in dotage.
Wherefore my counsel is to both two,
Cast of the brydell and lightly let them go.
This teaches Guido god wot and not I
That has delight to speak cursedly,
Always of women throughout all his book.
As men may se who so list to look.
To them he had envy in special,
That in good faith I am right wroth with al.
That he with them list so to debate,
For ire of which the Latin to translate.
Inwardly my heart I felt blede.
Of high dispite his clauses for to read,
That resowned in conclusiowne,
Only of malice to accusasiowne,
Of those women full evil mote he thrive.
So generally their sect do descryue,
Which made not through in discrecion,
Of good nor badde none excepcion.
He was to blame foul mote he fall,
For cause of one for to hinder all.
For I dare well affyrmen by the rode,
Again one bad their ben an hundred good.
And though some one double be and new,
It hyndreth not to them that be true.
And by example also though he show,
That some one whylom was a shrewe,
They that be good take shall no head,
For it no hinderinge is to womanheade.
Though twain or three can double be and feign
For there again sothly at Colayne,
Of vyrgyns weren inly full of grace.
A leven thousand in that holy place.
A man may find and in our calendar,
Full many maid parfyt and enter,
Which to the death stable were and true,
For some of them with the rosen hew,
Of Marterdome the bliss of heaven won
And some also as books tell konne,
With the lylye of vyrgynyte,
And vyolettes of parfyte chastyte.
Ascenden be above the sterres clear.
And the sercle of the nynthe sphere.
Where joy is aye with gladness eterne.
Wherefore in sothe as I can discern,
Though some clerks of shrewes have missaid
Let no good woman thereof be mispayde,
For lack of one all are not to blame.
And eke of men may be said the same,
For to the true it is no reprefe,
Though it be so another be a thief.
For what is he the worse in his degree,
Though that the other be hanged on a tree.
Nor unto women hinderyng it is none,
Among an hundred though yt there be one,
Of governance that be vicious.
For there again that been full virtuous,
If that ye list a thousand ye may find.
And though Guido write they have of kind,
To be double men should it goodly take,
And there again no manner grutching make.
Nature in workynge has full great powere,
And it were hard for any that is here,
The course of her to hold or to restreyne,
For she will not be guyded by no reyne,
To be coarted of her dew right,
Therefore each man with all his full might,
Should thank god and takes patiently.
For if women be double naturelly,
Why should men lay on them the blame.
For though min auctour hi^der so their name
In his writynge only of Cryseyde,
And upon her such a blame leyde,
My counsel is lightly ouerpasse.
Where he myssayth of her in any place.
To hyndre women other eve or morrow,
Takes no head but let them be with sorrow.
And pass it over where ye list not read.
Till ye be come where that Diomede,
For he was sent into Troy town.
Where ceryously as is made menciowne,
First how that she to him delivered was,
For Anthenor and for the king Thoas.
And how Troylus began her to conueye,
With many other to bring her on the weye.
And after this how that Dyomede,
By the way began her brydell led,
Till he her brought to her fathers tent.
And how that Calchas in full good intent,
Received her lodged there he lay,
And her speech during all that day,
And all the manner hole and euerydele,
All is rehearsed ceryously and well,
In Troylus book as ye have herd me saine,
To write it often I hold it were but vain.
But Guydo says long or it was night,
How Cryseyde has forsake her own knight
And gave her heart unto this Diomede.
Of tenderness and of womanhede.
That Troylus in her heart is now as cold,
Without fire as been these ashes old.
I can none other accusacion,
But only kinds transmutacyon,
That is appropryed unto her nature.
Selde or never stable to endure.
By experyence as men may often lere.
But now to turn again to my matere,
I must resort though that I be far,
As I began to written of the werre.
Of their battayles after that trewse, the descripcion of the Pallase of Ilion,
of a great pestylence in the greeks host, whereby they were enforced to seek
for trewse, which upon their suyte they obtained for thyrtye days. Capitulo.
xxvi.
THe time passed of the trewse ytake,
the next morrow wha^ Tita^ has forsake,
The under party of their hemysperye,
Where all the night he had be full merye,
With Aurora liynge by his side.
But in his bed him list no longer bide,
But shope him up and cast his streams shene,
On Troy wall when Hector armed clean,
Into the fyelde fast began him hye.
With fyftene thousand in his company,
Of worthy knights and of manly men.
And as I find Troylus had ten,
Of knights eke that his baner sewe.
And in all have Paris began remewe,
Out of the town with them of Perce land,
With each of the^ a mighty bow in his hand,
And arrows sharp trussed by their side.
And of knights that about him ride,
He had also three thousand as I find.
And Deiphobus next him came behind,
With three thousand knights armed clean,
On whose plates the son shone full shene,
And next him came the Troyan Eneas,
And as I read sothi^y that there was,
The same day with them of Troy town,
An hundred thousand knights of renown,
Like as records Dares Frygyus.
And in his book Guydo writes thus.
And with the greeks all toforre that day,
With seven thousand goes Menelay.
Knights echone which he tho did led,
And with as many went this Dyomede.
And next them seweth the hardy Achylles,
With his main called Myrmydones.
And zantipus the worthy king eke had,
Three thousand knights which with him he lad,
Into the fyelde again them of the town.
And alderlaste the great Agamenowne,
With such a nombre of the greeks fell,
That wonder is for to heren tell.
And when the wards in the field abroad,
Had take their place without more abode,
A grekyshe king which that Phillis hight,
Anon as he of Hector had a sight,
Toward him sitting on his stead.
With his spear he began him fast speed,
But when Hector has his coming said,
He hente a spear and rode to him again,
And through his shyelde and his plates round,
He gave to him his last fatal wound.
Upon whose death avenged for to be,
Full many greek began on Hector flee.
And first of all the worthy king famous,
That of greeks was called zantypus,
Of hye disdain only for Phyllys sake,
Toward Hector has his course ytake,
And with a spear ran at him full right,
But Hector first hit him with such a might,
Through his harneys with his speres head,
That zantyhus fell to the ground dead.
The death of whom the greeks sore complain
And did their might and their busy pain.
On every half furyous and wood,
Them to avenge on the Troyans blood.
And through their passing cruel hardynesse,
They began Troyans tho so sore oppress,
That many one that day ne might asterte,
Through the breast yperced and the heart,
For to be dead and slain among the prese.
Among which cruel Achylles,
Slew Lychaon and Eutorbyus,
Noble knights right worthy and famous.
That were ycome out of their country,
Again greeks to helpen the city.
And while trojans constrained were so narow
Were it with spear quarrel darte or arowe,
Hector was wounded throughout the vyser,
Into the face that like a river,
The red blood down began to rail.
By his harneys through his auentayle,
Whereof astoned when they had a sight,
Full many Troyan took him to the flight,
And to the cite fast began them draw.
And in the chase full many one was slawe.
Or they might efte out of the field remewe.
And ever in one greeks after sewe,
Unto the walls almost of the town.
Till that Hector the Troyan champyowne,
Of his knyghthode began to taken head,
Albe his wound sore began to blede.
Yet of manhood he began them recomforte,
And maugre them into the fyelde resort,
Namely when he had inspectiowne,
On the walls and toures of the town.
How that Heleyne and Heccuba the queen,
And his sister fair Polycene,
With many other lady began behold,
Him thought anon his heart began to cold,
Of very shame his knygytes shulden flee.
And like a Lion in his crueltee,
He made them turn manly euerychone,
And in his way he meteth Meryon,
A grekyshe king that was nygh of allye,
To Achilles as books specifye.
And with his sword Hector smote him so,
That he his body cloven has on two.
And when Achilles saw that he was dead,
Parted atwo even fro the head,
He he^t a spear and thought he ne would fayl,
To hit Hector through shield plate and mayle,
And rode to him tho full enuyously,
And myd the shield he smet him cruelly.
But with the stroke Hector never adell,
Remeueth not he sat so fast and well.
But with his sword anon and taryeth naught
He to Achylles with enuyous thought,
But knyghtly ran upon his coursere,
And on his creste that shone so bright and clear,
With such a might Hector has him smyt,
That he perced through his basenet,
And raced eke from his auentayle,
With that stroke many piece of mayle.
That Achylles constrained was of need,
Maugre his might to stagre on his stead.
To enclyne and to bow his back,
At which time Hector to him spoke.
And said Achylles I do well aduerte,
The great envy of thy cruel heart,
And specially that thou haste to me.
But be well ware therefore I counsel the,
Thy self to put so far in adventure,
For of one thing I plainly the ensure,
As I desire at my lust some day,
Here in the fyelde if I the mete may,
Trust me right well there gayneth no socour,
That I ne shall acquyten thy labor,
So mortally I do the understand,
With this sword that I hold in hand,
That with thy life thou shall not the^s^ escape.
So cruelly the vengeance shall be take,
Efte when we met even upon thy head.
Of which thing when Achylles took head
Aduertynge all that he herd him said.
Right as he would have answered again,
Vorthy Troylus knyghtly entered in,
And made them a sonder for to twynne,
And through the manhood of his company,
Of worthy knights that he tho did guye,
And high prowess of his own might,
He has the greeks put again to flight.
And slain of them that day out of dread,
Six hundred knights sothly as I read.
For loss of which the greeks fast began flee.
To their tents as of necessytee.
Till Menelay did his busy cure,
To make them the fyelde again recure.
Through whose manhood yt day out of doubt
And worthy knights that weren him about,
The fyelde of greeks recured was anon.
But tho fro Troy came king Odemon.
And in all have possible that he may,
He came enbushed upon Menelay,
And him vnhorseth in the self place.
And such a wound gave him in the face.
That from the death he wend not escape.
And doubtless anon he had him take,
With help of Troylus and lad unto ye town
But of greeks such a prese came down,
To rescue him in this great need,
That Odemon might tho no further led,
King Menelay toward the cite.
When Dyomede came with his meyne.
And many worthy riding him about,
When Troylus met among all the route,
All suddenly of hap or adventure,
Has him vnhorseth as it was his eure,
And after that anon he hent his stead,
And bad a squire that he should it led,
Unto Cryseyde only for his sake,
Besechynge her that she would it take,
As for a gift of her own man.
Sith he that day for her love it wan.
Amyd the fyelde through his great might.
Of him that was whylom her own knight.
And he in haste on his way it went,
And thereof made unto her present.
Prayinge her in full humble wise,
This little gift that she not despise.
But it receive for a remembrance,
And with all this that it be pleasaunce,
Of very pitye and of womanhede,
On her servant called Dyomede,
To remember that was become her knight.
And she anon with heart glad and light,
Full womanly bad him repair again,
Unto his lord and plainly to him said,
That she ne might of very kyndnesse,
Of womanhead nor of gentylnesse,
Refusen him platly from her grace,
That was to her there in strange place,
So kind found and so comfortable.
In every thing and seruysable.
That it may not lykely out of mind,
To think on him that was so true and kind.
With which answer the messager is gone,
Unto his lord and told it him anon,
Word by word like as she has said,
And he thereof was full well apayde.
That him thought plainly in his heart,
He was recured of his pains smerte.
And forth he had him in arms as a knight,
But that day during the strong fight,
They of Troy so manly have them borne,
That greeks might not stand them aforne,
For to their tents they have the^ chased down
That ne had be king Agamenowne,
Greeks had be driven clean out of the fyelde.
The which thing anon as he beheld,
He came upon with many worthy man,
And tho of new the slaught again began.
On every half upon the large plain.
That greeks have Troyans so be lain,
That efte again they have the fyelde ywon.
So that Troyans canstrayned tho begone,
To lose their land till Pollydamas,
Which with his knights there beside was,
Began fall upon endlonge on the grene,
Them of Troy full manly to sustene.
And the greeks he began so to enchace,
When he came in that they lost their place,
And to the stronde even upon the sea,
Through his knyghthod he made the^ for to fle
Of their life that they were in dread.
The which mischief when that Diomede,
Beheld and saw how Pollydamas,
Mortally pursued on the chase,
On horseback both and in the fyelde yfere,
With cruel heart hent anon a spear,
And spryngyng out rode to him full right,
And he again tacquyte him like a knight,
As he that list on no party feign,
Of his stead held again the reyne,
And raught a spear and threw it in the rest,
And Dyomede he smote so on the breast,
That mortally like as it is found,
He him vnhorseth with a grievous wound.
And right anon with a knightly heart,
Pollydamas all attones sterte,
Unto the horse of this Dyomede,
And by the reyne proudely began it led,
Unto Troylus where he on foot stood.
All forbathed in the greeks blood,
On every half which that he shadde,
Among them so knightly he him had.
That they ne might endure nor sustene,
His sharp sword ground was so kene.
And deliver maugre all his foen,
Into the sadell up he sterte anon,
Of very force armed as he was,
And unawarely by adventure or case,
With sharp swerdes for the nones whette,
As Achylles and he together met,
Worthy Troylus of rancour and of pride,
Achylles smote that he fell a side,
Down of his horse low to the ground.
And notwtstanding his grene mortal wound,
He rose again and fast began him speed,
If that he might recure again his stead.
But all for naught it would not avail.
For suddenly with a fresh battle,
They of Troy as made is mencyon,
In compasewyse beset him enuyron.
Eueryche of them armed bright and clean,
And Hector tho in his furious tene,
As Dares tells all the manner how,
The same day a thousand knights slow.
Which them withstode only in diffence,
For Achylles to maken resystence.
That time of death standing in ieopardye.
That certainly but if that books lie,
By lyklyhode he might not tho escape,
In that mischyefe to be dead or take,
Hector on him was so furyous.
But as I read king Thelamonyus,
Rescued him in this great need.
And caused him there to recure his stead.
Notwithstanding all that it disdain.
For he the duke and lord of Athene,
Was in case of heart and hole intent,
To help Achylles wonder dylygent.
That with him ladde many noble knight,
But for because that it drew to night,
As the storye makes rehersayle,
They made an end as of that battle.
And they of Troy entered be the town,
And after that as made is menciowne,
By and by having no delays,
Mortally they foughten thirtye days.
Without let or interrupcyon.
On outher part to great destruction.
But aldermost nathles their great pride,
They lost most on the greeks side.
Save Pryamus lost in special,
Six of his sons called natural.
For whom he made great dole and heuinesse.
And as the storye lyketh to express,
This mean while Hector in certain,
In his face wounded was again,
And thus they have in this cruel rage,
On every part received great damage,
Till Pryam has from Troy sent down,
For a trewes unto Agamenowne.
For six months if he assente would.
And thereupon he has a counsel hold
With his lords what were best to do.
And they echone accorded be thereto,
And grant his axynge conclusyon.
And all this while within Ylyon,
During the peace on outher part assured,
Of his wounds fully to be cured
Lay worthi Hector protector of the town.
But of this rich royal chief doungeowne,
That Ilyon in Troy bare the name,
Which of buildyng had such a fame,
If that I should commend it up and down,
As Dares does in his discrypciowne,
I want cunning my terms to aplye,
For in his book as he does specifye.
In all this world was there new so rich,
Of high deuyse nor of buildyng lyche.
The which stood the more to delight,
As he there says on twelve stones white,
Of Alabastre shortly to conclude,
And twenty pase was the latytude,
That ground ypaued thrughout with crystal,
And up an hight performed every wall,
Of all stones that any man can find,
Of Dyamountes and of sapphires Inde.
The royal rubye so oryent and light,
That the derkenesse of the dymme night,
Enchaced was with the beams shene.
And ever among were emeraudes grene.
With stones all that any manner man,
In this world deuyse or reckon can.
That were of pryse, value, or richesse,
There were wrought of large and great rou^dnes
As says Dares, and Iuory the pyllers,
And thereupon set at the corners,
Of pured gold all above on hight,
There were images wonder huge of weight.
With many perle and many rich stone,
And every pillar in the halle had one.
Of massyfe gold burned clear and bright,
And wonderful to any man's sight,
For of this work the merueylous fasshyon,
Was more like by estymacyon,
A thing ymade and founded by fayrye,
Than any work wrought by fantasye,
Through wit of man as by lykelynesse.
For in his books Dares does witness,
That it was like to reckon sight and all,
In apparaunce a thing celestyall.
Sees in this book ye get no more of me.
For but in writing I might never it se.
Albe that it all other did excelle,
No more thereof I think now to tell.
But to return again to Pryamus.
Which all this while was inly curyous,
With all his might and his busy cure,
To ordeyne for the sepulture,
Of his sons that before were dead.
And all that time sick lay Dyomede,
With loves stripe wounded to the heart.
As he that felt inwardly the smerte,
Of woeful syghes which in his breast abreide.
Full often adaye for love of her Creseyde.
For he was shake with a fever new,
That caused him to be full pale of hew.
And to wexen megre poor and lene,
For pyteously he began him to abstene,
For meat and drink and from all solace,
As it was seen in his deadly face.
And often a day to her he would complain,
Of his dissease and of his mortal pain,
Prayinge of grace that she would do se,
Upon his woo for to have pytye.
And of mercy for to taken head,
Of her servant only of womenhead.
Or plainly else there is no more to seye,
For her sake he said that he would deye.
But cunnyngly and in full sleyghty wise,
To keep him low under her service,
With delays she held him forth on hand*
And caused him as in a were to stand.
Full unsure between hope and despair.
And when that grace should have had repair
To put him out of all this heaviness,
Danger of new brought him in distress.
And with disdain to increase his pain,
Of double were she brought him in a train.
As women can hold a man full narowe,
When he is hurt with Cupydes arowe.
To set on them with many fell assayes,
Day by day to put him in delays.
To stand unsure betwyxe hope and dread.
Right as Creseyde left this Dyomede.
Of intent to set him more a fire,
As this women kyndly aye desire.
When they a man have brought in to a trau^ce
Unevenly to hang him in balaunce,
Of hope and dread to lynke him in a chain,
And of the fine unsure of both twain.
To drive him forth years them to serve,
And do no force where he live or sterue,
This is the fine of loves fyry rage.
And for she would have him in seruage,
She locked him under such a keye,
That he wot not where to live or deye.
Whereof in doubt thus I let him dwell.
And forth I will of the story tell.
And to my matter eke resort again,
And as mine auctour records in certain,
After the trewse were wered out and gone,
Twelve days suyng all in one,
The greeks have faught with the^ of the town.
To great damage and confusyowne,
Of outher party and aduersyte.
And in this while a great mortalyte,
Both of sword and of pestylence,
Among greeks by fatal influence,
Of noyous hete and of corrupt air,
Engendered was that tho in great despair,
Of their life in the fyelde they leye,
For day by day suddenly they deye.
Whereby their nombre fast began dyscrece,
And when they saw that it ne would sece,
By their advise the king Agamenowne,
For a trewse sent unto the town.
For thirty days. and Priamus the king,
Without abode granted his axynge.
How Andromecha was by a dream forwarned of the death of her husband Hector,
if he the day following entered the field, where of she admonyshed him, and he
thereto having no respect, was the next day slain of Achilles. Capitulo.xxvii.
When the moreyne and the woeful rage,
Of pestylence began for to aswage.
And the trewse were wered out and gone,
The greeks cast to meten with their foen,
Upon a day in plates armed clean.
When Phoebus rose with his beams shene,
Full pleasauntly and began to shede his light.
But as I find tofore the self night,
Andromecha the faithful true wife,
Of worthy Hector him loving as her life,
By whom he had get children two,
Wonder semely and inly fair also,
And Lamedowne called was the tone,
So young the the other that it ne might gone.
And Astyonax I read that he hight,
Fetured well and passing fair of syghte,
And as Guydo lysteth to endyte,
Of his mother at the pappes white,
For very young that time was suckynge.
And with his arm his breasts embrasyng.
And she that night as made is mencyon,
Had in her sleep a wonder vysyon,
I note in sothe what I may it neuene,
Outher a dream or verily a sweuene,
Or fro above a reuelacyon,
As whylom had the king Scypyon,
Or a showing outher an Oracle,
Or of gods a warnyng by miracle,
For in sothnesse slepynge as she lay,
Her thought plainly if the next day,
Hector went his fomen for to assail,
As he was wont armed in battle,
That he ne should escape utterly,
In fates hondes to fall finally.
And ouermore Attropos shall fine,
For evermore his lives threde to twyne.
And show the force of her fell might,
When the Parodye of this worthy knight,
A proche shall without words mo,
Into the fyelde plainly if he go.
Of which astoned street and short of breath,
Where as she lay abrayde upon the death,
And with a syghe stynte for to sleep,
And pyteously brast out for to weep,
For the constraynte of her herty sorrow.
And specially on the woeful morrow,
When that she saw this stock of worthiness
As he was wont manfully him dress,
To arm him in steel borned bright.
This trojan wall Hector this worthy knight.
She can no more but at his fete fell down,
Lowly declaryng her a vysyowne,
With quakyng heart of very womanhead.
Whereof god wot he took full little head.
But thereof had high indignacion.
Platly affyrmynge that no discrecion,
Was to trusten in such fantasyes.
In dreams showed gladly meinte with lies.
Full of Iapes and of illusyons,
Of which plainly the conclusyons,
Be not else but folks to delude.
Albe it so that these people rude,
Therein some while have affection,
To judge and deame in their oppynion,
Dyuersly what they may pretend.
And often fall and happen as they wend,
And follows like in conclusyon.
For dread of which the lamentacion,
Increase began of this Andromecha.
And in her swone first she cried ha.
Saying alas mine own lord so dear,
Your true wife alas why nyll ye here.
Which of so faithful hoole affection,
Desires aye your salvation.
And up she rose deadly of vysage,
And like a woman caught with sudden rage
To king Pryam and Hecuba the queen,
In haste she went her self to be mean.
And of her wifely heart true as stele,
Ceryously declared every deal,
Her pyteous dream which through miracle,
To her only by deuyne oracle,
Yshewed was through gods purueyaunce.
And told them eke the fynall ordinance.
Of fortunes false dispocisyon.
Fully purueyed to destruction,
Of her lord without more delay.
Into the fyelde if he go that day.
Wherefore she prays with a deadly hew,
Unto the the king of mercy for to rewe,
Upon her woe to have compassyon.
For to ordeyne by high discrecion,
Of his lordshyp and of soueraynte,
That her lord may not destroyed be.
Of reckeleshead or wylfulnesse.
And with that word of very kyndnesse,
In whom was aye so much love found,
Tofore the queen in sown fell to ground.
And said alas with a deadly chere,
Help in this case mine own mother dear,
Of womanhead and routh do me grace.
That my lord into the fyelde ne pace.
And do your deuer of motherly pytee,
Benyngnely and goodly for to se,
To his knyghthode and his high prowess,
For to restrain his renowned noblesse.
This ylke day to handle spear or shield,
Nor that he go armed into fylde.
And both twain assent for the best,
And condescende unto her request,
Finally according into one.
That when the wards were ready euerychone
On yssuynge out and Troylus first of all*
And Paris next on greeks for to fall,
And after him the troyan Eneas,
King Sarpedan and Pollydamas,
King Eroys and king Epystrophus,
And eke the king ycalled Forcyus,
In plate and mayle eueryche armed clean,
And alderlast came king Phylomene,
Withal the kings and lords of renown,
That in deffence come of the town,
With the greeks knyghtly to debate.
And Pryamus sothly to the gate,
Conveyed them at their out going,
And set their wards this noble worthy king.
Full prudently through his sapyence,
And after gave them congee and license,
Upon greeks for to prove their might.
Against whom full ready for to fight,
Their fomen were with royal apparayle.
Amyd the fyelde abydyng the battle.
But Pryamus in the mean while,
Like as Guydo remembers in his style.
For thylke fine that ye have herd me said,
To whothy Hector repaired is again,
Him contermaundyng that he ne should gone,
Thilke day to fight again their foen.
For which thing of high despyte he brent,
When that he saw other lords went,
Out at the gate and he alone abode.
For which he wexed furyous and wood,
Holy the cause arettynge to his wife,
That was of cheietie so tender of his life.
Puttyng on her fully the occasyowne,
Of his abiding that day in the town.
In preiudyce of his worthynesse,
And disencrease of his high prowess,
And leest through tongues to his high estate,
Through false report it were derogate.
He cast anon of a full knightly heart.
For life nor death it should him not asterte,
Within the fyelde that day to be found,
Though it so were with many mortal wound,
He should on pieces hewn be a sonder.
Upon the plain dismembered here and yonder.
So hole in manhod was his heart set,
That he anon without longer let,
Again to arm him was full dyligent,
Again the precept and commandment,
Of his father and rode on his way,
For fear of which anon as she would deye
His wife of new cry began and shoute.
And with her papes also hanging out,
Her little child in her arms twain,
Tofore her lord began to weep and plain,
Besechynge him of routhe and pity,
If so he would unto her sorrow se,
At the least for her wifely truth,
That he of manhood have in heart routhe,
Upon his child and upon her also,
Which that she bare in her arms two,
And not might him from criynge keep,
When he saw his woeful mother weep,
And knelynge down unto him she said,
In her sobbing as she might abrayde,
Mine own lord have mercy now on me,
And on this little child which that ye se,
So pyteously before you weep and cry,
Have mercy lord on us or that we dye,
Have mercy eke upon this Cite,
Mine own lord have mercy or that we,
By cruel death pass shall echone,
For lack of help alas when ye are gone.
This was the cry of Andromecha,
With whom was eke her sister Cassandra,
Hecuba and fair Pollycene,
And Heleyne eke the lusty fresh queen,
Which all atones fell him beforne,
With heyr untrussed and weping all to torn.
And loud began to cry in the place,
Besechynge him of mercy and of grace.
For thilke day to abide in the town,
And in his heart to have compassyowne,
On her complaynte and her woeful moan.
Since all the trust of the town alone,
In him abode and all the resystence,,
Against death he was their chief defense,
And in him only was their affiaunce,
Their suerte and their suffysaunce,
In each thing that them might grieve.
And yet all this ne might his heart meue.
For to abide yet of goodlyheade,
They him besought to their womanheade,
He would incline his herded heart of stele,
That they might a little drop feel,
Only of pity on their woo to rewe,
That lykly was to more and renew,
Finally to their destructiowne,
For of the Cite and likewise the town,
His death in soth should fully be ruin,
But yet all this might not him enclyne,
That he ne would out in conclusyon,
As indurate and hearted as a Lion.
He was always continuinge in his rage
Whose heart might as often nor aswage,
Another prayer nor lamantacion,
Him to restrain from his opinion.
For every peril he laid has aside,
And on his way began anon to ride.
Where through his wife none other bote can.
But in her rage to the king she ran,
So amassed in her mortal woe,
That she uneath might speak him to.
So diffaced and rewefull of her sight,
That by her hew knows her no wight,
For lost she had both might and strength,
And plat she fell to the ground at length,
Tofore the king that routhe was to seen.
Besechinge him of entente full clean,
That he of grace consider would her woe,
For but he help Hector was ago.
And he seeing her faithful womanhead,
At her request raughte anon his stead,
And pricked after only for her sake,
In so great haste that he has overtake.
Worthy Hector within the Cite,
And hent his reyne with great difficulte,
And maugre him made him turn again.
In such wise he durst it not with said,
Albe that he was full loathe thereto.
So that by prayer and by force also,
From his stead he made him to alyghte.
The areste of whom eschew he ne might.
For he ne would again his father strive,
Albe that he felt his heart ryue,
Of melancolye and of hertye ire.
And of disdain new set a fire,
So inwardly stered was his blood.
That like a Tygre or a Lion wood,
That were deprived newly of her pray.
Right so he fared all that ylke day.
Or like a bore that his tuskes whette,
While the Greeks and they of Troy met,
Furyously walking up and down,
And in diffence sothly of the town,
Troylus first on his baye stead,
Of adventure met with Diomede.
And each at other surquedous of pride,
With sharp speres began together ride,
And Guydo says without any dread,
One or both had anon be dead,
Ne had Menelay knightly go between.
And after that in a furyous tene,
He smette his horse in full knyghtly wise,
And Mereon the mighty king of Fryse,
Menelaus marked has full well,
And with his sword full sharp ground of stele,
Unhorsed him and threw him on the grene.
For he the stroke might not tho sustene,
This Menelay was on him so wood.
That it was lykly even there he stood,
With his life he should not thense eskape.
For the Greeks full hastily them shape,
This Meryon as ye have herd me said,
For to be set round upon the plain,
And to cesse him by the auentayle,
On every part and cruelly to assail,
All destytute in this woeful case,
But him to help came Pollydamas,
With his knights and began to nighe nere,
When he him saw taken prysonere.
And maugre all that there upon him set,
From their hands Pollydamas him fette,
At whose rescues there was so great a strife,
That many one therefore lost his life.
For Greeks rather then he should escape,
From their hands in that hasty rape,
Cast them plainly that he should be dead.
Fully in purpose to have had his head.
He stood of mischyefe in so great disioynt,
But him to selpe even upon the point,
Came Troylus in most knightly of arraye
And of his manhod made such affraye,
Among them in reskuse of this king,
That maugre them at his in cominge,
Delivered was this mighty king of Fryse.
From cruel death as ye have herd deuyse.
But thereupon came Thelamonyus.
Proud in arms and ever surquidous,
With three thousand full worthy euerychone,
And he vnhorseth Pollydamas anon.
Among his knights and proudly bare hi^ down.
But Troilus has through his hie renown
Myd of his foen get him his horse again,
But they of Troy so sore were belayne,
On every half through the greeks pride,
That they ne might before them tho abide,,
For new and new the hardy Achilles,
Assailed them with his Myrmydones.
That they compelled of necessyte.
In mischyefe were made for to flee,
Home to the walls and gates of the town,
To great damage and confusyowne.
Of their party that abacke so gone.
The which thing when Margaryton,
Beheld and saw how the game gothe,
In his heart he began to wexen wroth.
And passyngly for to have disdain,
As the storye records in certain,
That he was both hardy and famous.
And son also to king Priamus.
A noble knight and of great worthiness,
And when he saw the mischyef and distress,
Of them of Troy add how they began fle,
He cast anon avenged for to be,
Upon Achilles for all his great might.
And ran to him full like a manly knight,
On horse back for the towns sake,
And him enforseth Achilles for to take,
Amyd the field among his knights all.
But Achilles alas it should befall,
That day him slew by cruel adventure.
Where through Trojans mighte^ not endure,
The field to hold but homeward began the^ hie
And mortally they maken noise and cry,
First for the death of Margaryton,
And for the pursuyte that king Thelamo^.
Made on the chase through his crueltye.
Home to the gates of Troy the Cite,
That slew and killed always as he rode,
Albe that Paris manly him withstode,
With his brethrene that in baste were borne,
But for all that their ground they have lorne,
Left and forsake utterly the field.
And home they went and brought on a shield,
The dead corpse of Margaryton.
And after that their gates shette anon,
The which mischief as Hector began behold,
Of very ire his heart began wexe cold,
And said platly without more delay,
He would avenge his death the same day.
And made in haste his stead to be fet,
And up he sterte and on his basenet,
Vnwyste the king or who be lefe or loathe,
There was no gain forth anon he gothe,
Till he was passed the gates of the town,
More furyous then Tygre or Lyowne.
At whose coming as thick as swarm of been.
Tofore his sword Greeks began to fleen,
They thought it was time to withdraw.
And first I find how that he has slawe,
Two worthy Dukes as he with them met.
That busy were his way for to let,
The one ycalled was Eurypalus,
And the other hight Halcydius,
And so Trojans the field again have won,
And of new manfully begone,
Greeks to sewe and follow on the trase,
And yet at myschiefe Dan Pollydamas,
The same time was of Greeks take,
But Hector has so borne him for his sake,
Where as that he forest was belayne.
And through his knighthod reskued hi^ again
And put the Greeks in so great distress,
Through his manhood and his worthiness,
That where so ever thylke day he rode,
His sharp sword he bathed in their blood,
He was so cruel and so merciles.
But then a knight called Leothydes,
Shope him anon with Hector for to mete,
While he was most yrous in his hete,
And set on him full presumptuously,
But Hector tho deuoyde of all mercy,
Anon him slew and threw him in the field
The which thing when Achilles beheld,
The great slaughter and the wounds wide,
That Hector made upon every side,
He began anon compass in his heart,
And up and down cast and aduerte,
How the greeks never may be sure,
Again their foen to fight nor endure,
Nor keep a field with them for to strive,
All the while that Hector were alive.
Wherefore he cast and shope many weye,
By what engyne Hector might deye.
At advantage if he might him find,
And thereto eke Pollicenes of Inde,
A worthy Duke was also of assent,
Only for he of heart and hole entente,
In hope stood his sister for to wyue,
For love of whom he felt his heart ryue.
And in her grace better for to stand,
He cast fully for to take on hand,
This high emprise as I have you told,
But while that he was on him most bold,
Hector him slew there was none other gain
The which anon as Achilles has seyne,
For ire he wexed in his heart as wood,
As bore or Tygre in their cruel mood,
Upon Hector avenged for to be.
And furyously he began on him to fle.
But Hector caught a quarrel sharp ygrou^d
And threw at him and gave him such a wound,
Throughout the thighe upon other side,
That in the field he might not abide.
But him withdrewe and anon is went,
With all his men home unto his tente,
And made anon a surgeyn for to bind,
His mortal wound and after as I find,
When he was staunche and cease for to blede,
In all haste again he took his stead,
And leest he were of that wound dead,
Afterward as it was great dread,
He thought first avenged for to be,
Upon Hector if he might him se.
Of hap or sort if it would fall,
For him thought to his pains all,
It were to him the best remedy,
Of his hand if he might dye,
For of his life he routhe not a mite,
Be so that he Hector might acquyte,
Death for death in conclusyon,
For that was holy his entencion,
Of his desire fully suffysaunce,
By death unawarely to give him mischaunce.
But all this time Hector up and down,
As he was wont plays the Lion,
Among Greeks in many sundry place,
And with his sword began them so enchase.
That as the death where they might hi^ seen.
They fled before him like a swarm of been.
For none so hardy was him to wythsette.
And in this while a grekishe king he met,
Were it of hap or of adventure,
The which in sothe on his cote armure,
Embrouded had full many rich stone,
That gave a light when the son* shone,
Full bright and clear that joy was to seen,
For Perles white and Emerawdes grene,
Full many one were therein set.
And on the cercle of his basenette,
And round enuyron of his auentayle,
In velvet fret all above the mayle,
Sapphires ynde and other stones red.
Of whose arraye when Hector takes head,
Toward him fast began him draw.
And first I find how he has him slawe,
And after that by force of his manheade,
He hente him up before him on his stead,
And fast began with him for to ride,
From the wards a little out of side,
At good leyser plainly if he may,
To spoil him of his rich arraye,
Full glad and light of his new empryse.
But out alas of false couetise,
Whose gredy fret the which is great pytee,
In hertes may not lightly staunshed be.
The Etike draws by so great distress,
That it defaceth the high worthynesse,
Full often sithe of these conqueroures.
And of their fame rent away the flowers.
Desire of having in a gredy thuoght,
To high noblesse sothly longs naught.
Nor such pylfre spoylynge nor robberye,
Appartayne not to worthy chyualrye.
For couetyse and knighthod as I lere,
In one chain may not be knet yfere.
For kouthe it is that often such rauyne,
Has cause be and root of ruin,
Of many worthy who so list take heed,
Like as ye may now of Hector read.
That suddenly was brought to his ending,
Only for spoylynge of this rich king,
For of desire to him that he had.
On horse back out when he him ladde,
Reklesly the storye makes mind,
He cast his shield at his back behind,
To welde him self at more lyberte,
And for to have oportunyte,
To spoil him and for no wight spare,
So that his breast disarmed was and bare.
Except his plates there was no diffence,
Again the stroke to maken resistance.
Alas why was he tho so reckles,
This flower of knighthod of ma^hode pereles
When that his foo all that ylke day,
For him alone in awayte so lay,
If in mischief of hate or of envy,
In the field he might him ought espy,
This Achilles cruel and venymous,
Of hertye most melancolius,
Which covertly houing him beside,
When that he saw Hector disarmed ride,
He hente a spear sharp ground and kene,
And of ire in his hateful tene,
All unawarely or Hector might aduerte,
Alas the while he smote him to the heart,
Throughout ye breast that dead he fell adowne.
Unto the earth this Trojan champyowne,
Through neclygence only of his shield,
The death of whom when Odemon beheld,
The worthy king might him not refrain,
But to Achilles rode with all his pain,
And hit him so amyd of all the prese,
Maugre the might of his Myrmydones,
That for dead Guydo says certain,
Of that wound fell grofeling on ye plain.
But his knights on a shield alofte,
The ylayde him and carried him full soft,
Unto his tente in all the haste he can,
And there I leave this deadly wounded man,
Full sore sick till he may releue.
And after that when it drew to eve,
They of Troy with great reverence,
Did their labor and their diligence,
The dead corpse to carye into town,
Of worthy Hector when Titan went adowne
And to the temple dolefully they wend.
And of that day this was the woeful end.
I can no more but thus the long night.
In heaviness as it is skill and right,
I will them leave and again return,
To my matter to help them for to mourn.
The complaynte of Lydgate for the death of Hector. Ca. xxviii.
But now alas how shall I forth proceed,
In the storye that for woe and dread,
Feel my hand both tremble and eke quake,
Oh worthy Hector only for thy sake.
Of thy death I am so loathe to write.
Oh who shall now help me to endite,
Or unto whom shall I clepe or call,
Certys to none among the muses all
That by accord singen ever in one,
On Pernasus beside Helycon.
So aungelyke in their hermonye,
That tunge is none that may specifye,
The great sweetness of their goodly song,
For no discord is found them among,
In their minsyke they be entuned so.
It sytte them naught for to help in woe,
Nor in matters yt be with mourninge shente,
As tragydyes all to tore and rent,
In camplayninge pyteously in rage.
In the Theater with a dead vysage,
To them alas I clepe dare nor cry,
My troubled pen of grace for to guye,
Another to Clyo nor to Callyope,
But to Alecto and to Thesyphone,
And to Megera that ever does complain,
As they that live aye in woe and pain.
Eternally and in torment dwell,
With Cerberus deep down in hell.
Whom I must pray to be gracious,
To my matter which is so furyous,
For to a wight that is comlaplayninge,
A drery fear is right well syttinge.
And to a matter meynt with heaviness.
Accords well a cheer of drerynesse.
To be allied as by unity.
Wherefore help now thou woeful Nyobe,
Some drery tear in all thy piteous pain,
Into my pen dolefully to rain.
And help also thou cruelly Yxione,
And Belydes that does the bokette gone,
And with thy stone help thou Secyphus,
And in thy river help eke Tantalus,
That for hunger haste so huge pyne.
This woeful playute help me for to fine.
Me to further do your business,
For now the stock and root of worthynesse,
Of knighthod ground of ma^hod soures and well,
That tofore all bare away the bell,
Of derrynge do this flower of high prowess,
And was exaumple also of gentilnesse,
That never could do amiss or seye,
Alas Hector alas why should thou deye.
Oh cruel Parchas why took ye no head,
So cruelly to twine his fatal threde,
Ye were to hasty alas why were ye so,
And namely when the threde ye brake a two
Thou Attropos which through thy great envy
Oh Troy alas well may thou weep and cry,
And make a woeful lamentacion,
Which haste of new to thy confusyon,
Lost thy diffence and thy strong wall.
Thy berer up thy suertie royal.
By whom thy honor chiefly was begone
Alas alas for now thy bright son,
Eclipsed is now stand thou desolate,
Of all comfort and disconsolate,
Thy light is lost and thou in dercknesse,
Yplounged art for in sothefastnesse,
Of all worthy thou haste the worthyest,
This day yloste and the knightlyest,
That is or was or shall I the ensure
Be ever borne whylse the world may dure.
No wonder is though thou be wale sore,
And day by day complain for evermore.
That was thy shield both in joy and woe,
Whom thou were wont for to love so.
So tenderly with all thy hole heart.
That it may not lightly the asterte,
To have him ever in thy remembrance.
Which was in sothe fully thy suffysaunce.
For as Guydo makes mention,
There was no man dwellinge in the town,
That he ne had of very kindness,
For love of him as he list express,
His child more lefe to have dyed in this case,
Other his heir so well beloved he was.
If the gods, fate, or destyne,
Disposed had that it might have be,
Women also of every manner age,
Be for his death fall in such a rage,
Through the Cite about in every street,
That with sobbinge and with salt tears wete
And heir to rent for their deadly woe,
Furyously they ronnen to and fro.
So mortal was their aduersyte.
That to behold alas it was pity.
Young maids and likewise matrones old,
Sobbe and syghe and their fystes fold.
And loud cry and said finally,
Alas now shall our fathers cruelly,
In our sight be slain day by day.
Alas the while and no man shall say nay.
Farewell our help now Hector is ygone.
That in the surenesse of us euerychone,
Was wont to rest now is he dead alas.
Of whom the body when it carried was,
Into presence of Pryamus the king,
Anon he lost the office of speaking.
And began him self in salt tears droune,
And pyteously therewith fell in swone,
Upon the corpse cold as any stone,
Inly desirous for to deye anon,
Without tariyng on him as he lay,
But that he was by force rent away.
His brethren eke when they token head,
Tryste and pale for sorrow well nyghe dead.
That have them self with rage al to torn,
That never was I trow seen aforne,
Of brethren yet such an other care.
For each of them with him self began fare,
As there they would have dyed on the corse,
For of their life platly they gave no forse.
But at the ground with many sorrows sore,
Like wild bulls they began cry and rore,
That routhe was their deadly woe to seen.
An heart of stele might it not sustene.
What shall I say of Hecuba the queen,
Or of his sister young Pollycene,
Or Cassandra the prudent and the wise.
Or of his wife the sorrow to deuyse.
Which rent them self in torment and in woe.
As finally they would them self for do,
By cruel death so they weep and wayle.
That if I should maken rehersayle,
To write their sorrows and their complaynges
Their pyteous sobbyng sorrows and wepinges
The woeful cries and pyteous sownes,
Their drery plaintes and lamentaciownes,
And all their woe for to specyfye,
A large volume it would occupye,
If each thing I should in order tell.
I trow it were to long for to dwell.
For any man and tedyous to here,
For many day after as I lere.
The women wept before the corpse lyinge.
Them self defacyng in their complaining,
That wonder was how they might endure.
But that they have it sothly of nature,
And of kind for to weep and plain,
To syghe sore and into tears rain,
Till the tempest of their woeful rage,
May by process lyt and lyt aswage.
And thus I let them sygh and sorrow make
This cely women that in their clothes blake,
shroude their faces and wimpled more in vain,
While to my matter I return again.
To tell plainly how king Pryamus,
In heart was inly desirous.
To cast away in his entencion,
The corpse to keep from corrupcyon,
Which naturally but men taken head,
Corrupt must right of very need.
For of kyndly dispocysyon,
There may be made none opposycion,
Above the ground if the body lie,
That by all reason it must putryfye.
But if craft be above nature.
Vncurrupte it may not there endure.
Wherefore the king shope him to ordeyne,
To preserve it hole fro things twain.
From odoure and abhomynacion.
And therewith eke by craftye operacyon,
That in it slyght be not found horrible,
But that it be lyefly and visyble,
To the eye as by apparaunce.
Like as it were quycke in existence.
What it cost the king will spare naught.
But made anon before him to be brought,
The craftyest masters of the town,
Such as most had of discrecyowne.
To perform his axynge curyously.
And they obey his byddyng faithfully,
With all their will and entyer dylygence.
In the temple most of reverence,
Of all the town whylom dedicate,
And of full yore also consecrate.
To Appollo of old foundaciowne,
Beside a gate standing of the town,
Called Tymbrya in their Troyan tongue.
As in storye is both red and song.
And in this phane that I speak of here,
They made first by the high aultere,
By great deuyse a little oratorye,
Perpetually to be in memory.
Where as was set a rich receptacle.
Made in manner of a tabernacle.
Egall of sight for a large image,
That raised was on a rich stage,
That was borne at each of his corners,
Of pured gold upon four pyllers.
And on eueryche full craftily ydyght,
An angel stood of gold borne bright.
Ceryously the work to sustene,
With craftye archys raised wonder clean,
Enbowed over all the work to cure,
So merueylous was the celature.
That all the rofe and closure enuyrowne,
Was of fine gold plated up and down.
With knottes grave wonder curyous,
Fret full of stones rich and precious,
Of every kind that man can deuyse.
So royally and in so thryfty wise,
That the derckenesse of the black night,
With the beams of the clear light,
Enchaced was where they dyden shene.
And fro the ground vpryght as a line,
There were degrees men by to ascend,
Made so well that no man could amend.
The worckmanshyp and they were euerychone,
Performed up all of crystal stone.
Attaynyng up from the table base,
Where the standing and the resting was,
Of this rich crafty tabernacle,
Having above upon each penecle,
A rich rubye. and raised hye on hight.
Stood an image huge and large of weyghte,
Of massye gold having the likeness,
Of worthy Hector that began his face dress,
Toward greeks where he tho did stand,
Aye thretyng them with his sword in hand.
And amiddes all this great richesse,
They have yset by good auisenesse,
The dead corpse of this worthy knight,
To sight of man standinge up as right,
By subtle craft as it were living,
Of face and cheer and of quick lokinge,
And of color southly and of hew,
Being as fresh as any rose new,
And like in all as by supposayle,
As he lived in his apparayle.
For on his stead like as it is told,
Through small pipes wrought and made of gold
That by measure were enbowed down,
To an enter made in his crown,
By great advise and subtilte,
To each party and extremyte,
Of his body craftily porrecte,
Through nerfe and synewe driven and direct.
By secret pores craftily to extend,
Whereby the lycour might down descend.
To keep him hole fro corrupcion,
Withouten any transmutacion,
Of hyde and hew in any part to turn.
And at his head of gold was an vrne,
And that was fylde with bawme natural.
That ran through pipes artyfyciall,
Through neck and head into many place,
Penetrable by veins of the face.
That through virtue and force of this licoure,
He was conserved lively of color,
Fresh of hew quick and nothing pale,
So mightily the bawme did auale.
Comparisoned as it were semblable,
To a soul that were vegetable,
The which without sensybelyte,
Ministers life in herb, flower, and tree.
And semblably into every vain,
Of the corpse the virtue did attain,
By breast and arm spredinge enuyron.
For the moisture by discencion
To hand and foot southly as I read,
Through bone and joint began his virtue shede,
And distillinge mightily is flete.
And at his fete full of gummes sweet,
A vial stood tempred with bawne ymeynt
That by process may not wax feynt,
But day by day increase and amend.
Of which the vapoure upward began ascend,
Causinge the air enuyron be delyse,
To resemble a very paradyse,
For the savor more wholesome was and soote,
Than the odor of gum spice or root,
And of pure gold were four laumpes light.
Tofore the corpse brenninge day and night,
With oil in sothe if it be credyble,
That was by craft made in extinguible,
For it ne might mine auctour says certain,
Another be queint with tempest wind or rain.
Nor by process wasten of no years.
Which in the air be bright bourned wires,
Full craftily raised were a lofte,
Of whose swetenes men rejoiced often,
In their courage it lyked them full well,
And when this work was complete eueridell,
Round enuyrowne full rich and fresh to se
They made a parclose all of Eban tree
That so long last may and dure.
The which tree only of nature,
When it is cut smells wonder sweet,
And may not waste nor brenne with no hete
Though it be laid among the coals red,
Midde the flawme of many fiery glede,
It not consumes though men assaye full often
And in water it houeth not alofte,
But kyndely thense to the ground it goth,
To swymme on heyght in soth it is to loath,
And like also as teaches Plynyus,
This tree whylom was passyngly famous,
Of so high pryse and reputacion,
That in the large mighty regyon,
And worthy land of Ethyope and Inde,
Of yore agon the folks as I find,
Had this tree in so great honor,
That they gave trybute to the Emperor,
As is remembered of antiquite,
Of gold and yuor and of this rich tree.
With these gifts famous and royal,
To quyte their debt to him in special.
And when Pryam in full thryfty wise,
Performed has as ye have herd deuyse,
This rich work noble and excellent,
Of herty love in all his best intent,
Ordained eke as Guydo can you tell,
A certain nombre of prestes for to dwell,
In the temple in their deuocions,
Contynually with devout orysons,
For the soul of Hector for to preye.
That the gods his spyryte list convey,
Eternally with them to dwell yfeare.
In joy and bliss above the sterres clear.
To which prestes ye king gave mansyons,
There to abide and possessions,
The which he has to them mortysed,
Perpetually as he have herd devised.
And whiles that they knele pray and wake,
I cast fully me an end to make,
Finally of this my third book,
On my rude manner as I undertook.
And whiles they of Troy weep and morn,
Unto greeks I will again return,
And with dulle style on the story trace,
Only borne up with supporte of your grace.
Thus ends the third book.
How the greeks deposyng Agamenon, ordained Pallamydes the general of their
army. Cap. xxix.
HEctor thus dead as ye have herd said,
and Achylles in his tent ylayde,
With his wounds mortal fresshe and grene,
Upon a morning when ye son shene,
Enchaced had away the derke night,
Agamenon the wise worthy knight,
In his works passyngly prudent,
Has in all haste for his lords sent,
And when they were assembled euerychone,
Within his tente to them he said anon.
Syrs quod he and lords that be here,
King, Princes, and Dukes eke yfere,
If ye aduerte by clear inspection,
Ye ought echeone with high devotion.
Holy of heart our gods for to herye.
And inwardely for to be right merye,
If ye consydre and wisely do take heed,
How that our enemy Hector is now dead,
That whylom was berer up of Troy.
Their full trust their honor and their joy.
Their hoole deffence and their protection,
And unto us death and confusyon.
Unlikely ever to have had victory,
Whiles with life he floured in his glory.
Again whose sword we mighten not avail
For slew he not at our aryuayle?
If ye remember on the first day,
The noble king called Protheselay?
And after next if I shall not feign,
He Patroclus parted even on twain,
In fyelde among us euerychone,
Slew he not eke the worthy king Menon,
Archylogus and also Prothenor,
And eke the king that hyghte Alphynor,
Phyllys also and king Epystrophus?
And to the end he brought zantypus,
And Meryon the mighty strong king,
In his way as he came riding,
He slain has and other kings two,
Cedyus and Doryus also,
Polyrenes and strong Polybete,
Letabonis and the king Phylete,
The manly knight the king Isydyus,
And eke the king called Humerus?
For in his Ire and his cruel tene,
Of worthy kings he slain has eyghtene,
Which hither came out of greeks land,
By the power of his mighty hand.
Now laud and honor to the gods all
Which caused have that it is be fall.
That he is dead to our increase of joy.
And to discrese of our foen in Troy.
As they shall find in experyence.
And laud also prese and reverence,
Be to fortune that us has help well.
With her tournyng of her double whele.
To high comfort and consolacyowne,
Of us echone sitting enuyrowne.
That stand now in parfyt sykernesse,
Through death of him yt did us so oppress.
And what may they wait now in the town
But after death and destructiowne,
And hastily for to end in woe,
Now that their trust Hector is a go.
Without whom they may not long endure,
Wherefore we may fully us assure,
Our purpose hole that we shall acheue.
And finally daunte them so and grieve,
That unto them it shall be importable,
Of one assent if we stand stable.
For their party tourneth on the wrake,
And their hope is fully put a bake.
And dispeired in nonsecurytye,
For utterly both they and their City,
Shall more and more in weer of death depend,
And we in soth shall day by day amend,
With help of god both on sea and land.
For now victory is ready to our hand.
Deuoyde platly of ambyguyte,
And excluded at eye as ye may se,
Both of wantrust and of foreyne dread,
But I counsel or that we proceed,
Any ferther upon our foen to ride,
Prudently a while to abide,
And keep us close for to pass our bounds,
Till Achylles be heled of his wounds.
And then echone by mighty vyolence,
Shall the^ oppress when they have no diffence
As I have said through help of Achylles.
And let us now send for a peace,
For two months to king Pryamus,
If it so be he list to grant it us.
As it is like plainly that he shall.
And they there while with flawme funeral,
Consume may the dead bodies pale,
That lie abroad on every hill and vale.
Which by report of them that have repeyre,
From day to day infecten so the air,
Throughout the field engendryng pestilence
Of stynke there is so great a vyolence.
And we there while may in ease and rest,
Our wounds cure me seems for the best.
And they assent thereto euerychone,
And unto Troy the messageres are gone,
And have the trewse granted of the king.
And be repeyred without more taryinge.
And thereof made full relacyon,
To the greeks before Agamenon.
And after that when all was at an end,
Home to his tent every lord does wend.
And while the trewse endures and the peace
Among greeks king Pallamydes,
Cumplayneth sore of Agamenon.
That he so had the domynacyon,
Above them all having there at envy.
And on a day in his melancolye,
Of high despyte and indignacyon,
Full inly fret with yrous passion,
He began break out and his rancour show.
By certain signs though he spoke but few
Till on a day the wise Agamenon,
Conceived has of high discrecyon,
Holy this thing and thought he ne would spare,
Fro point to point him self to declare,
When his lords together were present,
Tofore them all in his own tent.
As he that was this noble worthy king,
Full circumspect in every manner thing.
Naught to rakell nor melancolyus,
But by attempraunce inly virtuous.
Well auysed and wonderly prudent.
When that he knew the meaning and intent
And the conceyte of this Pallamydes,
He not to hastye nor to rekles,
But long abydyng through prudence and reso^
Within the bounds of his discrecion.
Whose tongue was only of sapyence,
So restreyned that no neclygence,
Of hasty speech sothly for to rape,
Might make a word his lyppes to escape,
Unadvised for nothing him asterte,
But it were first examyned in his heart.
For aye his speech in so thryfty wise,
Conveyed was by doctrine of the wise,
Under the reyne of wit and high prudence,
And after that by form of eloquence,
Always so said that reason went aforne,
So that no word was in his tale lorne.
And in this wise showing his sentence,
Tofore all in open audyence,
Said even thus when that all was peace,
Unto the king called Pallamydes.
Sothly quod he if so ye take heed,
Me seems plainly that it were no need,
Auysedly if he list aduerte,
To musen so nor grutchen in your heart,
Of all this host that I have governance,
Wisely considered every circumstaunce,
How I the estate which no man may deny,
Would in no manner never occupye,
By other title then free election.
Not interrupt by medyacyon,
Of brocage other roted upon mede.
Aye under meynt with favor or falshede.
Depeinte with color of true entencion,
As might support such false ambicion.
Of which thing here I will me quite,
Tofore you all that I am not to wit,
In any wise of so high offense.
But stand clear in my conscience,
Without spot of any such vain glory,
Touching the estate which is transytorye.
Yet nevertheless I have do my cure,
With all my wit to help and procure,
That every thing touching the comentie,
Persevere might in prosperyte.
Having the eye of my inward syghte,
Unto the estate of every manner wight,
That were committed to my governance,
With great labor and busy attendaunce.
Indifferent unto hye or low,
To help and fostre where as I might know,
That any stood in myschyefe or in neade.
Day and night for to taken head,
As I best could by aduysednesse,
Aye dylygent that none fell in distress.
For sothfastly who so look aryght,
My days thought and my watch a night,
And of my heart the inly aduertence,
Without fraud slouthe or neclygence,
Was faithfully with all my full might,
Me to acquyte to every manner wyghte,
Like his estate without excepcion.
So that no man justly of reason,
Greek nor other that is now a live,
Unto my gylte may duly do ascryue,
Any falsehede engyne or trecherye,
Of love or hate favor or flaterye.
In any cause named in special,
But that I have be a like egall,
To one and all with all my busye pain.
That no man has matter to complain,
For his party of hye or low estate,
And to deuoyde of rancour and debate,
Among you I have do my deuer,
In general and thing partyculer,
That hither toward nothing has mischeued
And god wot well it should not have agreued,
To my heart to set at any pryse,
You to have chose by your discrete advise,
Some other to this domynacion.
And I to have be in subjection,
With ease of heart and tranquillite.
Like other lords here of my degree.
And in my will fully have obeyed,
Like one of you utterly to have deyed,
In the quarrel that we have undertake.
If destyne had it so yshape.
I say in soth me is full loath to feign,
And ouermore also where ye plain,
That I was chosen without your assent,
Marvel not sith ye ne were present,
Nor long after if ye remember a right,
Toward Troy your way was not dyght.
If ye consider it was after nere,
Or that ye came passed full two year.
And so long to abide your coming,
It had been much to greeks hyndryng,
Passing harm and full great damage,
And huge lettynge unto our voyage.
For if we had without any wene,
On your coming tarried at Athene,
It lykely is ye can not well say nay,
To have be there yet unto this day.
And where as ye thought it be not credyble,
And eke affyrmed for an impossyble,
That Greeks should in any manner wise,
Dare take on them any great Empryse,
In your absence manly to acheue.
It is but wind nothing for to leave,
For so it be to you none offense,
The greeks have without your presence,
Through their force on water and on land,
Full many thing parformed with their hand.
And acheued through their worthynesse.
And of one thing that in me ye guess,
This to say that of my degree,
I should in heart so rejoice me,
Of this lordshyp and this great estate,
The more to be pompose and elate.
In chere or port that I it occupye,
But me to acquyte trewely and not lie,
And to deuoyde all suspection,
I will make a resygnacion,
Tofore you all for to excuse me.
Now be auised discretly for to se,
Whom ye list have again to morrow prime.
Without setting of any longer time.
Prolongyng forth or any more delay,
And thus they made an end of that day.
And went their way only for that night,
Till on the morrow yt Tytan shad his light.
At which time a counsel general,
The greeks held but most in special,
Of lords was there congregation,
As I have told for the election.
And when they were all met yfere.
Agamenon anon as ye shall hear,
Said even thus with sad countenance.
Lo syres quod he touching the governance,
That I have had and dominacion,
I have thereto with hole affection,
And clean entente do my business,
That every thing might in wilfulness,
To your increase persevere and contune.
Record I take of god and Fortune.
Which have conserved and the cause be,
You for to flower in felycyte,
So that your honor and your high noblesse
Stand hole and sound yet in sykernesse.
And while your fame is most in flourynge,
As seems me it is right well syttyng,
Mine estate fully to resygne.
Specially while fortune is beninge.
For of so many that be now present,
I know my self only insuffycient,
Without help for to bear the charge.
Men with to much may ouerlade a barge.
And namely when tempest is and rage,
And sith ye be so discrete and sage,
Of my burden let me be releued.
So that no man therewith be agreued.
But let us all of one entencion,
Without strife or discencion,
Chose such one that most be acceptable,
To you echone and most couenable,
You to govern by discrecion,
And they echone with hole affection,
Assented be to speak in general.
Here men may se how it is natural,
Men to delight in things that is new.
The trust of people is faint and untrue.
Aye indiscreet and full of doubleness.
And varyable of their sykernesse.
Aye awaytyng in their opinion,
After change and transmutacyon,
Selde or never standing hole in one,
To day they love to morrow it is gone.
In whom full selde is any sykernesse.
For only now of newfangelnesse,
That has embraced their affection,
They have instead of Agamenon,
Of new chose only of favor,
Pallamydes to be their governor.
And of all Greece like as they desire,
To have the Scepter of the hole Empire.
And to be called about in every cost,
The only Emperor of the Greeks hooste.
Right as tofore was Agamenon,
And this was fine and conclusyon,
For that day of their Parliament.
And after that every man is went,
To his lodgyng home the right way.
But in his tente wounded as he lay,
The hardy knight the fyerse Achylles,
When that he herd of Pallamydes,
From point to point and of the election,
He was displeased in his opinion.
And plainly thought as to his advise.
Agamenon was passyngly more wise,
And more discrete unto governance,
Than was the the other as to his pleasaunce.
And said it was none election,
But a manner subrogacyon.
Because him self in the parliament,
At the chesyng was not there present.
Arettyng it passing great offense,
That the choice was made in his absenee.
Wherewith he was of heart inly wroth.
But where so be that he be lefe or loath.
There is no more but in conclusion,
In his strength stood the election.
How king Pryam in person issued into battle, for thadue^ge of Hectors
death, where he did right valyauntly. Cap. xxx.
THe trewse passed and ywered out,
The wounded eke recured all about.
The next morrow after Pryamus,
In his heart was inly desirous,
With the greeks manly for to fight.
Hectors death tauenge if he might.
This old Pryam knightly in the fyelde,
That when Troyans in them self beheld,
The great will and the high courage,
Of him that was so far yronne in age.
They began rejoice and pluck up their heart,
And specially when they began aduerte,
His great manhood and his worthynesse.
His liuelyed and his high prowess.
And for his sake every manner man,
Began arm him in all the haste they can,
With Pryamus that day to live or deye,
An hundred thousand and fyfty of the town.
Like as Dares makes mencyowne.
And worthy knights they were euerychone
Without other that with Pryam gone.
And all before went Deiphobus,
And Paris next and then Pryamus,
Menon the king and worthy Eneas.
And alderlast came Pollydamas.
And as I find stern and full of pride.
Pallamydes came on the the other side,
Into the fyelde with many strong battle,
And first when each other began assail,
King Pryamus knyghtly his way chese,
Through the wards to Pallamydes
And him vnhorseth through his hye renown,
And like a knight he kylleth and bears down
The proud greeks where so that they rode.
Was none so hardy that his sword abode.
For so narowe he began them to coharte,
That their wards he made a sonder part.
On them he was so fell and furyous,
For he that day did dedesfull meruaylous.
In arms wrought. that wonder was to seen
And a maruayle how he may sustene,
Of so great age in the fyelde tendure.
For in credible was I you ensure,
To se how he through his great might,
The greeks put proudely to the flight.
And Deiphobus was also not behind,
Again his foen knightly as I find.
To acquyte him self and make the^ to go back,
And Sarpedowne in whom eke is no lack.
Yfallen is on Neptolonius,
The proudest greek and most surquedous,
And most famous as of strength and might,
The which agaynwarde rode full line right
To Serpedowne with a spear round,
And delyuerly smote him to the ground,
But Sarpedowne full yrous in his heart,
Without abode on his fete up sterte,
And Neptolonye in his ire all hot,
Thrughout the thighe with his sword he smote.
And than anon the king of Perce land,
That was so worthy and famous of his hand
Of Sarpedowne when that he took head,
Knyghtly to him restored has his stead.
Not withstandyng that Menelaus,
Was upon him passing despyteous.
And with him eke the Duke of Athenes,
Enclosed have among the great prese,
The king of Perce alas it should befall.
And slew him as he among them all,
Full knyghtly fought like a champyowne.
With multitude enclosed enuyrowne,
And he him self but alone alas,
All destitute in this mortal case.
Through whose mischefe they of Troy town
Began to withdraw till that Sarpedowne,
Has helped them to recure there land.
Full many Greek kyllyng with his hand.
And king Pryam so manly found at all,
With his sons called natural,
Which upon him where so that he rode,
The long day manfully abode,
Departing not plainly from his side.
And as the king and they together ride,
Full mortally the greeks they confound.
For Pryamus with many cruel wound,
Has slain of them many worthy man.
On horseback among them as he ran.
For there was none that day young nor old,
Of Troy town so hardy nor so bold,
Of none estate that has so well him borne,
Among Greeks or so well has him worn,
From point to point to reken every thing,
As has Pryam the noble worthy king,
For he alone was confusyon,
To the greeks and destruction.
Their outter mischief and discomfyture,
Before whose face they might not endure.
For things two in his mortal ire,
Inwardely have set him so a fire,
The hearty hate that he bare of old,
Unto greeks double many fold,
With the death had in remembrance,
Of worthy Hector by contynuaunce.
The which platly through his worthynesse,
With his sword he shope him to redress.
For fret of hate and constreynt of his pain,
Were verily thylke things twain,
By which that day who so look a right,
His force was doubled and his might,
Where through he took so cruelly vengeance,
That he the greeks brought to outtraunce.
And through his knyghthod put the^ to ye flight
But greeks then attones did their might,
By assent to assemble into one,
And for a sleyght a side out they gone,
Into a plain large and fair to se,
Between Pryam and Troy the city,
To fine only in their entenciowne,
Him to debar the enter of the town.
For every way the greeks have with set,
That they of Troy had tho be let,
At their repair the storye tells thus,
Ne had the manhood be of Priamus.
The which anon as any lion strong,
With his sword began ride them among,
And severed them with large wounds wide
And slew all tho that would his sword abide
Every where endelonge on the plain.
And Paris eke has them so belayne,
With mighty shote of his strong archers,
And with the pursuit of these Arbalasters,
That they ne might of the shote so kene,
The mortal harm abide nor sustene.
But began anon to fle out of the place,
And king Priam so narowe began the^ chase,
That of great need and necessite,
Through the slaughter and the cruelte,
Of his sword sharp whet and ground,
There was no Greek in the field yfounde,
But fled away eueriche to his tente,
And they of Troy be to their Cite went,
Because it drew fast toward night.
For Phoebus had bereued them his light,
And so the honor of his high victory,
The worship eke the laud and memory,
Perpetually and the palm also,
Priam the king has won and no mo.
For that day in release of his sorrow,
And as I read on the next morrow,
He has ysente out of Troy town,
For a trewse to Agamenowne.
Which granted was the self day at prime,
Albe thereof rehearsed be no time.
How long it last in the book express.
During the which they did their business,
Hertye labor and inward diligence,
For to ordain with great reverence,
How that the corpse of the worthy king,
Of Perce land without more taryinge,
With kingly honor out of Troy town,
Shall carried be into this regiowne.
To be buried with his predecessors,
With other kings of his progenitors.
The which thing was complete by ye advise
Of Alisaunder that called was Paris.
And first the corpse enbawmed richely,
Conveyed was and that full solempnely,
As write Guido with an huge route,
Of his knights ridinge him about,
Triste and heavy cladde in black echone,
And with the chare the right way they gone,
Toward Perce ledinge of this king,
The dead corpse toward his buryinge.
Which hallowed was like his estate royal.
And in this while the feast funeral,
Was hold also with great deuociowne,
Of worthy Hector within Troy town.
Like the custom used in tho days.
And the rites of their paynym lays.
The which feast as made is mention,
Fro year to year by reuolucion,
Yhalowed was the space of fourtnight,
With many flawme and many hydous light,
That brent enuiron in the sentuarye,
And called was the Aniuersarye,
For that it came about year by year,
A certain day in their Kalendere.
In which of custom for a remembrance,
The people should by continuance,
Plain and weep and also pray and read,
For their friends that before were dead,
Full piteously with their heyr to torn,
Mourninge in black and kneling aye aforne
The dead corpse of this worthy knight.
Which in his time so passinge was of might.
And this was done while the trewse dure,
So that the Greeks trustely might assure,
When that them list at good liberte,
Without danger enter this cite,
Day by day and Trojans might also,
Unto Greeks freely come and go.
AT which time with full great delight,
Has Achilles caught an appetite,
To enter and se the manner of the town.
Without wisdom or dtscresciowne,
For to behold plainly and to se,
Hoole the manner of this solempnite.
And forth he went on a certain day,
Toward Troy in all the haste he may.
Unarmed sothly as mine Auctour says.
Without assurance or any other faith,
Except the trewse who so be lyefe or loathe.
And first of all to the temple he gothe,
Of Apollo hallowed where was the feast.
Throughout the town down unto the lest.
That cleped was the Anyuersarye,
As ye have herd what should I longer tarry.
And many worthy present was thereat,
Amid the temple of high and low estate,
Lords and ladies of affecciowne,
From every part gathered of the town.
Now was the corpse of this worthy knight
As fresh of color kept unto the sight,
As lyfely eke and as quick of hew,
To behold as any rose new.
Through virtue only of the gummes sweet,
And the bawme that began about flete.
To every joint and each extremyte,
And at this feast and solempnyte,
Was Hecuba and young Pollicene,
So womanly and goodly on to seen,
With many other of high estate and low,
Tofore the corpse syttinge on a row,
With heyr untrussed cladde in wedes blake,
That ever in one such a sorrow make,
That routhe was and pity for to seen,
How they plain and the death bimeane,
Of worthy Hecor of knighthod ground and well.
But trow ye as Guydo list to tell,
That Pollicene in all her woeful rage,
Ychaunged has upon her visage,
Her native color as fresh to the sight,
As is the rose or the lelye white.
Other the freshenes of her lips red,
For all the tears that she began to shede.
On her chekes as any cristall clear.
Her heyr also resembling to gold wyere,
Which lay abroad like unto the sight,
Of Phoebus beams in her sphere bright.
When he to us does his light auale.
And aye she rent with her fingers small,
Her golden heir on her black wede.
Of which thing Achilles took good head,
And began marvel greatly in his thought,
How god or kind ever might have wrought,
In their works so fair a ceeature.
For him thought he might not endure,
To behold the brightness of her face.
For he felt through his heart pace,
The persinge streams of her eyes two,
Cupides darte has him marked so,
For love of her that in his desire,
He burnt as hot as does any fire,
And after soonewith sudden ire he quoke,
And always fix on her he had his look,
So that the arowe of the god Cupide,
Has perced him even through the side,
To the heart and gave him such a wound,
That never was likly to be sound,
And aye in one his look on her he cast,
As he durst and began to prese fast,
Toward her namely with his eye.
That him thought he must needs deye,
But if that he found in her some grace,
There was no gain for plainly in yt place,
Of new he was caughte in loves snare.
That of health and of all welfare,
He was despeyred in his heart so,
That he ne knew what was best to do.
Each other thing I do you well assure,
He set at naught and took of it no cure,
His thought was on her and no mo,
The long day thus went he to and fro,
Till Phoebus cheyre low began decline.
His golden axetre that so clear did shine,
This to say the son went down,
When Hecuba queen of Troy town,
And her daughter Pollycene also,
Out of the temple to the paleys go.
And aye Achilles on her had a sight,
While that he might till for lack of light,
He may no more have leisure oportune,
To look on her cursed be fortune,
For which in haste he maked has his went,
With his knights home unto his Tente.
Where he anon without more taryinge,
To bed goes full tryste in complayninge,
Aye in him self castinge up and down,
In his mind and eke in his reasowne,
From head to foot her beauty euerydell,
And in his heart he felt and knew full well,
That fynall cause of his languishing,
Was Pollicene of beauty most passinge.
For love of whom so much pay ne he felt,
That with the heat he thought his heart melt.
Aye on his bed walowinge to and fro.
For the constreynt of his hid woe,
For which almost him thought that he deyde,
And to him self even thus he seyde,
Alas quod he how me is woe begone,
That of my sorrow know end none.
For I suppose since the world began,
Ne was there never a more woeful man.
For I that whylom was of so great might,
So renowned of every manner wight,
Throughout the world both of high and low
For there was none in sothe that could know
A man in arms that was more famous,
Nor yet yholde more victorious,
Tofore this time remembered by no style,
Unto this day alas the hard while,
Another Hector plainly nor none other.
Of Pollicene that was the worthy brother.
That power had when they with me met,
For all their might me to ouersette.
Nor in the field my force for to daunte,
Here pryuely as I me dare auaunte,
But now alas a maid of tender age,
Has suddenly me brought in such a rage,
That with the streams of her eyes twain,
She perced has and cloven every vain,
Of my heart that I may not asterte,
For to be dead through constreynt of my smert
For who shall now wish me or teach,
Or who alas shall now be my leche,
Or who alas shall help me or save,
There is but death and after that my grave,
For other hope plainly is there none.
Save in her mercy alas and that is gone,
For another prayer treasour nor richesse,
Force nor might another high prowess,
Highness of blood birth nor kinrede,
May avail nor helpen in this need,
To meue her nor my sad truth,
Upon my woe ever to have routhe.
What new furye or inportune rage,
Has brought my hertin to such outrage,
Against which I can not now debate,
To love her best that deadly does me hate
And in good faith who wisely list aduert
Little wonder though she me hate of heart,
Sith I am come hither, fro so far,
On her kinrede for to make werre,
In the which to my confusyowne,
Her knightly brother most worthy of renown
Have fatally with mine hands slawe.
Which in this world had no fellow,
Of worthynesse nor of manlyheade.
Alas alas now may I quake and dread,
And of my life fallen in dispeyre.
For how should I be bold to have repeyre
Or dare alas come in their syghte,
I woeful wretch I unhappy wighte,
Or how shall I be hardy to appear,
In the presence of her eyes clear,
Certys I se none other mean weye,
But finally that I must needs deye.
So dispeyred I stand on every side.
Of other help I con me not provide,
And right anon with scaldinge sighs deep,
This Achilles braste out for to weep,
With deadly cheer pale and funeral;
And with his face turned to the wall,
That routhe was and pity for to seen,
The hertye furye of his pains kene.
For so oppressed he was in his thought,
Of life nor death that he rought naught.
And this continued till it drew to night,
That Titan has withdraw his clear light,
And ever in one like this woeful man,
Ilyche like of color pale and wan,
Without sleep so fretinge was his sorrow.
Till Lucifer on the next morrow,
Tofore the son with his beemes clear,
Full lustely began for to appear.
In the oryent when this Achilles,
Impatient without rest or peace,
Quakinge aye in his fever new,
As it was seen plainly in his hew.
Till he abrayde of anguishe suddenly,
And called one that was with him pryue.
And of counsel whom he trusts well,
And unto him he tells euerydell,
Fro point to point with him how it stood.
And sent him forth because he could his good
On his message straight to Troy town,
With full advise and informaciowne,
Of this mattere to Hecuba the queen.
Through his wisdom for to be a mean,
If so he might by his discrecion,
Find any way as of salvation,
Unto his lord that he loved so.
And to the queen anon he is go,
And his matter wisely began conueye,
Tofore or he of grace would her preye,
That she enjoys to give him audience,
For in his tale there was none offense.
He was no fool nor new for to lere,
Wherefore the queen goodly began him here,
Of all that ever him likes for to said,
There was no word ylost nor spoke in vain.
For his tale no man could amend,
And craftily he began to discende,
To the substance and told clearly out,
With premises full well brought about,
That finally in conclusyon,
The chief he said of his entencion,
Effectuelly if it would be,
Was for to make peace and unity,
Atwene Greeks and the folk of Troy.
To which thing he knew no better weye,
Than of the werre for their alder ease,
By his wit prudently to appease,
The mortal strife and the bitter rage,
By allyaunce only of marriage,
If that her list this wise worthy queen,
That her daughter fair Pollicene,
May wedded be unto Achilles.
Where through their might be a fynall peace,
If Hecuba by her discrescion,
Through her wit and medyacion,
And her prudence might about bring,
That Pryamus were fully assentinge,
That Achilles might his daughter wyue.
So that it might parfourmed be as blyue,
Like as tofore made is mencin,
By covenant only and condition,
That the Greeks shall their werre let,
And suffer him to lyuen in quyete.
If the marriage of these ylke twain,
Parfourmed be and knyt up in a chain.
And when ye queen has known his intent,
Full soberly by good aduysement,
Tofore or that any word asterte,
Full pyteously she sighed in her heart,
And at the last with a sobre cheer,
Even thus she said to the messagere,
My friend quod she touching thy request,
I can no more make the beheste,
But at the least I will condescende,
What lies in me to bring to an end,
Thy lords will with all my heart entiere.
But hereupon I must first requere,
The kings will if he list to assente.
To the purpose for which thou art sent.
And ouermore I must wit also,
If that Paris be willing eke thereto.
Of which thing with every circumstaunce,
I will my self maken enqueraunce,
Full faithfully of Priam and Paris,
The mean while what is their advise,
Without more within days three.
At which time come again to me,
From Achilles if so he will the send,
And finally thou shall know an end,
Of this matter and an answer plain.
And home he goes to Achilles again,
With full glad cheer his lord the more to please,
And for to set his heart at better ease,
Auysedly of high discrescion,
He has so made his relacion,
And told his tale in so thrifty wise,
As he that could his words so deuyse,
To bring in hope into his lords heart,
With full relese of his pains smerte,
Whereby he made his sorrow to withdraw,
And thus while hope began to adawe,
Amid his break. and Hecuba the queen,
To Priam spoke of this Pollycene,
Touching the sonde of this Achilles,
And of his profre for to make a peace,
She told him all and forgate nothing,
Whereof astoned Priamus the king,
Spoke not a word half an hours space,
But in him self began inly to compace.
Full prudently what it might mean,
That Achilles would have Pollycene.
Unto his wife aye wonderynge more and more
And at the last syghinge wonder sore,
He has disclosed the conceyt of his heart,
And said alas how sore it does me smerte,
To remember that I may have no peace,
The great offense of this Achilles,
Toward me plainly when that he,
Slew worthy Hector through his crueltye,
That holy was upon every side,
The hoole assurance governor and guyd
Of me and mine platly for to said.
And therwithall of mine eyes twain,
He was alone the very sothfast light.
Shield and protector through his great might
And his manhood again the mortal rage,
Of Greeks werre in my crooked age,
But now alas to my confusyowne,
He slain is so worthy of renown.
By Achilles which may not out of mind.
That in my heart I can never find,
To be allied with my mortal foo,
Root and ground of all my sorrow and woo.
It were full hard my heart to appease,
To love him that causes mine unease.
On every half where through my cruel foen
The proud Greeks hearted be echone.
Against me now Fortune is contrayre.
Turned of new my quarrel to apayre.
That causes Greeks wood and furyous,
On me alas to be presumptuous.
Only for Hector is me berafte away.
But sythen I no other choice may,
Against heart though it for anger ryue,
In this matter assaye I shall to strive,
Though me be loathe and sytteth me full sore,
Yet to eschew harms that be more,
Which lykly be hereafter for to fall,
And for to save mine other sons all,
I will consent that this Achilles,
So that he moke a true fynall peace,
Atwene Greeks and also this Cite,
Without more plainly how that he,
Have unto wife my daughter Pollycene.
But lest that he any treason mean,
My will is first how so that it wend,
Of his behest that he make an end,
Without fraud this is mine advise.
To which counsel assenteth eke Paris,
And more rather in conclusyon,
For there was made none excepcioon,
In this Trete of the queen Heleyne,
That Menelaye never should atteyne,
Her to recure again unto his wife.
For which Paris without noise or strife,
Or grutchynge other unto this entente,
Within him self was fully of assente,
Thereby hoping without fear or dread,
Perpetually Heleyne to possede.
Right at his lust and no man shall say nay.
And after this upon the third day,
Achilles has to wit of this mattere,
To Hecuba sent his messingere.
And she him told the answer of the king,
Ceryously gynninge and endinge.
And how that he assenteth well thereto,
And Paris eke and she her self also,
If it so were plainly she him told,
Touching the peace that the purpose hold.
And first that he his heste bring about,
That they be sure thereof need not doubt,
That he shall have his purpose euerydele,
If that he work prudently and well.
And hereupon with informaciowne,
This messenger out of Troy town,
Without abode in all the haste he may,
To Achilles held the right way.
And told him hole the effect of this mattere,
And he always feruente and entiere,
In heart brent as hole as any glede,
And saw there was none other way to speed
But only peace as ye have herd me tell.
And aye his breast with sighs began to swel,
For the only love of this Pollycene,
And cast always among his throes kene,
To his purpose a way for to find,
And whiles he was busy in his mind,
How he should his purpose bring about,
And in him self casts many doubt,
Anon despair in a rage up sterte,
And cruelty caught him by the heart,
Which has him throw into such a were,
That him though it was in his power,
All his beheste to fulfill in deed.
Except he had well the less dread.
Every thing to put in certain,
Wening no Greek would his lust with feign
From his desire to be varyable,
And to him self thus was he favorable,
For to parfourme and nothing to deny,
All that was lusty to his fantasye.
As is the manner of lovers euerychone.
That they suppose to acheue anon,
What thing it be that they list take on hand,
In what disioynt that the matter stand,
All though it be a very impossyble,
In their folly they be aye so credible.
And so Achilles trusts finally,
For to fulfill his hestes utterly,
Supposinge aye for his worthynesse,
For his manhood and his high prowess,
In which he did him self gloryfye,
Some what of pride and of surquedrye,
How the Greeks shoulden be despayred,
Both of their trust and their might appeyred,
Upon Trojans to wynnen any land,
If it so were that he withdrewe his hand,
To help them and therwithall also,
Home into Greece that they wolden go,
From the syege only for his sake.
And their quarrel vterly forsake.
But it so were this day fyerse Achille,
With them abode the cite for to spylle.
For which thing the lords by assente,
Assembled were to heren the entente,
Among them all of this Achilles.
By the byddinge of Pallamydes,
And when they were gathered all yfere,
Tofore them all like as ye shall hear,
THis Achilles has his tale begone.
And said syres that so much konne,
Both of wisdom and of high prudence,
So renowned eke of sapyence,
Throughout the world and of discreciowne,
And be so worthy also of renown.
Kings and dukes of whose royal name,
From East to West floureth yet the fame.
Both of knyghthode and of manlyhead.
To that I say I pray you taken head.
This to say if that ye consider,
The plain intent of our coming hither,
By good auyse that our entencyon,
Had no ground founded on reason,
Nor cause roted on no manner right.
If it so be that ye lift up your sight,
And aduerte clearly in your mind,
Full far a back wit was set behind,
Prudent lokyng and aduysenesse,
For first when that we of folly hastynesse,
Took upon us to come from so far,
Again Troyans for to gynne a werre.
And to ieoparte our lives euerychone,
For the love of one man alone.
Ye wot all I trow whom I mean.
King Menelay defrauded of his queen.
To tell troth me list not for to feyne,
For ye well wot only that Heleyne,
Was ground and gynnyng of all this debate.
For whom so many worthy of estate,
Recurlesse of any remedy,
Life and good have put in ieopardye.
Our lands left and eke our regyownes,
Our cities also and our rich towns.
Which by our absence stonden desolate,
Wives and children eke disconsolate.
In woe abide mourning and distress,
Whiles that we here the soth to express,
From day to day beset on every ride,
Lie in the field and our death abide.
In sorrow and care in labor and in woe,
And with all this ye wotte well also,
Since first time that the werre began,
Of our greeks how many worthy man,
Has lost his life through deaths fatal wou^d
That hitherto have might lived and be sound
At home in Greece assured well in joy.
If they ne had comen unto Troy.
That to remember it is full great pity,
And over this I say also for me,
Among Troyans in their cruel mode,
I have so much lost of my blood.
That has full often made pale of hew.
This other day also grene and new,
I had of Hector such a mortal wound,
With a quarrel sharp what and ground,
Above the thygh so kene was the head,
The same day before that he was deed,
Of very hap as it was yshape,
That from the death uneath I might escape.
Which yet all fresh is upon me seen.
Large and wide and as yet but grene.
The smerte of which I yet full sore compain.
And in good faith me seems that Heleyne
If ye aduerte wisely in your thought,
With such a pryse should not have be bought.
Where through our life and our good yfeare,
And our honor are yput in were.
And dreadfully hangen in ballaunce.
For if that ye in your remembrance,
Conceive aryght and casten up and down,
The sudden change and reuoluciowne,
That fallen has sith the werre began,
The slaught and death of many worthy man,
That for her sake has here lost his life.
And yet the worste of this mortal strife,
Does most rebounde into our damage.
To disencrease and eke disauauntage,
And lykely is daily to be more,
If ordenaunce be not made therefore.
And remedy shape on outher side.
By fine only that Heleyne do abide.
With them of Troy still here in the town.
And let us cast by good inspectiowne,
For our ease some other manner way,
So that the king called Menelay,
Chese him a wife in some other land.
Like his estate by suraunce or by bond.
Under wedlock confyrmed up of new,
That unto him will be found true.
Sith that we without gylte or sin,
May him by the law from this Heleine twyn.
For of diverse causes be ynowe,
Thrughout ye world of every wight yknowe.
Of auoutry for the foul vice,
That it to law is no prejudice,
Though Menelay justly her forsake.
When so his list and an other take.
That shall him both better queme and please
And so to us it shall be full great ease.
When the werre is brought to an end.
Which lykely is many man to shende.
If it so be that it forth contune.
The great labor is so importune.
That we ne shall no while mow sustene.
For this is soth withouten any wene,
Troyans yet be flourynge in their might.
And with them have full many worthy knighte.
To help them of hye and low degree,
And therwithall so strong in their cite,
On every part without and eke within,
That we are not lykely for to win,
In our purpose though we ever abide.
Wherefore by wisdom let us voyden pride.
And wylfulnesse only of prudence,
To have the eye of our aduertence,
To our profyt more then vain glory.
And while our honor shines by victory,
A wisdom is to withdraw our hand.
Since we may not constrayne by no bond,
Fortunes whele for to abide stable.
Wherefore I read or she become mutable,
This gery goddess with her double chere,
Let us give up such thing as lies in were.
Whiles that we may our alder worship save,
For of the werre the laud yet we have.
Consider well how by your manhead,
Our most foe Hector is now dead.
And while that we in our honor flower,
My counsel is before fortune loure,
As I said ere to change her bright face,
While that we best stand in her grace,
By one assent and one oppynyon,
Without any contradiction,
Of heart and will both of one and all,
Or our honor on any party pall,
Into Greece that we home return.
For if that we longer here soiourne,
On the quarrel that we have long sewed,
Doutles it may not be eschewed,
Full great damage this without fail,
Or we have done shall follow at the tail.
Wherefore best is our folly up resygne,
And while our hap is welfull and benynge,
Most blandyshynge and of face fair,
The time is best to make our repair,
While that we stand in party and in all,
With our enmyes in honor perygall.
And fer above plainly if that we,
Could have an eye to our felicite.
While that it is in his ascencion.
But lest some man will make objection,
That we may not so our honor save,
To repair plainly but we have,
Helayne again that is cause of all.
To which thing anon answer I shall.
If any man in his fantasye,
To dishonor or to vyllanye.
Arrecte would in any manner kind,
We to go home and leave her behind.
Shortly to say I hold it be no shame,
Sith that we have one as great of name,
As is Heleyne and of birth as good,
Among us ycome of kings blood.
Sister to Pryam lord of Troy town.
Exiona whom that Thelamowne,
In keeping has if I shall not feyne,
In Troy town as Paris has Heleyne.
And sith now it may be none other,
Let the tone be set again the the other.
And the surplus of old enmyte,
Betwyxe us and Troy the cite.
My counsel is for our both ease,
By one assent wisely to appease.
This all and some and that we hence wend.
I can no more my tale is at an end.
To whom anon king Menelaus,
For very ire wood and furyous.
And king Thoas the duke eke of Athene,
As they that might no longer him sustene,
To suffer him they were so reckles,
Spoke all attones unto Achylles.
Not only they but through inpacyence.
The court perturbed without prouydence.
With tumulte gonnen to repreue,
This Achilles and proudely them co^meue
Against him and his opinion.
And said shortly in conclusyon,
Unto his read they ne would assent.
Nor condescende to nothing that he mente,
To be governed by him in this case.
For which thing anon Achylles was,
So full of ire and rancour in his heart.
That sodaynely from his see he sterte,
And went his way as he were in a rage.
Tryste and pale and a wood vysage.
And shortly said for him like not feign,
That he ne would longer do his pain,
To help them how so that they speed,
Again Troyans for no manner need.
And bad anon this hardy Achilles,
To his knights called Myrmydones,
That they no more with spear nor with shield
To help greeks enter into fyelde.
But keep the^ close at home within thetr tente,
Thus in his ire he gave commandment,
To all his men as ye have herd deuyse.
Them to withdraw at every high empryse,
When so ever they go into battle.
And in this while scarsenesse of vyttayle,
Fell in the host of flesh of bred and wine.
That many Greek brought unto his fine.
For they ne might endure for distress,
Constreynt of hunger did the^ so oppress.
Till at the last king Pallamydes,
As he that was in nothing reckeles,
Has thereupon made purueyaunce,
Remedy and redye ordinance,
And by assent and counsel of echone,
He has sent wise Agamenon,
The worthy styng to Messa there beside,
A little I Will only to provide,
For the greeks if he might speed.
Them to releue in this great need.
And Thelephus king of that land,
Of gentylnesse has put to his hand,
As he that was large and wonder free,
And renowned of much humanite.
To succor them commaundyng aye anon,
His purueyours in all have to gone,
From every party about enuyron,
Through all the lands of his regyon,
And faithfully to search every cost,
To take up vytayle for the greeks hooste.
And after that full hastily he made,
To stuff their ships plainly and to lade,
With every thing that was necessary,
To the greeks and by water carye,
At request of king Agamenon,
Without taryinge or delacyon.
And so the king with plente of vytayle,
Fraughte and ylade began anon to sail,
Toward the syege he and his meynee.
Aye costynge by the grekyshe see.
The wind was good and the king as blyue
With his nauye at Troy did aryue.
In few days and Greeks anon right,
Of his repeyre were full glad and light.
Of his exployt and his good speed.
That he so well has borne him in this need.
And after this Pallamydes anon,
As says Guydo is to his ships gone,
For to consider and look all about,
Where need was within and eke without.
Any of them to amend or repare,
As he that list for no cost to spare.
In every thing without neclygence.
Touching his charge to do his dylygence,
Till the trewse fully were out run.
And the werres new again begone.
Which many man sothly dear abought,
And ceryously to write how they wrought,
My purpose is plainly in sentence,
Under supporte of your pacyence.
DVrynge in one the deadly cruel hate,
That stynte may nor cesse by no date.
Atwyxe Greeks and them of the town.
To great damage and destructiowne,
On outher part feeling full vnswete.
Till on a day they cast for to mete,
As they were wont proudely with spear and shield
With their wards entering into fyelde,
Armed full bright upon outher side.
And enbatayled stout and full of pride,
Full knyghtly have chose their ground and take
Their large baners with the wind yshake,
Till they together suddenly have met.
And alderfyrst Deiphobus has set,
Fresh and lusty and of heart yrous.
Upon a king called Creseus,
And of envy the storye tells than,
On horseback as they together ran.
Deiphobus first with his spear as blyue,
Throughout the breast even did him ryue.
Unto the heart that he spoke no more.
The death of whom Greeks plain sore.
And for his love such a woe they make,
That all astoned they have the fyelde forsake
And began anon unto their tents flee.
The which in sothe when they of Troy see,
Upon the chase fast began them speed.
Unto time that worthy Dyomede,
And with him eke the king Pallamydes,
Of hye despyte cruel and mercyles,
With twenty thousand worthy knights al,
Upon Troyans suddenly are fall.
And mortally made them lose their way,
And to resort home again to Troy.
And eke with greeks fell and furious,
The same time came Thelamonius,
That hight Ayax the strong knightly man,
And like a Lion among them as he ran,
Upon Troyans and them over set,
Casually in his way he met,
Cecylien lusty fresh and light,
And of his time a wonder manly knight.
And son was to Pryam as I read,
Whom Thelemon pryckyng on his stead,
Slew cruelly with his sword anon.
Rasynge his arm from the shuldre bone.
That he alas fell dead in the fyelde.
The death of who^ when Deiphobus beheld,
Wodder anon then Tygre or Lion,
With a spear rauhe to Thelamon,
And smette him so through his plates bright,
Of very force that he made him light,
And lose his sadell be set among the prese.
The which stroke when Pallamydes,
Beheld and saw and clearly began aduerte,
Irous and wood with a furyous heart,
Cast him anon to avenge Thelamowne.
On Deiphobus full worthy of renown.
And mortally his guerdon him to quyte,
And with a spear ground for to byte,
Sharp and kene large round and square,
Full cruelly or that he was ware,
Through his harneys without more areste,
Deiphobus he smote so in the breast,
That with the stroke he brake ye shafte a two.
So that the tronchone and the head also,
Left in his breast that there was no way,
Finally but that he must deye.
There was none help nor remedy at all,
The wound was so cruel and mortal,
That with the life he might not abide.
And in this while Paris came beside,
Of adventure while this Deiphobus,
Was of his wound so inly anguyshous,
And began in have for to approach nere,
With face pale and right an heavy chere,
And for his distress wept pyteously.
And his knights commanded hastily,
His wounded brother a side soft and fear,
In all have that they should forthwt do bear.
Out of the wards from the great prese.
Unto his pain for to do relese,
For to a brethe him at leyser and auente.
In open air and they unto him went,
Maugre the greeks where he wounded was
And bare him out a full easy pase,
Toward the wall fast by the town,
And with great dole and lamentaciowne,
Full softely on the ground him laid.
Till at the last this deadly man abrayde,
With mortal look and face funeral,
And there pyteous so that each ball,
Began turn up of his deadly eye,
And even thus to Paris he began seye.
Oh brother mine whom that I loved so,
Have now pity and rewe upon my woe,
Of kyndnesse and of brotherheade,
And to my words of routhe take now head,
Sith we by death must a sonder twynne.
For Attropose shall no longer spynne,
My lives threde but the knotte break,
Wherefore brother I pray the to be wreke,
Upon my death or I hense pace.
If that thou list to do me such a grace,
Of kyndnesse yet or I be dead.
Out of my breast or this speres head,
Be rent away that thou avenged be,
Upon my foe as I trust in the.
That I may wit he be dead or I,
And that his spyryte it pass finally,
And first discende deep down in hell.
Eternally with Pluto for to dwell.
Myd his bounds that derke been and low.
That finally so that I may know,
That he be dead there is no more to say,
I give no force how soon that I deye.
To whose request Paris took good head*
And into fyelde fast began him speed,
For thought and woe pyteously weeping,
While his brother lay there lanquyshynge.
Not awaytynge but only after death,
Upon the point to yelden up the breath.
And with his knights Paris up and down
The wards sought about enuyrowne,
Till at the last Pallamydes he fond.
With Sarpedon fyghtyng hand of hand.
Now was this king this worthi Sarpedown
Come in defense of them of Troy town.
Which of his hand was a noble knight,
And while that he with all his full might,
Most busy was Pallamydes to press,
Like a Lion whetted with woodnesse,
Pallamydes in heart not a ferde,
Let fly at him with his sharp sword,
So myghtely that it was a wonder,
For he his thygh parted has a sonder,
And smote of by the herd bone.
That Sarpedon fill down dead anon.
So that Troyans when that he was slawe,
Were compelled of force them to withdraw,
Through the pursuit of king Pallamydes.
Which upon them was so merciles.
And as cruel as a wood Lion.
After the death of king Sarpedon.
The which alas when Paris did espy,
He marked him with a cruel eye,
And hente a bow that passyngly was strong
And with an arowe to his tyller long,
Entoxycat with venym in the head,
That whom he smote therewith was but dead
And hytte him so in the auentayle,
Throughout the stuff and the thick mayle,
Into the throat that it began through pace,
That he fell dead in the self place,
Pallamydes this manfull worthy knight.
Where through Greeks took them to the flight
And made a noise and a woeful cry,
The death complaynyng wonder piteouslye,
Of their lord and mighty governor.
But late chose to be their Emperor,
Their chief socour and sovereign refute,
But now alas they stand destitute,
Of governance broke and disarayed,
Without guide right as sheep dismayed,
Disconsolate and comfortless yshent.
That each of them flies unto his tente.
And they of Troy sued on the chase,
On horseback a wonder huge pace,
And merciles slew them as they fle.
On every side that pity was to se.
Without mercy or any other grace.
For like the Lions they began them enchace.
Till they compelled of necessyte,
Constrained were through their cruelte,
To turn again and them self diffende.
And they of Troy down anon discende,
Of horseback even upon the plain,
And attones there was none other gain,
They began the greeks proudely to outraye,
And cruelly do them so disamaye,
That finally there gayneth no diffence,
So mortal was the mighty violence,
Of Troyans that Greeks so diffoyle,
And alderfyrste at leyser they dispoyle,
The greeks tents of gold and richesse,
At which time Troylus began him dress,
And Paris eke down to their nauye,
With thirtye thousand in their company.
Kyllyng all tho plainly that they met,
And on their ships wild fire they set.
That to the wall of Troy the Cite,
Men might well the hydous flawme se.
And all had gone to destruction,
Ne had Ayax ycalled Thelamon,
Through his manhood and knyghtly excellence
Come anon and made resystence,
Of the greeks with many worthy knight,
And tho of new began the mortal fight.
Atwene Troyans and the greeks stout,
The red blood raylyng all about,
Upon the plain so hydously they blede,
And here and there both in length and bread;
Dead and maimed and full pale of sight,
Upon the soil full many noble knight.
Atwyxe them so cruel was the hate.
For in their fight together they debate,
As wild bores even so they fare.
For none of them list other for to spare.
And in the fyelde worthy Thelamowne,
Through his knyghthod and his high renown
So manly bare him greeks to deffende,
That no man might in manhood him amend.
Through all ye world though men had sought.
For he that day in his person has wroughte,
Meruailes in arms through his great might
That in sothnesse Greeks anon right,
Without him had finally be shent,
And their ships attones lost and brent,
Through the pursuit of Paris that day,
And worthy Troilus yt made such affraye,
Among them through high prowess.
That fyfty shyypes Guydo does express,
Were lost and brent or that Thelamowne,
To reskus came with his knights down.
Unto the sea the remenaunt for to save.
But for all that Troyans that day have,
The higher hand of this mortal fight.
Through the force and the great might.
Of Troylus only which has so many slain,
Of the greeks in soth that they were feign,
Them to withdraw and the field to let.
For in abydyng they fond full vnswete.
Wherefore they began for to lose their place,
Among which the kings son of Trace
That Heber hight wounded to the death,
That he ne might uneath draw his breath,
With a spear in his breast styckynge.
To Achylles he came in complaynyng,
Unto his tent even there he lay,
Which in the fyelde was not all that day.
For the sake only of Pollycene.
The love of whom was so sharp and kene,
Aye at his heart ylyke grene and new.
To whom Heber with a mortal hew.
Complayneth sore arrettyng cowardyse,
And in manhood a very trewandyse,
That he that day might so for shame,
Withdraw him self in hindering of his name
Out of the fyelde to him full great reprefe,
Of the greeks seeing the mischief,
That they were in. and confusyon,
Upon the brinke of their destruction.
Abroad the field to se them so lie dead,
And list not ones for to take heed,
Of his knyghthode greeks to releue.
And while Heber began him thus repreue,
And the spear which in his body was,
All suddenly was drawn out alas,
With Eye up cast in rancoure and in ire,
Full pyteously Heber did expyre.
In the presence of this Achylles.
And therewith came in a sudden res,
Into his tente a certain knight of his,
Of whom Achylles axeth how it is,
Among the greeks and clearly how it stood.
And he answered full Irours in his mode,
Certes quod he full unhappily,
For they of Troy have so cruelly,
Our greeks all this day in their fight,
Full shamefully put unto the flyghte.
So many slain alas and welawaye,
That uneath none escape might away,
Unhurt maimed or withouten wound,
So fell on us Troyans were yfounde.
And of them eke was such multitude.
That I suppose shortly to conclude,
This day there was to my opynyowne,
Not left a man within Troy town.
That able was to stand in battle.
With spear or sword his enmye to assail,
I Wene in soth but they been come out,
With us to fight there was so huge a route.
That we ne might of force take on hand,
In the fyelde against them for to stand.
But now my lord it draws unto night,
That they be faynte any more to fight.
If it were pleasyng to your worthynesse,
To your manhood and your high noblesse,
To take on you to your encrese of fame,
For evermore to getten you a name,
And there withal for your own glory,
Perpetually to be in memory,
To rise up and arm you anon,
And sodaynely upon them to gone,
Feeble and weak to make resystence,
Against your manly famous excellence.
There were no more but we were victours,
For ever more and very conquerours.
During the world to be in remembrance.
And they for ever brought unto outraunce,
In sothfastnesse I have of it no dread.
But Achylles took of him no head,
Nor to Heber that lay before him dead,
Full cold and struck of color like to lead.
Nor ones list to give him audience,
Nor unto him have his aduertence.
There may no word in his heart mine,
To that he said to maken him enclyne.
For utterly even like he ferde,
As though he no manner word ne herd.
For through his ears it passed as a sown.
Lo here the manner and condiciowne,
The very custom and the plain vsaunce,
Of these lovers hangyng in a trance.
Honor, worship, manhood and prowess
Strength, might, fame and hardynesse,
Increase of name virtue and victory,
Knyghthode, noblesse, and in arms glory,
All these mighty can loueley aside,
Such is the might of the god Cupyde.
Which hertes hye with his hoke can sease,
So loath they are plainly to displease,
Outher in chere or in countenance.
In will or deed or disobeysaunce.
To her that is their sovereign lady dear.
For with a look of her eyes clear,
She can full well daunte all their pride.
For Venus soon so can provide,
His arrows kene to perce nerfe and vain,
And them enlace in his fyry chain,
That only through his importable charge,
They be restrained for to go at large.
Which cause was this day doubtless,
That this noble hardy Achylles,
Would not withouten any wene,
Come in the fyelde for dread of Polycene.
Lest that she were offended in her heart.
If any thing escaped or asterte,
This Achylles through mysgouernaunce.
And whiles he hengeth thus as in balaunce,
The greeks faught with them of the twone,
Till bright Phoebus was at goinge down,
That Troyans of necessytye,
For lack of light enter the city.
And while that they homewarde be repeyred
Lay Deiphobus of his life dispeyred.
Compleynyng aye on his deadly wound.
And when Paris and troylus have him found
In that myschyefe they began weep and cry,
As they would for very routhe dye.
With woeful noise and with pyteous sown,
The salt tears began to run down,
On their chekes upon outher side.
And whiles they upon him abide,
This wounded man began draw to his end.
Whose spyryte was ready for to wend,
Out of his breast and his weary ghost,
Full hastily into another cost,
With deadly eyes turned up so down.
When that he knew by relacyowne,
That Paris has Pallamydes yslawe.
Anon he bad that they should out draw,
The large tronchone with the stelen head.
And there with all anon he fell down dead.
And with the corpse they began them fast speed
Toward the town but for it is no need.
The dole to write and lamentaciowne,
That made was for the noble Sarpedowne,
Through the city and namely of the king,
And of the queen ever in weeping,
Of his brethren and his systers dear.
It were but vain to rehearse it here.
But Pryam has with great dylygence,
Two towmbes of royal excellence,
For Deyphobus and king Sarpedowne,
With many image graven enuyron,
And many a knotte koruen here and yonder.
And buried them but a little a sonder,
Like the custom of their rytes old.
And whiles they the feste halowe and hold,
That called is the feste funeral,
The Greeks have do make in special,
A rich toumbe to the worthy king,
Pallamydes and for his buryinge.
Solempnely made ordinance,
Among them as it was vsaunce,
And with great dole and pyteous heaviness,
They have this king of great worthynesse,
Royally brought to his sepulture.
And for they might long not endure,
Without an head and a governor,
They chosen have to their Emperor,
By one assente and affection,
The worthy king the wise Agamenon.
And after they made no lettynge,
They of Troy the next day ensuynge,
With their wards in to field to gone,
Fully purposed to fight with their foen,
And greeks manly in the face them met.
But worthy Troylus so them over set,
That greek was none shortly for to tell,
Thilke day before him might dwell.
So cruelly he began them for to chase.
For where he came or rode in any place,
They fled his sword of their life in doubt
His young knights ridinge him about,
Such as he was vsaunt for to lead,
And ever in one the greeks blood the shede.
Which like a stream disteined all the plain
And all this while was so huge a rain,
The same day and so huge a myste,
That every man has his fellow myste.
Specially upon the greeks side,
That for the storm and their wounds wide
And for the manhood of this Trojan knight.
Worthy Troilus so fresh, so young, and light
They were coact through his cruelte.
Maugre their might for dred of death to fle,
To their tents succor for to find,
Troyans aye pursuynge behind,
Iull mortally wish a stern pase,
But for the storm they cease of the case,
And home repair to their Eitie strong,
Till on the morrow that the lark song,
That Troylus efte most manly to battle,
The greeks new cast him for to assail.
And Guydo wryt this young champyowne
Thylke day as he rode up and down,
Among his foen through his high renown
that there ne was king duke earl nor barown,
With his sword where so that he wend,
That of their life he made a mortal end,
All the while that Phoebus gave his light.
Till at the last that it drew to night,
That he to Troy repayreth manfully.
And seven days suynge by and by,
This life he led with his knights fell,
Upon greeks as Guydo can you tell.
Aye new and new he began them so confound
His cruel sword was so kene ground,
That they ne might in his mortal tene,
Before his sight abide nor sustene.
Nor the vengeance that he on them took,
For where he rode the weye they forsook,
In his trase the renges were so read.
Of them in soth that in the field lay dead.
For which slaughte and confusyowne,
The greeks new sent to the town,
For a trewse to Pryamus the king.
And he anon granted their axynge,
For two months fully by the assent,
Of all the lords of his parliament.
Whereof they made full relacion.
The enbassadours to Agamenon,
And to their lodgyng after forth they went.
But how that he unto Achylles sent,
The mean while his messangers wise,
So as I can I shall anon deuyse.
AGamenon as Guydo list endyte,
His lords sent Achylles to vysyte,
For certain causes like as ye shall here.
Which in the storye be rehearsed here.
And with Vlixes and worthy Diomede,
Duke Nestor went plainly as I read,
To fine only by their counsellyng,
Into his heart that they might bring,
And endure him to have a fantasye,
To be willing thorugh his chyualrye,
With them to stand as he has do toforne.
That have so many of Troy men ylorne.
For lack only of his high presence.
And Achylles with dygne reverence,
Received them and with right knightly chere
And after that when they were set yfeare,
Like their degree anon in adventure,
While Vlixes full of eloquence,
Began his tale prudently deuyse.
To Achylles saying in this wise.
Sir Achylles most renowned of glory,
Throughout the world to be in memory.
And of his knyghthode very shoures and well
Displease it not now that I shall tell,
To your noble famous excellence,
Nor to your ears let be none offense,
That I shall say but of goodlyhead,
Pacyently that ye will take heed,
To my words said of heart and thought,
I you ensure for I feign naught.
This to say if ye remember well.
The first cause and purpose every dell,
Of the greeks if ye have mencyon,
Was fully set by one entencyon,
As well of you as of us pardye.
When we come first to this city.
Kings princes I except none.
Of which in soth to reckon euerychone,
Your self was to speak in special,
One of the first and most pryncypall.
Assented full how Troy the Cite,
Through our manhood destroyed should be.
Perpetually brought unto ruin.
But now of new I note what does enclyne
Your worthynesse suddenly to varye.
And to our purpose for to be contrary.
Consider first of you that be so sage,
The wrongs done and the great damage,
In greeks land of them of the town.
Conspyryng aye to our destructiowne.
If ye aduerte wisely in your thought,
That slain have and to an end brought,
Full many worthy sith gone full yore,
And of treasour that no man may restore.
Dispoyled us and brought in great distress.
Our goods raught our gold and our richesse*
Our ships brent through their cruelte.
And to all this alas ye list not se.
Now that they be which may not be delayed
Through your manhood finally outtrayed,
Since ye have slain their hope their suffisau^ce
Hector in whom was all their affyaunce.
Fully their trust and diffence also.
And Deyphobus also is a go,
And lykely are more to be apeyred,
Fro day to day and finally dispeyred.
So frowardly fortune on them loureth.
And now your honor and your fame flouteth,
In his worship and your high renown,
Atteyned has the exaltaciowne.
And highest prycke of fortunes whele,
It were great wrong and ye look well.
Of wylfulnes for to be unkind.
To her that ye so friendly to you find.
Or to be froward while she is benynge,
By influence graciously to assygne.
Her spoukes meue unto your pleasaunce,
And hap to turn with plente on your chance
After whose help you needs not to call.
Wherefore alas why will ye suffer palle,
Your noble fame of very wylfulnesse,
While it is highest in his worthynesse,
Your knyghtly prudence it should not asterte.
Of which thing every gentle heart,
Should have routhe and compassyon.
Wherefore we pray of ^iscrecyon,
That ye you shape this purpose to amend,
And that ye would of heart condiscende,
With us to stand knyghtly in this werre,
By your manhood that is spoke of so far.
That your renown to the world end.
Reported be where so that men wend,
Perpetually by freshenesse of hew,
Day by day to increase new,
That the tryumphe of this high victory,
Be put in storye and eke in memory.
And so enprynted that foryetfulnesse,
No power have by malys to oppress.
Your fame in knyghthode derke or difface,
That shyneth yet so clear in many place,
Without Eclypsyng sothly this no less.
Which to conserne ye be now reckelesse.
Of wylfulnesse to cloud so the light,
Of your renown ye whylom shone so bright.
Your mighty hand of manhood to wtdrawe.
Consider first how greeks are yslawe,
Tofore your tent with mortal wounds wide,
Through out the fyelde upon every side.
And have disdain only for lack of routhe.
Alas the while for a little slouthe,
To ley to hand in their mischyefe at all.
That whylom were their strong mighty wall
Their chief diffence and their champiowne
Sovereign help and protectiowne.
For whom ye have so often shed your blood,
Again their foen with them when he stood,
Full myghtely their enmyes to assail,
Without whom they little may avail.
In very soth ne none of us echone.
But ye of knyghthode list with us to gone,
Again Troyans as ye were wont to do.
And is our trust and fynall hope also.
That ye shall help and our socour be.
And hereupon we pray you that ye,
Say your aduyce and your full will.
And than anon the hardy fyerse Achylle,
When Vlixes concluded had his tale,
Since a face for anger dead and pale,
Said even thus all openly and plain.
Sir Vlixes if so right as ye said,
And have declared in conclusyon.
That our purpose and entensyon,
Was finally to brenne and destroy,
This royal city that is called Troy.
I hold in soth me lyketh not to lie,
That our intent was grounded on folly,
To put us all through indiscrecion,
Of reckleshede and hasty mocyon,
Of life and death in such ieopardye.
And specially in all the Chiualrye,
Of greeks land for so small a thing.
So many prince and so many worthy king,
That have ieoparted their body and their good,
Yloste their life and yspent their blood,
Which might have be full well at home i^ peace
And is not now the king Pallamydes,
Yslawe also as who says but of new,
That was so wise, so manly, and so true,
Of whom the life was of more price alone,
Than the cause for which that we echone,
Be gathered here who so look a right.
And of greeks many a noble knight,
That have be slain both of the worthyest,
The world to seek and the manlyest.
For out of every land and regyowne,
On greeks party and with them of ye town
Of chyualry and knighthod ye sovereign flower,
To win in arm worship and honor,
Assembled be and come fro so far.
Of which in soth by duresse of this werre.
Full many one in the fyelde is dead.
And verily without any dread.
There shall well mo if the werre last,
Fro every day the number lasseth fast,
Of worthy knights deed without routh,
That I dare say and conclude of troth,
In this rage furyous and wood,
Full lykely is that all the gentyl blood,
Through out this world shall destroyed be.
And rural folk and that were great pyty.
Shall have lordshyp and holy governance
And Churles eke with sorrow and mischaunce,
In every land shall lords be alone.
When gentle men slain be echone.
Is not Hector that was so noble a knight,
That was this worlds very son and light
Of manhood flower slain pyteously.
In this werte in soth and so mighty I.
Parauenture which may not attain,
To his noblesse if I shall not feign.
For by what way shall we the death eschew.
With all our might if we it pursewe,
Fro day to day while that we lie here.
Therefore shortly me for to requere,
Touching the werre outher for to pray.
Is but in vein and harken what I say.
I will not purpose in this werre or strife,
For to ieoparte any more my life.
For lever I have that Palled be my name,
Than for to be slain and have an idle fame
For worthiness after death yblowe,
Is but a wind and lasts but a throw.
For though renown and prise be blow wide
Foryetfulnesse leyth it often aside.
By length of years and oblyuion,
Through envy and false conclusyon.
The land of knyghthode and of worthynesse
Of wisdom eke and of gentylnesse.
Fredam, bounte, virtue and such grace,
Foryetfulnesse can dark and defface,
And therwithall males and envy.
Ysered has the palm of Chyualrye.
By false report wherefore I say for me,
I will of wisdom such folly let be,
And in quiet forth my life now led.
And over this to you three I read,
To seek peace with Troyans if ye may,
In hasty wise without more delay.
This my counsel platly to you all,
Or that myschyefe of death upon you fall.
It were well done that ye took head,
Both Vlixes and thou Dyomede.
And Nestor eke sythen ye be wise,
To work plainly like as I deuyse.
This the sum and fine of mine intent,
And so reports to him that has you sent.
And they anon with short conclusyon,
Repeyred be to Agamenon,
With such answer as ye have herd me seine
It needs not to write it new again.
And hereupon king Agamenon,
Let make anon a conuocasyon.
Of his lords and in their presence,
Fro point to point sothly in sentence.
He has rehearsed how that Achylles,
Was desirous for to have a peace,
With them of Troy and platly how that he,
For no prayer will in no degree,
Again Trojans with spear nor with shield,
In help of greeks be armed in the field.
Wherefore the king as he that was full wise,
Hereupon axed their deuyse,
And when them thought what best for to do,
In this matter sith it stood so.
And first of all speaks Menelay,
With angry chere and said platly nay.
To have a peace it was not his intent.
Ne that he would thereto be of assent.
Sythen the Cite in conclusion,
Stood on the prycke of his destruction.
NOw that Hector and Deiphobus were dead
yt whylom were their trust in every need,
And their diffence but now they are ago.
Farewell their trust and their hope also,
Without more and all their hole pride.
They may not now but after death abide.
And trust well without any less,
Though it so be that this Achylles,
Ne help us not toward our empryse,
We thereof not dread in no manner wise,
Without him for to have victory,
By our manhood and our own glory,
I am full sure thereof and certain.
But Vlixes began replye again.
Nestor also of sudden mocyon,
Contrayre was to his opinion.
Affyrmynge plainly that no wonder was,
Though Menelay sothly in this case.
Unto the peace would not assent,
For openly they wyste what he meant,
For he was ground and root of all the werre
And cause also they come were so far,
Out of their land he and the queen Heleyne.
And for the sake only of them tweyne.
The greeks all which no man may deny.
Their lives put in such ieopardye,
For him and her if the ground be sought,
For well they wyste that he rought naught,
This Menelay what woe they endure,
So he his wife might again recure.
And where he says that Hector is dead.
He has an heir to speak of manlyhead,
And of knyghthode as it will be found,
And called is Hector the second.
Worthy Troylus which yt is his brother,
In all this world is not such an other,
Of worthynesse for to reckon all,
For he of Troy is the mighty wall.
And diffence now Hector is a gone,
Ye know it well your self euerychone.
If it so be that ye list take heed,
Whose sharp sword sore does us blede,
Every day in his furyous hete,
Amyd the fyelde when we with him mete,
And instead of worthy Deiphobus,
Which in his time was wonderly famous.
His brother Paris is now found at all,
In worthynesse of knyghthode perygall.
So that of them we have none advantage.
Unto this hour but rather great damage.
To reckon all sith we be gonne,
This very soth we but little won,
But we are lykely always more to lose,
If we contune but sith we may chese.
It were wholesome to live in quiet.
To have a peace and this werre let,
By one assent sith ye be wise.
ANd with yt word Calchas began to rise,
The Troyan treytour with a pale chere,
For very Ire and said as ye shall here.
A worthy princes what think ye to done,
To change so like as does the moon.
Your old purpose and your first intent,
Again the will and commandment,
Of the godder that every thing govern,
By purueyaunce who so can discern.
Alas alss why ne will ye at the least.
Credence and faith give to their heste.
Which in no wise may not be fallyble.
For in soth it were an impossyble.
Utterly but Troy the city,
Of ordinance and necessytye,
Might be destroyed hense but alyte.
If your sloth be it not to wit,
So that victory worship and honor,
And fynall palm eke of this labor,
To be reported on water and on land,
Reserved be holy to your hand.
In your purpose if ye forth contune.
And hinder not of folly your fortune.
This in soth I dare it well conclude.
And peryllous is the gods to yllude.
Of neclygence or sloth wylfully.
Wherefore I read that now manfully,
Of heart and thought and of full unity.
Platly deuoydyng ambyguyte,
To set upon and knyghtly to resume,
Your force again fully to consume,
Your cruel foen and let be shet without,
Wanhope and dread dispeyre and every doubt,
Castyng of parrell sloth and cowardyse.
And let manhood utterly dispyse,
All dread of death that causes hertes feynt.
With cowardyse and to be atteynt.
That finally as gods have be hight,
Through prescyence of their eternal might,
To victory that ye shall attain,
Like your desire there is no more to said.
And when Calchas in conclusyowne,
This false treytour unto Troy town,
The greeks had through his words fair,
Touching the werre put out of dyspayre.
Of heart all one they cast them to fulfill,
Holy his counsel though so that Achylle,
Be froward aye to help them in their need,
They gave no force nor took of it no head,
But euerychone they them ready make,
As ye shall here the field in haste to take,
THe trewes passed of ye months twain,
Into ye field Greeks began them ordain,
And they of Troy again them issue out,
And worthy Troylus with an huge route,
The Greeks began alderfirste assail.
And with his sword he made for to rail,
The red blood through their harneys bright.
That as the death they fled fro his sight.
For he that day through his cruelte,
Cast him platly avenged for to be,
Upon the death of Hector utterly.
And as Dares writes specially.
A M. knights this Troyan champyowne,
That day has slain rydyng up and down.
As mine auctour Guydo list endyte,
Save after him I can no ferther write.
In his book he gives him such a name,
That by his manhood and his knyghtly fame
The greeks all were driven unto flight,
By all that day till it drew to night.
And on the morrow in the dawning,
The greeks have at Phoebus vprysynge.
Yarmed them with great dylygence,
Again Troyans to standen at diffence.
Among whom that day as I read,
So well him bare worthy Dyomede,
That many Troyan through his cruelte,
Has lost his life. till Troylus began to se,
This Dyomede in the fyelde riding,
To whom anon without more lettynge,
With his spear thrown into the rest,
This Troylus rode and smote him on the breast
So myghtely that of very need,
Down of his horse he smote this Dyomede.
Albe of wound he tho had no damage.
And furyously Troylus in his rage,
Of high envy began him to abrayde,
When he was down ye love of fair Creseide.
Of his deceyte and false Trecherye,
And greeks than fast began them hye,
Among the horse in mischief which he lay,
To draw him out in all the have yt they may,
And on a shield brosed and affrayde,
They bare him home so he was dysmayde,
Of the stroke home unto his tent.
And Menelay the same while has hente,
A mighty spear tauenge this Dyomede,
And toward Troylus fast began him speed,
Fully auysed to him unhorse anon.
But Troylus first made his stead gone,
So swyfte a course toward Menelay,
That he anon at the earth lay.
So myghtely ye hit him with his spear.
That shield nor plate might his body were,
That he ne had there a mortal wound.
But his knights anon as they him found,
Out of the prese when they had him rent,
They bare him home to his own tent.
The greeks aye standing in distress,
Through the knighthode and ye hye prowess,
Of this Troilus which so has them belaine
On every part where he rode on the plain.
Till unto time that Agamenowne,
Into the fyelde is a valed down.
With many worthy about his banere,
That shone full shene again the son clear.
And with his knights him rydyng enuyrowne,
He sore enchased them of Troy town,
Wounds and sleeth and put them to ye flight,
Him self acquytynge like a manly knight.
But for all that without more abode,
Among Troyans fyersly as he rode,
This worthy king great Agamenowne.
Troylus with a spear has smytten down,
Maugre his greeks there gameth no socour,
And when they saw their lord and governor
In such myschyefe at the ground lyende,
They hente him up and made him to assende
Through their manhood on his strong stead
And he of wit began to taken head.
And considered wisely in his thought,
In what disioynt Troilus had them brought
And how his greeks for all their great pride,
Tofore his sword might not abide,
He prudently of high discrecyon,
This noble knight this king Agomenon,
As he that had aye his aduertence,
On governance through his prouydence,
When he saw his greeks began to fail,
And wexe feeble to standen in battle,
For lack of stuff that should them recomfort
Full prudently he made them to resort,
Eueryche of them to his own tent.
And after that he has to Pryam sent,
For a trewse to Troy the Cite,
For six months if it might be,
And by his counsel Pryamus the king,
Without abode granted his axynge.
Albe that some as Guydo list endyte,
Were evil apayde so long to respyte,
Their mortal foen in any manner wise.
But yet his grant as ye have hard deuyse,
Stood in his strength fully as I read,
In which time of very womanhead,
Creseyde list no longer for to tarry,
Though her father were thereto contrary,
For to vysyte and to have a sight,
Of Dyomede that was become her knight
Which had of Troilus late caught a wou^d
And in his tent when she has him found,
Benygnely upon his beds side,
She set her down in the self tide,
And platly cast in her own thought,
Touching Troylus yt it was for naught,
To live in hope of any more recure,
And thought she would for nothing be unsure
Of purueyaunce nor without store,
She gave anon without any more,
Holy her heart unto this Dyomede.
Lo what pytye is in womanhead.
What mercy eke and benynge routhe,
That newly can all her old truth,
Of nature let slyppe and over slide.
Rather then they lysten so abide,
Any man in myschiefe for their sake,
The change is not so ready for to make.
In Lumbardstrete of crown nor doket,
All poyse is good be so the prent be set.
Their letter of change does no man abide,
So that the wind be ready and the tide.
Passage is aye who so list to pace,
No man is lost that list seek for grace.
Danger is none but counterfeyte disdeyne,
The sea is calm and from these rocks plain
For mercyles never man ne deyde,
That sought for grace record of her Creseide
Which finally has given all her heart,
To Dyomede in relese of his smerte.
And prayed him to be right glad and light,
And calls him her own man and her knight.
And him behyghte rather then he deye,
In every thing how she would obey,
That were honest him to do pleasaunce.
For lever she had change and varyaunce,
Were found in her than lack of pytye,
As sitting is to all Femynyte,
Of nature not to be vengeable,
For faith nor oath but rather mercyable,
Of man's life standing in distress.
Hereof no more for now I will me dress,
To tell forth in my translacyon,
Ceriously how Agamenon,
During the trewse and the time of peace,
Him self went unto Achylles,
Besechynge him some regard to have,
Of his knyghthode Greeks for to save.
And his presence no more to withdraw,
To suffer them so mortally to be slawe,
Of their enmyes Pompous and Elate.
But Achylles always indurate,
Ilyche new both in heart and thought,
From his purpose platly changes naught,
Fully enclyned for to have a peace.
But for as much as this Achylles,
Of entyernesse and high affection,
So loving was unto Agamenon.
He unto him granted at the least,
A great parcel touching his request.
This to say that this Achylles.
Grants to him his Myrmydones.
Full knyghtly men only in his absence,
With the greeks to maken resystence,
In the fyelde again them of the town.
For which grant king Agamenowne,
And duke Nestor thanked him of heart,
But he always containing in his smerte,
For the love of fair Pollycene,
Ne knew no gain to his wound sgrene,
But dispeyred languysheth ever in one.
And when the trewse passed were and gone,
Upon a day the morrow full benynge,
Achylles his knights did assygne,
The fylde to take with Agamenon,
And as the story makes mention,
He gave to them bands fresh of read,
That men may know by their manlyhead,
With whom they were withholde in special*
And like a man deadly and mortal,
Within his tent this Achylles abode,
When they from him into the fyelde rode,
Only for dole they shulden from him twinne.
In his absence a werre to begin.
Maugre his will again them of the town.
But forth they went with Agamenowe,
Upon Troyans stern and full of pride.
And with them met on the other side,
The manly knights of the Troyan blood.
Which were on them so furyous and wood,
That cruelly the greeks they oppress.
So that a back for fear they began the^ dress.
They were on them so inly fell and kene.
Till that the mighty Duke of Athene,
Entered in the greeks to diffende.
But upon him unawarely or he wend.
Came mighty Troylus like a wood Lyown
And from his stead anon he bare him down
And after that he put him so in prese,
Till he has met with these Myrmydones,
And of them slew that day full many one.
And so fer in Troylus is ygone,
That he greeks put utterly to flight.
Through his knyghthod til it drew to night
and fro his sword no raunsom might the^ borow
And Guydo write that on the next morrow,
Full mortal was the slaught on outher side.
Amyd the field as they together ride,
Of manly knights that wonder was to seen
And as they faught the king Phylymene,
With help only of Pollydamas,
Taken has the worthy king Thoas.
And began him lead toward Troy ye town
But Myrmydones him to help came down
Wonder proudly and after began to sewe,
And through their might Thoas they rescue
And him deliver for they were so strong.
But Troylus then hurtled them among,
Furyously full like a champyowne,
Now here now there cast and threw the^ down
Some he slew and some he made blede,
Till cruelly they slew his mighty stead.
On which he sat and yet nevertheless,
He fought on foot against Myrmydones,
That cast had Troylus to have take.
But Paris tho began them so awake,
With his brothern that about him rode,
That in the place where as Troylus stood,
Upon his fete but him self alone,
Of Mirmydones they sleine have many one
That of knighthod through their ma^lyhead,
They unto him brought an other stead.
Amyd his foen and made him to ascend.
And he full knightly began him self dyffende,
Be set with greeks in the felfe stounde,
That never yet a better knight was found,
They felt it well that tho were his foen.
But than his brother called Margaryton,
So as he fought puttyng him self in prese,
Was slain alas among Myrmydones.
The death of whom in a cruel ire.
This Troylus with anger set a fire,
Plainly purposes tauenge if he may.
And with his sword began to make way.
And Paris aye fast by him rydyng,
With his brethern upon him awaytyng,
Which all yfeare were so mercylesse,
And I find these Myrmydones,
That of force and necessyte,
They were compelled plainly for to flee,
Troylus was on them so furyous.
So vengeable eke and so dispyteous.
That he them gave many mortal wound,
And yet in soth that day they were found,
Noble knights and quyt them wonder well
For they the craft knew euerydele,
Longyng to arms of them as I read.
But for all that he made their sides blede,
Through the mayle and their plates shene,
That they ne might plainly him sustene,
The sword of Troilus them chasing ouerall,
Albe they kept them close as any wall.
Hole together and went not a sonder.
But Troilus aye them chaseth here and yonder
And severed them mauger all their might.
Till into field with many worthy knight,
Came Menelay and king Agamenon,
Vlyxes eke and cruel Thelamon.
And Dyomede which of his wounds grene
Recured was as says mine auctour clean.
And on Troyans suddenly they fall,
With their wards and their knights all.
And tho began the fight to renew,
On every half that with blouddy hew,
The plates bright were of new ysteyned.
And they of Troy so manly have the^ peyned,
Again there foen in this mighty strife,
That many greek was berafte his life.
And where they were most mighty in bataile
Troylus came in and began them to assail,
On every part with many blouddy wound.
And by his knighthod began them to confou^de,
That aye they fled so they were a ferde.
The mortal strokes of his sharp sword,
Their deadly foe and destruction.
And this contynueth till king Thelamon,
By his manhood when that he beheld,
The greeks made recure again the fyelde.
And began Troyans assail wonder sore,
And tho began the slaughter more and more,
On each side. till Troylus new again,
The greeks has so fyersly ouerlayne,
Myrmydones and them euerychone,
Before his sword that he made them gone.
To their tents and the fyelde forsake.
And with his hand that day he has take,
An hundred knights that came in his weye.
Through his prowess and sent them into troy
And ever in one began so to enchace,
Myrmydones that they lost their place.
And to Achylles lying in his tent,
They be repeyred forwounded and to rent.
Their herneys broke both in plate and maile
And of their nombre I find that they fail,
An hundred knights slain dead alas.
That after were found in Taas.
Amyd the fyeld through girt with many wound.
Of Troylus sword Hector the secounde.
Whereof Achylles when he had a sight,
So heavy was all the next night,
In his bed walowynge to and fro,
Deuoyde of sleep for constreynt of his woe,
At his heart his wound was so kene,
What for his men and fair Polycene.
Wyttynge well if he did his pain,
To be venged he should not attain,
In no wise unto his desire.
And thus he brent in a double fire,
Of love and ire that made him syghe sore.
But for cause love was the more,
He was aferde again them of the town,
In his person to do offenciowne,
Lest Pryamus and Hecuba the queen,
Offended were and namely Polycene,
And thus he stood in a double weer,
That at his heart satte him wonder nere,
With many wonder diverse fantasye,
As have lovers that be in point to dye.
Right even so fares this woeful man,
For very woe that no read ne can.
So entryked that wend for to deye,
Of his recure he knew no better weye.
And while he lay this in his throws wit,
Like as Guydo plainly list endyte,
That the story makes mencyowne.
That days seven they of Troy town,
So encrese and augment of the sorrow,
With the greeks metten on every morrow.
That through ye force of alder both their might
On outher part, was slain many a knight.
And all this while lay this Achylles,
Of greeks death ylyke reckeles.
For love only and took no manner head,
Who so were hole or mortally does blede.
Or who that plaineth with his wounds large
Him thought it was no parcel of his charge.
So much he has on other thing to think.
That often he waketh when he should wynke*
Thoughtfull aye and ymagynatyfe,
And very weary of his own life.
Till on a day king Agamenon,
Seeing the death and destruction,
On greeks half withouten remedy,
To Troy sent by enbassadrye,
For a trewse certain days space.
But he might thereof have no grace,
Longer time platly to endure.
Then for leyser of the sepulture,
Of worthy knights that were dead aforne.
In the fyelde on outher party lorne.
Which in the Taas full busyly they sought,
And after this plainly how they wrought,
During the syege with great vyolence,
I shall descryuen with your pacyence.
How Achylles slew the worthy Troylus vnknyghtly, and after trayled his body
through the fyelde tied to his horse. Cap. xxxi.
THe cruel force and mortal ire,
Of martyrs might always set a fire,
With new envy gonne of old hatrede.
Brennyng in hertes hole as any glede,
Atwyxe greeks and them of Troy city.
Which lykely is not staunched for to be,
Till death consume with mortal darte,
Full many worthy upon outher part.
To execute alas by fynall fate,
On either part the envious deadly hate,
Which they ne might by destyne remewe.
For it was set, it nedely must insewe.
And Attropos will suffer it none other,
That maystresse is and guyder of the rother,
Of deaths ship. till all goth unto wrake,
And fortune began turn her face abake,
Of high disdain fro Troy the city,
As in this story shortly ye shall se.
For when the trewse that they had ytake,
Were wered out they began them ready make,
The proud greeks and into fyelde they gone
Upon a morrow when Phoebus bright shone
Armed full shene eueryche at his deuyse.
And Menelay has first met with Paris,
That day in storye as I read.
And each of them smytte other of his stead.
At which time Dan Pollydamas,
To Vlixes rode a stern pase,
And each at other of cruel enmyte,
With styffe swords began together flee.
That nouther was of manhood for to wit,
And with a spear squared for to byte.
The mighty Duke called Meneste,
Rode line right that all might it se,
To Anthenor the Troyan full of pride.
And from his sadell cast him down aside.
In his furye and his hateful tene,
And tho in haste come king Phylomene,
Only in help of them of the town,
And began assail king Agamenowne,
Through his knyghthode and his hardiness
That he him had brought in great distress,
To utter myschyefe and confusyon,
Ne had be only that king Thelamon,
Full proudely came him for to reskewe.
And after sore began for to pursewe,
With a spear upon Phelomene,
And for his horse he laid him on the grene,
Maugre his force the story tells thus.
For he to him was mortally yrous.
And after that young Archylogus,
A mortal course ran unto Brumius,
One of the sons of Pryamus the king,
Young and deliver and best in lykyng.
But he him smytte with so great a might,
That he fell dead this fresh lusty knight,
The death of whom wha^ they of Troy espy,
They made a shoute and pyteously began cry,
Of woeful routhe and his death complain.
Till the noise began utterly attain,
To Troylus ears platly where he rode.
And he no longer after that abode,
But to the place felly began approach,
And with his sword for to set a broche,
Without routhe the greeks hateful blood,
And mercyles all that him withstode,
He slew that day by cruel adventure.
That greek was none yt which might endure
Tofore his sword he began them so oppress.
For of knyghthode and of high prowess,
He had them put utterly to flight,
Ne had been the manhood and the might,
Of Myrmydones which all that long day,
By one assent upon Troylus lay.
Whereof he was full melancolyus.
And of courage and manhood most famous,
He ne list no longer for to let,
But all attones upon them he set,
And furyously began among the^ ride,
And some he smote even through the side,
Through the body and some through ye heart.
And with his sword through doublet and the shert
Through shield and plate, and through haberion
He perccd has and like a wood lion,
He slew that day of them many one.
That maugre them they fled eueryche.
With the greeks eueryche to his tent.
And they of Troy after them he went.
Swyftly on horse till they have them take.
And such a slaught of greeks there they make,
That finally there was a bette reskuse,
But only death so passyngly confuse,
The greeks were at myschyefe desolate,
Troylus so narowe brought the^ to chekmate
That they could tho no better remedy,
But hydously for to wayle and cry,
To death forwounded with a grisely chere.
That Achylles when he began first to here,
The dredefull noise and the woeful sown,
That caused was by reflectiowne,
Of air again who so could it know,
In rochys hard and in kauernes low,
Like as it were one word spoke of two,
That men are wont to callen an Ecco.
So confuse was the lamentaciowne,
On greeks side of which the deadly sown,
So pyteously to Achylles is run,
Of them that lay again the hot son,
With mortal wounds yeldyng up the breath,
With roumble and swowhe resownyng into death
Such a noise greeks maden there.
And what it meant Achylles did enquere.
And what the cause was of their clamor,
And they him told for lack of socour,
The greeks were each in his tentorye,
Of Troylus slain. so that the victory,
Goth finally with them of Troy town,
For evermore in conclusyowne,
So many greek slain lay in his tent,
Gapynge upward with his blood yspent,
Through the constreynt of his wound smert
And while Achilles began their case aduerte
Full sodaynely there came to him a man,
The which his tale even thus began.
Alas quod he how may ye thus sustene,
To se your men hereupon the grene,
Before your face slain and lie dead.
And list not ones for to take heed,
But stand still pensyfe in your tent.
Upon the point your self to be shent.
In hasty hour if ye here abide.
For fyfty thousand knights here beside,
Ready armed in plates and in mayle,
Cast them plainly you for to assail,
This no doubt unarmed as ye stand.
But ye of knyghthode manly take on hand,
Them to resyste in this self place,
And like a man to meten in the face.
For which anon in a cruel mode,
This Achylles like as he were wood,
Has armed him fomyng as a bore,
Farewell his love he set of it no store.
Of hasty hete his ire was so kene.
That he forgot fair Pollycene,
And her beauty yt whylom made him smert.
And in a rage up anon he starte,
And took his stead as any Lion wroth,
Again Troyans and into fyelde he goth.
Like a wolf that is with hunger gnawe,
Right so began he again his foen to draw.
And where he rode without excepciowne,
He wounds sleeth kills and bears down
Now here now there in a little throw,
That they of Troy began his sword to know
Which was infecte of new with their blood
For there was none as yet yt him withstode,
So mortally he began about him layne,
The dead bodies enlonge the plain,
Till casually Troylus began espy,
This Achylles as he cast an eye,
And began his horse with all his might and pain
But Achylles of him was ware also,
Smette his stead and made him for to go,
Toward Troylus in the self tide,
And with full course as they together ride,
Full line right their speres sharp whette,
With such a might they have together met
Of high dysdayne there is no more to said
That to the ground they fell both tway^^
But Achylles caught has such a wound
In his body deep and so profounde,
That long he lay mine auctour says certain,
Or he to health restored was again.
And Troilus eke through plates maile and al
As write Guydo had a wound small.
Which unto him did no greunaunce.
And thus that day by contynuaunce,
And days six suynge by and by,
The proud greeks met cruelly,
Amyd the fyelde them of Troy town.
To great damage and confusyowne,
Of outher party plainly this no nay.
For many worthy slain was day by day.
In their rancour and hertye hoote envy,
Albe Guydo does not specyfye,
None of their names plainly in this book,
As ye shall find if ye list to look.
ANd all this while for this sodeine thing
Pensyfe and tryste was Pryamus the king
That Achylles turned has so clean,
His lust away from young Pollycene.
And for this change so sodeyne and so new
Thought his behestes were not all true.
But on deceyte and on doubleness.
On fraud falsely and new fangelnesse.
On sleyghty treason an vncouert gyle,
Or rage of love that lasts but a while.
Was utterly found in his beheste.
For like as a wind that no man may areste
Faceth a word discordaunt fro the deed,
Of which a wise man take shall no head.
But let pass as he were reckelesse.
For albeit that this Achylles,
Was whylom caught within loves snare,
Him list not now ones for to spare,
Of high rancour his lady to offend.
It was not like as they of Troy wend.
Hecuba nouther yet Pollycene,
And in an anger and began her to abreyde,
That she her trust so entyerly has leyde.
On Achylles that can so falsely mean.
Wherefore full tryste was this Pollycene.
That was enclyned with her eyes clear,
By the counsel of her mother dear,
To have be wedded to Achylles.
To fine only there should have be a peace,
Atwene greeks and them of Troy town,
But all was false inconclusyowne.
In the fine was the truth ysene,
For when Achylles of his wounds grene,
Was fully cured by a certain day,
He began compass in all that ever he may,
And ymagine in his enuyous heart,
To be venged of his wounds smerte.
Upon Troylus thot stacke aye in his mind.
At advantage if he might him find.
To him he bare so passyngly hatrede,
In his heart brennynge as the glede.
Which day nor night may in no degree,
Fully be queynt till he avenged be,
The hoote rancour began so on him gnawe.
Auysed platly that he shall beslawe,
Of his hands when so that it be fall.
And on a day to him he began call,
Myrmydones his knights euerychone,
Upon a morrow when the greeks gone,
Tofore the town in steel armed bright,
Again Troyans of purpose for to fight.
And they were come proudely into field,
In opposyte with many rich shield.
Newly depeynt with colors fresh and fine,
Upon which full bright began to shine,
Fyry Titan gold tressed in his sphere,
At his vpryste with his beams clear.
When this fell enuyous Achylles,
To his knights called Myrmydones,
Upon Troylus began him to complain.
Besechynge them for to do their pain,
Again this Troylus in the field that day.
To catch him at myschyefe if they may.
And busyly to do their dylygence,
On him to have their full aduertence,
By one assent where that he ride.
All other thing for to set aside.
And of naught else for to take heed.
Saufe finally again him to proceed,
If so they might catch him in a trappe.
Within them self troylus for to clappe.
To enclose and set him round abouie.
In all wise that he go not out,
And when he were beset among them all,
Not to siea him what ever that be fall.
But through their might manly him co^serue
Till he him self come and make him sterue.
With his sword he and none other wight.
Lo here a manhood for to preyse a right.
Vengeance of death of rancour and of pride,
Compassed treason knighthode laid aside.
Worthynesse by false envy yslawe,
Falshede a lofte truth a back ydrawe.
Alas in arms that it should befall.
Of trecherye there the bitter galle,
Should in this world in any knight be found
That be to troth of their order bound.
Alas alas for now this Achylles,
Conspyred has with his Myrmydones.
The death of one and yt the worthyest wight,
That ever was and eke the best knight.
Alas for woe my heart I feel dead,
For his sake this storye when I read.
But when fortune has a thing ordained,
Though it be ever wayled and compleyned,
There is no gain nor no remedy,
Though men on it galen aye and cry,
I can no more touching this mattere,
But write forth like as ye shall here.
How Myrmydones have their lord behyght,
With all their power and their full might,
To fulfill his commandment.
And into field with greeks they be went.
But Troylus first in the opposyte,
Without abode manly them to mete,
He was ybrent with so fervent hete,
Of hardynesse and of high courage.
Of worthynesse and of vasselage.
That him ne list no longer to abide,
But with his folk in began to ride,
Among greeks this folk of high renown
And with his sword he wou^deth and bears down
Sleeth and kylleth upon every haiue,
So mortally that there may no salve,
Their sores sound for there was but death,
Where so he rode and yeldyng up the breath,
So furyously he began them to enchase.
And made them lose in a little space,
Their land echone and before him flee.
In Troylus sword there was such cruelte.
That maugre them he the field has won
The same time when the bright son,
Hye in the southe at mydday mark shone.
Even at the hour when it drew to noone.
When Myrmydones gathred all in one,
In compass wise round about him gone.
And furyously of one entenciowne,
They made a cercle about him enuyrowne.
When they him saw of help desolate,
But he of heart not dysconsolate.
Upon no side through his manlyhead,
Like a Lion took of them no head.
But through his famous knyghtly excelle^ce,
He as a Tygre stands at diffence.
And manfully began them to encomber,
And began to less and dyscrease their number,
And some he maymeth and wou^deth to ye death,
And some he made to yelden up the breath.
And some he laid to the earth low,
And some he made for to overthrow,
With his sword of their blood all wete.
At great myschyefe under his horse fete.
Upon his stead sturdy as a wall.
This worthy knight this man most mercial
Pleyeth his play among Myrmydones,
Him self god wot alone all helples.
But tho alas what might his force avail
When three thousand knights him assail.
On every part both in length and bread,
And cowardly first they slew his stead.
With their speres sharp and so square ygrou^d.
For which alas he stante now on ye ground.
Without reskuse refute or socoure,
That was that day of chyualrye the flower.
But well away they have him so beset,
That from his head they smote his basenet.
And brake his harueys as they him assail,
And sever of stele the mighty strong mayle.
He was dysarmed both neck and also head,
Alas the while and no wight took none head.
Of all his knights longing to the town.
And yet always this Troyan champyowne,
In knyghtly wise naked as he was,
Him self defends. till Achylles alas,
Came riding in furyous and wood,
And wha^ he saw how that Troylus stood,
Of long fighting awhaped and a mate,
And from his folks alone disconsolate,
Sole by him at myschyefe pyteously,
This Achylles wonder cruelly,
Behind unawarely or that he took head,
With his sword smyteth of his head.
And cast it forth of cruel cursed heart,
And thought sure it should him not asterte.
To show his malice this wolf vnmercyable
Full vnknyghtly to be more vengeable.
Upon the body that dead lay and cold,
Alas that ever it should of knight be told,
Write or rehearsed to do so foul a deed,
Or in a book alas that men shall read,
Of any knight a storye so horrible.
Unto the ears passyngly odyble.
For this Achilles of crueltye alas,
The dead corpse took out of the taas,
And vengeably bond it as I find,
At the tail of his horse behind.
And hatefully that every wight beheld,
Drew it him self endlonge the field.
Through the renges and the wards all.
But Oh alas that ever it should fall.
A knight to be in heart so cruel.
Or of hatred so spytefull and so fell,
To draw a man after he were dead.
OH thou Homer for shame be now red,
And ye amase yt hold thy self so wise,
On Achylles to set such great a pryse.
In thy books for his chyualrye.
Above echone that do him magnyfye.
That was so sleyghty and so full of fraud,
Why geuest thou him so hye a praise and laud.
Certys Homer for all thy excellence,
Of Rethoryke and sugared eloquence,
Thy lusty songs and thy dytees sweet,
Thy honey mouth that does with sugre flete,
Yet in one thing thou greatly art to blame.,
Causeles to give him such a name,
With title such of tryumphe and glory,
So passyngely to put in memory,
In thy books to say and write so,
that he through knighthod slain has Hectors two.
First him yt was like unto none other,
And sithes Troilus yt was his own brother
If thou art meued of affection,
Which that thou have to Greeks nation,
To preyse him so for thou caust endyte.
Thou should aye for any favor write,
The truth plainly and be indyfferent,
And say the sothe clearly of entente.
For when he slew Hector in the field,
He was before disarmed of his shield.
And busy eke in spoylynge of a king.
For if he had beware of his coming.
He had him quyt through his chyualrye.
His false deceyt and his trecherye,
That he ne had so lightly from him gone.
Also Troylus naked and alone,
Amyd three thousand closed and yshet,
When Achilles has his head of smet,
At his back of full cruel heart.
When he nothing his treason did aduerte.
Was that a deed of a manly knight.
To slay a man forweryed in the fight,
Faint of travail all the long day,
Among so many standing at a baye,
A kings son and so hye borne,
Naked the head his armure all to torn.
Even at the death on the self point,
At great myschyefe and plainly out of joint,
Of his life standing on the wrake.
When Achilles came falsely at the bake,
Assaylynge him when he was half dead,
And like a cowarde smote of then his head.
That was tofore hurt and wounded sore.
Wherefore Homer ne praise him not therefore
Let not his prease thy royal book difface,
But in all haste his renown outrace.
For here his name when I here it neuen,
Verily up to the third heaven,
As seems me infecte is the air.
The sown thereof so foul is and vnfayre.
For if that he had used aduertence,
Other the eye of his prouydence,
Unto knyghthod or his worthynesse.
Other to manhood or to gentyllesse,
Or to the renown of his own name,
Or to the report of his knyghtly fame,
In any wise to have taken head,
He had never done so foul a deed,
So vengeably for to have ydrawe,
A kings son after he was slawe.
And namely him that was so good a knight.
Which in his time who so look aryght,
Passed Achylles I dare it well express.
Both of manhood and of gentylnesse.
But for all that he is now dead alas.
The death of whom when Pollydamas,
And Paris eke first began espy,
They fared in sothe as they woulden dye.
And specially with face dead and fade,
Paris alas such inly sorrow made,
For the constreynt of his deadly woe,
When he saw well that Troylus was ago,
And that he shall in life him never se.
Such sorrow also the Troyan Dan Enee,
For him has made and many other mo,
That all at ones they together go,
The dead corpse to recure if they may.
But greeks were so fell on them that day,
That all their haste was utterly in vain.
In any wise the corpse to get again.
Till that Menon the noble worthy king,
Which loved Troylus over all thing,
Caught such routhe of affection,
That he in haste fearser than a Lion,
On his death cast him to be wreake.
And first for Ire thus he began to speak.
To Achylles for all his hye treasowne,
Oh thou Tratoure, Oh thou Scorpyowne,
Oh thou Serpent full of Trecherye,
Which in dishonor of all chyualrye,
Through false engyne have this day yslawe,
The only best that here had no fellow,
When he was whylom in this world alive.
Alas alas who may aryght deseryue,
Thy venym hyd thy malice and untruth.
Without pity or any knyghtly routhe.
To draw a knight so gentle and so good,
A kings son of so worthy blood,
Through out ye feld at thy horse tale behind,
That ever after it shall be in mind,
This cruel deed and vngentylnesse.
And with yt word Menon began him dress,
Toward Achylles without more areste,
And with a spear smet him in the breast,
Enuyously of so great hatrede,
That he uneath kept him on his stead,
And Menon after pulled out a sword,
And cast him manly to mete him in the berde,
And rode to him fully deuoyde of dread,
And such a wound he gave him on the head,
That maugre him in many man's sight,
To the earth he made him to alyght.
For all his pride in a mortal trance.
And of that wound he felt such greuaunce,
That at the death he lay an huge while,
In a swowne the space of half a mile,
Till Myrmydones assembled into one,
With great labor and hente him up anon.
Full deadly pale so he began to blede,
But for all that they set him on his stead,
And at the last his heart he caught again,
And smet his horse of hate and hye disdain,
And toward Menon fast began him hye.
But when that he his cominge began espy,
Full like a knight list not to abide,
But hit his horse sharply in the side,
And met Achilles proudly on the plain,
And with their swords they together layne,
And began to hurtle on horse back tho yfere,
With heart enuyous and despytous chere.
But king Menon was at advantage,
Of Achylles for all his wood rage,
In point to abrought him to confusyowne,
Till yt the wards of new be comen down.
On other part both of these and yonder,
Which suddenly severed them asonder.
And as the story tells plainly than,
Began the slaughter of many manly man.
For another party the field ne would leave,
Of very pride till it drew to eve.
That Phoebus began aswage of his hete,
And began to bathe in the wawes wete,
His bright beams of the Occyan.
That fro the field home goth every man,
To their lodginge and after seven days,
They faught yfere and made no more delays.
Full mortal by cruel adventure,
While Achylles full busy was to cure,
His wounds grene and his sores sound.
And then he had a new treason found,
To be venged upon king Menon,
For all his wit he set thereupon.
And so this cruel enuyous Achilles,
Ycharged has his Myrmydones,
Worthy Menon among them to enbrace.
If they him found of opportune in place.
With all their might and their busy thought,
From their hands that he escape naught.
Till he him self avenged on him be.
And so befell as they Menon se,
The next morrow like a manly knight,
Again the Greeks armed for to fight,
On Troy side as he was wont to do,
Of adventure that day yt fell so,
That Achilles and this Menon met,
And each of them began on other set,
On horse back with full great emiye.
When as so long in their melancolye,
Mine auctour wryt they together fight,
That each made other of force to alyght.
And when Menon stood upon ye ground*
Myrmydones went about him round,
As they were charged of the fyerse Achylle,
When he alas without gods will,
Dysseuered was from his knights all.
And at myschyefe they upon him fall,
Destitute alone and helples,
And in such point slew him Achylles.
But in the story like as it is found,
This Menon first gave him such a wound,
Tofore his death in all this fell strife,
That he dyspeyred was as of his life,
This Achylles for all his false treason.
Take heed Homer and demeth in thy reason,
The false fraud and the sleyghty gyle,
The treason cast before with many wyle,
Of Achylles and judge now a right,
If ever he slew any worthy knight.
But if yt were by preodycyon.
Record I take of the king Menon.
So that the title of his laud alas,
Entriked is with fraud and with fallace.
That thou Homer may with no color,
Though thou paynte with gold and with asoure,
In thy writing his venym not enclose,
But as the thorn hyd under the rose,
Whose malice aye dares by the root,
Though the flower above fair and soote,
That men the fraud under may not se,
Of his treason ye get no more of me.
But I will tell how Greeks do that day,
How Meneste and king Menelay,
Dyomede and Thelamonyus,
On Troyans were passing despytous.
For cruelly with their wards all,
In their myschyefe be upon them fall,
And made them flee home unto the town,
For whylom Troylus chyefe champyowne,
Is dead alas and has them now forsake.
Of whom they have the dead body take,
The same day with great difficulte,
And dolefully they into the Cite,
Have tho it brought crying often alas,
And for his death such a woe there was,
That I trow there is no man alive,
Which could aryght half dele descriue,
Their pyteous woe nor lamentacyowne,
Certeyse not Boys that has such renown
With drery words to be weep and cry,
In complaining to Phylosophye,
Through his book accusynge aye fortune,
That selde or naught can in one contune.
She is so full of transmutaciowne.
Oh stace of Thebes make no bost nor sown
Of drerynesse for to write at all,
Another of death nor festes funeral,
Of making sorrow nor aduersyte,
Let be thy weeping oh thou Nyobe,
Ye sister also of Ayeliager,
That custom have for to flee so fer.
Fro year to year your brother to complain.
And thou that weptest out thine eyes twain
Oedippus king of Thebes the cite,
Thou woeful Myrrha and Calyxtone.
That so well can in rage you bemene.
And Dydo eke whylome of Cartage queen.
Let be your dole and your contrycyon.
And Phyllys eke for thy Dymophon.
And eke Cecho that new do begin,
To cry and wayle. and also thou Corynne,
That whylom were in so great affray,
For death only of thy Popyngay.
As in his book tells us Ouyde.
Let all this woe now be laid aside,
And make of it no comparisowne,
Unto the woe that was in Troy town.
For death only of this worthy knight,
For love of whom every manner wight,
High and low old and young of age,
Are fall of new into such a rage,
That they ne could of their woe none end.
Whose salt tears will their eyes shende.
So pyteous was the lamentaciowne,
In every street throughout all the town,
Alas who could all their sorrows tell.
I trow certeys Pluto deep in hell.
For all his torment and his pains kene,
Nouther she Proserpyna his queen,
Another the weary wood Tycius,
Iryon nor hungry Tantalus,
Ne could not well for all their bitter pain,
So furyously wepen and complain,
As do troyans Troylus for thy sake.
For who can now such a sorrow make,
Or who can weep as king Pryamus.
Who wepeth now with face full pyteous,
Or sorrow makes. but Hecuba the queen,
Who wepeth now but fair Pollycene,
Who wepeth now but Paris and Heleyne,
Who can now weep into tears reyne,
As Troyans do with deadly swole chere.
It neded them no wepers for to hyer.
They had enough of their own store.
Alas for now they be for evermore,
Of help all sole of comfort destytute.
For who shall now be to them refute.
Now that Hector and also Deyphobus,
And Troylus eke that was so virtuous,
Be dead alas who shall their succor be.
Or help sustene the werre of there Cite,
There is no more in conclusyon,
But after death fully destruction.
Of their towers and their walls strong,
In this matter what should I plain long.
It vayleth not always so to morn,
Wherefore I will now again return,
To my matter and tell forth how the king,
To greeks has without more taryinge,
For a trewse and a peace ysent.
A certain time by great auysement.
Which granted was of Agamenowne,
And they ayene repeyred to the town,
How Paris slew Achylles, and Archylogus Duke Nestors son, in the Temple of
Apollo. Cap. xxxii.
King Pryamus did his busye cure,
For to make a rich sepulture,
For Troylus corpse full noble and royal.
As says Guydo of stones and metal,
And him enclosed of great affection,
And nighe beside was the king Menon.
Solempnely buried and laid in grave.
And after that day by day they have,
Like the custom of feste funeral,
And other ryghtes ceremonyall,
For them both with dew obseruaunce,
Seruyse done aye by contynuaunce,
In their temple like as was the guyse.
Which were to long me for to deuyse.
And tedyus eke to you for to dwell.
But I purpose ceriously to tell.
How Hecuba as I can endyte,
Her cast fully Achylles to requyte,
His tirannye sothly if she may.
And unto her she calls on a day,
Alexsaunder in full secret wise,
And unto him as I shall you deuyse,
With weeping eyes and full heavy chere,
Said even thus as ye shall after here.
Paris quod she alas save gods will,
Thou know well how the fyerse Achylle,
My sons has slain well nigh euerychone,
There is none left but thy self alone.
He has me made alas there is no gain,
Full cowardly of children now baraine.
Both of Hector and Troylus eke thereto.
Which were to me in every trouble and woe,
Fully comfort pleasaunce and solace.
Wherefore I cast plainly to compase,
By some engyne his death to ordain.
And like as he by treason did his pain,
Traitorously with his sword to smite,
Right so I think with treason him to quite.
As sitting is of right and equity.
And sith thou wotest platly how that he,
Has set his heart and his love clean,
Upon my daughter young Polycene,
To fine only to have her unto wyue.
For which I cast to him send blyue,
For to come and treat of that mattere.
In the temple of Appollo here.
In the temple most chief of this Cite.
At which time my will is that thou be,
Thy self armed there full pryuelye.
With certain knights in thy company,
Armed also again the same day.
That in no wise he ne escape may,
From your hands but that he be dead.
As I have said and therefore take good head
Unto this thing with all my heart I pray.
From point to point my byddyng to obey.
And he assenteth with all his hole heart,
Behotynge her that he should not asterte,
And with him took twenty and no mo,
Of manly men that right well durst do.
And in the temple by full good advise,
They were yhid by biddynge of Paris.
While Hecuba covert in her entente.
Her messager to Achylles has sent,
As ye have herd in conclusyowne.
To come in haste unto Troy town.
After the effect which was of her myssage,
Only to treat of a marriage.
And he in haste comes at her sonde.
As he that could nothing understand.
Her treason hyd nor plainly it aduerte.
He was so hot marked in his heart,
With loves bronde and his fyry glede,
Of life nor death that he took no head.
But set a side wit and all reason,
To cast before by good discrecion,
What was to do with lokynge full prudent.
For he in soth was with love blent,
Into Troy when that he should gone.
Like as it fares of lovers euerychone.
When they have caught in heart a fantasye,
For no peril though they shulden dye.
They have no might nor power to beware.
Till they unawares be trapped in the snare,
Their maladye is aye so furyous.
And thus Achylles and Anthylogus,
Nestors son have the way nome,
Toward the town and be together come,
Into temple as ye have hard me tell.
And Paris tho list no longer dwell,
But all unawarely with his knights all,
On Achylles is at myschyefe fall,
Eueryche of them with a sword full bright,
And some books say it was done by night,
When his death long before desired,
By Hecuba and Paris was conspyred.
But Achylles in this mortal case,
Among them all naked as he was,
Hent out a sword in the self steven,
And like a knight he slew of them seven.
Of very force mauger all their might.
But when Paris thereof had a sight.
Three darts raught that were kene and square,
And suddenly are that he was ware,
Full secretly hyd under the shade,
Markynge at him and no noise made,
Cast at him even as ever he can,
That head and shafte through his body ran,
And therwithall knights not a few,
With sharp swords began upon him hew,
And left him not till he lay at ground.
Full pale dead with many mortal wound
And ryghtfully of reason as it sit,
Thus was the fraud and the falshed quyt,
Of Achylles for his high treason.
As death for death is skylfully guerdon,
And egall mede without any fable,
To them that be mercyles vengeable,
For thilke day Guydo writes thus,
That Achylles and Anthylogus.
Of Paris were in the temple slawe.
And afterward the body was outdrawe,
Of Achylle fro the holy bounds,
And cruelly thrown unto the hounds,
To be devoured in the broad streste.
In canell rennynge of fylthy waters wete.
Without pytye or any manner routhe,
Lo here the end of falshed and untruth.
Lo here the fine of such trecherye,
Of false deceyte compassed by envy,
Lo here the knotte and conclusyon,
How god aye quytteth slaughter by treason.
Lo here the guerdon and the fynall mede,
Of them that so delyten in falshede.
For every thing platly for to said,
Like as it is his guerdon does attain.
As ye may se of this Achilles,
Which on a night in the temple les,
His life for he was aye customable,
By fraud and treason for to be vengeable.
But it befell at request of Heleyne,
That the bodies of these ylke tweyne,
Conserved were from the hungry rage,
Of best and foul gredy and ramage.
And yet they lay amyddes of the city,
Full openly that all men might them se,
To great gladness of them of the town.
Into time that Agamenowne,
To king Pryam sent his massageres,
To have license to fette them home on bears
By grant of whom they have the corses take
For whom greeks such a sorrow make,
That pytye was and routh for to here.
And eueryche spoke thus unto his fear.
Farewell our trust now Achylles is deed,
Farewell our hope and holy all our speed.
Farewell our joy and our chief diffence,
That had in manhood so great excellence.
Farewell alas our sovereign assurance,
Farewell in knighthode all our suffysaunce.
For now alas unlikely is that we,
Shall ever win or getten this Cite.
To us alas so froward is fortune,
But that they myghten not contune,
Always in woe nor in pain endure,
They caused to make a rich Sepulture.
To Achylles of stones precious.
And an other to Anthylogus.
What should I now any longer dwell,
Ceryously the rytes for to tell,
Of their buryinge nor what woe they make,
Their weeping all nor of their clothes blake.
Nor how that some loure in their hode,
And how some go with milk and blood,
With doleful heart and into fire it shete.
And how that other casten gummes sweet,
Amydde the great flaumes funeral.
Nor of the plays called pallestrall.
Nor of the wrastlynge that was at the wake,
It were but vain me to undertake,
To tellen all wherefore I will let be.
Fully in purpose like as ye shall se,
To resort as in conclusyon,
To tellen how the great Agamenon,
For his lords in all the haste has sent,
And when they were assembled in his tent,
Full prudently this king this manly man,
With great advise thus he his tale began.
SYres quod he fortunes varyaunce,
Her chere froward and double countenance,
And sodeyne turn of her false vysage,
Your hertes has put in such arage,
For the murdre to god and man odyble,
Of Achylles and the death horrible,
By compassynge of Hecuba the queen.
Now seems me that it shall be seen.
If any manhood in your hertes be.
Or knightly force in aduersytye,
For to endure by virtue of suffraunce.
Till of his death ye taken may vengeance.
And manly quyte this outrageous offense.
When time comes to make full recompense.
But sith that ye be manly and prudent,
I would first se the plain intent.
In this matter of you that be so wise.
And hereupon what is your advise.
By one assent and voice in comune,
Whether ye will the werre forth contune,
And the syege ygonne upon this town,
Till they be brought to destructiowne.
Or into greece now resort again.
For cause only that Achylles is slain.
That whilom was your strong champiowne
Your distence and chief protectiowne.
But finally now that he is dead,
Hereupon let se what is your read.
Say openly and no longer tarry,
And some anon gonne for to varye,
And to grutche casting to and fro,
Standing in doubt what were best to do.
And some said on the the other side,
For life or death they would an end abide.
And some of them that of wit were rude,
For their party gonnen to conclude,
That they would efte home again return.
And other said that they will soiourne,
Still at the syege hap what hap may.
And thus they treat all the long day,
Every man like his opinion.
Till at the last in conclusyon,
They be accorded fully into one,
Fro the syege never for to gone,
Unto the time they have of the town,
Through their knyghthode full possessyowne
At their free will to spylle or else to save.
Albe Achylles buried was in grave.
For the trust of every worthy knight,
Was finally as gods have behyght,
That they in haste shall the town possede.
This was their hope fully deuoyde of dread.
Vndispeyred in their opinion.
And then anon Ayax Thelamon,
A worthy knight and famous of his hand,
Among all tho that were of greeks land,
Said even thus plainly in sentence.
Syres quod he that here be in presence,
My counsel is platly and my read,
Now it stands so that Achylles is dead,
For his son in all the haste to send.
Hither to come for to se an end,
Of the syege and help us in this need.
Which now abyt with king Lycomede,
His bysayle and named is Pirrus.
And some him call Neptolonyus.
Right lusty fresh and by lykelynesse,
Able to attain to great worthynesse,
As by report and the fame is kouthe.
If he draw him to arms in his youth.
And sothfastly but if books lie,
As I have read and herd by prophecye,
That finally Troy the Cite,
Without him shall never won be.
Thus books say that be of old memory.
And how greeks shall have no victory,
Till he come this son of Achylles.
Wherefore in haste and be not reckeles,
Send for him that it be done anon.
And they commend his counsel euerichone
And to his read fully them assent,
And by advise full prudently they sent,
In all the haste on this embassyat,
The wise king full famous of estate,
I mean the prudent noble Menelay,
And forth he goes the self same day,
And on his journey began him fast speed.
Till that he came unto Lycomede.
The old king as ye have hard me tell,
Where for a time I will let him dwell,
And to Greeks in the mean while,
So as I can derecte again my style.
How Paris and Thelamon Ayax, slew each other in the fylde. Cap. xxxiii.
THe time of year when the shene son,
In the Crabbe had his course yronne,
To the highest of his ascencyon.
Which called is the somer stacyon.
When the virtue out of every root,
Is drawn up and the bawme soote,
Into the croppe and the fresh flower,
Most lusty is of hew and of color.
Till Phoebus chare in his discencion,
Out of the Crabbe toward the Lion,
Holds his course in the fyrmament.
I mean when he is retrogradyent.
And dries up the moisture and the wete,
Of herb and flower with his fervent hete.
And all that veer before him made grene,
To white he tourneth with his beams shene
Both sede and grain by decoction,
For naturally by dygestyon,
That first was raw in fruits and in flowers,
And watery eke by plente of humors,
He dries up and rypeth at the full,
With his feruence that men may them pull.
Each in his kind after the season,
Fro year to year by reuolucyon.
On their branches freshely as they sprede,
When that Cheryes powbly be and read.
First in June that seweth after May,
When the hot merry summers day,
No dwery is but like a gyaunt long.
The same time greeks stout and strong,
With rancour brent of their enuyous hete,
Have shapen them with their foen to mete,
And bright armed into fyelde they go,
And they of Troy out of the town also,
And their wards ordained euerychone,
The fyelde have take to meten with their foen
And began to assemble upon outher side.
But Thelamon of folly and of pride,
The same day of him as I read,
As he that had of his death no dread,
Disarmed was for battle of arest.
Of mayle and plate bare upon his breast,
For of folly and surquedons outrage,
Bare his head and bare of his vysage.
And bare also without basenet,
And naked eke of vyser and palet.
He rode all day of nothing tho aferde,
Having no weapon but a naked sword,
For wylfully he left at home his shield,
And his spear when he took the fyelde.
Full like a knight sitting on his stead,
And after him follows Dyomede.
Like Mars him self about him his meyne,
And fast by came the duke of Meneste,
King Vlixes and Agamenon.
ANd Pryamus with them of Troy town,
Took eke the fyelde with a full heavy chere,
For he was both fearful and in were,
In great dispeyre and inly full of dread,
To issue out sith Hector now was deed.
Worthy Troylus and also Deyphobus,
For in him self he demed plainly thus,
That he was febled greatly of his might,
After their death with greeks for to fight.
But out he goth hap what hap may,
And Paris eke full knyghtly of array,
King Phylomene and Pollydamas,
Worthy Esdre and with them Eneas.
By one assent there is no more to say.
The same day knightly to live or deye,
In their diffence and utterly ieoparte,
As gods list the field that day depart.
And proudely first the greeks they began perce,
And Paris tho with the^ that were of Perce,
Fell in a side with the son shene.
And his archers with arrows square and kene
The greeks began a sondre to disseuere,
For in the field they might not persenere,
Only for shot of the strong archers.
Of Perce land and the Arbalasters.
Which made them fle right of very need.
Into time that proud Dyomede,
When he of greeks saw this sodeyne flyghte
Them to releue like a manly knight,
Is come upon felly in his tene,
And first of all he set on Phylomene.
A worthy king that came on Troy side,
The which again began at him to ride,
That Dyomede has but little won.
With swords styffe as they together run,
That to behold it was a noble sight,
How each of them quyte him like a knight,
As they together ran on horse back.
That no man could in another se no lack.
But ever in one Troyans were so fell,
Upon greeks that they ne might dwell,
To keep their land so they made them blede,
Mauger the force of this Dyomede.
The slaughter was so hydous and so strong.
That through ye field the woeful noise ronge
And mortal cry of wounded folk that lay.
Slain on the soil endlonge the way.
Till Meneste sitting on his stead,
The worthy duke began to take heed,
In what myschyefe greeks were beset,
And hent anon a spear sharp ywhet,
Smyttynge his horse felly in the side,
And through to renges knightly he began ride
And stynt not so furyous he was.
Till that he met with Pollydamas,
A Troyan knight and a manly man,
And unawarely at him as he ran,
He hytte him so in many man's fight,
To the earth that he made him to a light.
And with a sword at ground when he lay,
He had him slain the self same day,
In his rage and his cruel tene,
Ne had be that king Phylomene,
Had him reskewed in this adventure.
Which so frendely for him did his cure,
Maugre the might of this Menestee,
From his hands that he went free.
All for hathed and be spreynt with blood.
And all this while Ayax proudely rode,
Of surquedy and of wylfulnesse,
Of folly rage and foul hardynesse,
Naked his body head and euerydele,
Amyd his foen armed bright in steel.
And of Troyans such a slaughter made,
That they lay dead both in son and shade
Throughout the field where this Thelamon
Among them rode woodder then Lion.
That Trojan none might him tho withsta^de
While that he held his bloody sword in hand
That wonder was naked as he rode,
Without wound that he so long abode.
And as Guydo makes rehersayle,
And writes eke for a great marvel,
That he vnslayne might so long contune.
But when a thing is shapen of fortune,
It might be fall what ever thing it be,
In weal or woe joy or aduersyte.
When one shall dye or when he shall escape.
But she alas can alder first by iape,
And bring a man unawarely to myschaunce,
When he best weneth to have assurance,
In this lady of transmutacyon.
Like as it fell of worthy Thelamon,
This same day which of folly pride,
Among his foen began so far to ride,
Ylyche fresh right as he began,
And slew of Perce many a manly man.
And of him self took no manner head,
His knightly heart so was deuoyde of dread,
Till Paris saw his great hardynesse,
And how that he his knight did oppress,
Enchasynge them so mortally and narowe,
Without abode anon he took an arowe,
Extoxycat sharp and venymous,
And in this Ire fell and despyteous,
And shot at him in the self tide,
As says Guydo and smyt him through ye side
That of that hurt there is no more to say,
He felt well that he must deye.
And when he saw none other remedy,
For he rode supprysed with envy,
Thrughout ye prese his sword aye in his hand
Into time that he Paris fond.
And unto him with a pale chere,
He spoke and said anon as ye shall here.
Paris quod he as this mortal wound,
Of thine arrowe sharp and square yground
Has finally my life put in dispeyre,
Never into Greece to have repeyre.
Right so shall I by short conclusyowne,
Away shape that into Troy town,
With thy life thou enter shalt no more.
At my heart the venym byt so sore,
That other gain is there none but death.
But yet tofore or I yield up the breath,
Trust me right well there may be no socour
That thou ne shalt be predecessor,
And go before deep down into hell.
There with Pluto eternally to dwell.
So as of right it is necessary,
Thy time is set which thou may not tarry.
And here my troth for morgage of thy corse
That in all have I shall make deuorse,
Atwyxe the and the queen Heleyne.
And twynne a sonder eke the false cheyne,
Which linked was by color of wedlock.
And has so long be shet under lock.
Only by fraud and false engyne also.
But now the knotte shall be broke a two.
With my right hand the troth to darayne,
For through the cause only of you twain,
In this werre many worthy knight,
His life has lost and many an other wight
On outher side for your both sake.
But of all this I shall an end make.
Of your love and foul auoutrye.
For finally Paris thou shalt dye,
Of my hands as it is thy chance.
And with ye word his sword he began enhaunce
Above his head and smote him in the face,
That he fell dead in the self place.
For his head he has parted on twain.
And right forthwith there is no more to saine
Ayax alas of his mortal wound,
Fell dead also gruflynge unto the ground.
Full pyteously and then they of Troy,
Have Paris take up out of the weye,
And bore him home into their cite.
But Dyomede and duke Menestee,
With many greek riding enuyrowne,
Sewed the chase even to the town.
But for cause Tytan began to low,
Down by the arc of his days bow,
For into west under the rows read,
And Hesperus began his light to shede.
This to say or it drew to night,
The Greeks be repeyred home aryght,
Eueryche of them to his lodging place.
To take their rest all that nyghtes space.
Save as I read that Agamenowne,
The greeks made fast by the town,
To set their tents and pauylyons.
Of very pride fast by the wall,
Habytacles and new mansyons.
And they of Troy dyspeyred over all,
No refute could Greeks for to let.
But of assent fast their gates shette.
And all the night on the walls wake,
And over this such a woe they make,
Through the Cite that Paris was so dead,
For finally now they can no read,
But weep and cry and sorrow ever in one.
Now al ye sons of Priamus were gone.
Fortune alas has them so appeyred,
That of their life they be now dyspeyred,
Of all hope and of good welfare.
Perpetually for to live in care.
Unto the death and that was fast bye.
For now there is no manner remedy,
Upon no side nor refute none at all,
But them to keep close within the wall,
That for to se it was a pyteous thing.
And such a woe makes now the king,
For Paris death that for deadly smerte,
Him thought platly that his woeful heart,
Recureles would brast and ryue a tweyne.
And into tears he began dystylle and reyne,
As he would tho for very sorrow deye.
And of the queen alas what shall I seye,
Hecuba his own mother dear,
That cries and wepeth with a woeful cheer.
Of Pollycene that was so woe begone,
And of his systren also euerychone,
That have their heir and their clothes torn,
As if they had their own death ysworne,
For drery woe and for pyteous pain.
But for by all the fair queen Heleyne,
Wayleth cries with a deadly cheer,
That her eyes which whylom were so clear,
Forderked were with doleful tears smerte.
And to the corpse suddenly she sterte,
And clypped yt in her arms twain.
And pyteously embrace it and restrain,
Like as she would with him dye anon.
For still she lay dombe as any stone,
As marbyll cold her lymmes craumpishing,
Ready at all toward her buryinge.
Till men by force from the corpse her hent.
And she her heyr and her chekes rent.
As tho she had be fallen in a rage.
That changed was alas in her vysage,
Her natyfe color and her rody hew,
Whylom as fresh as any rose new.
Now is she like unto ashes cold,
And with her hands aye together fold,
Her self she smote on her pale face.
And ever among the corpse she did embrace,
In her swownes as she fell to ground,
Twenty times and wept full his wound.
With woe she was awhaped and amate,
Of all comfort alas disconsolate.
In heart being inly desirous,
Through her rage passing furyous,
To dye attones with her own knight.
For toward death enclosed was her sight.
As she that list to live now no more.
And as I trow that never man before,
No woman saw fall in such distress.
In such disioynt of deadly heaviness.
Nor for no woe so pyteously yraue,
Not Cleopatre going to her grave.
Nor woeful Tesbe that fro the kaue sterte,
When she her self smote unto the heart.
Nor the faithful true Orestylle,
When that she saw her lord again her will,
Marcus Prolancus unto ship gone,
And for his love fell down dead anon.
Nor the sorrow of true Iulia,
Nor the feruence of faithful Porcia,
Of which the one fell dead suddenly,
For she saw blood spent so cruelly,
On her lords dreadful gardment.
And Portia so true in her intent,
When that her lord Brutus lost his life,
For because she might have no knyfe,
With rolys red slew her self alas.
Was not also in the self case,
Arthemysya queen of Tarse land.
Of Mausalus the grave when she foude,
Her own knight of whose bones small,
Full woefully and with a cheer pale,
She poudre made and drank it every morrow
But all the woe and the furyous sorrow,
Of these echone yet may not atteyne,
Unto the sorrow of the queen Heleyne.
That finally will her self fordo.
For Paris sake whom she loved so.
For after him she will not live a day.
But be awreke plainly if she may,
Upon her life rather than dysseuere.
And thus in woe aye she does persevere,
In her heart Paris sat so deep.
Alas who says that women can not weep
Yes doubtless they have it of nature.
Though it so be that they no woe endure.
Yet can they feign and salt tears find,
Plenty enough of thryr own kind,
And sorowles morn and complain.
I say not this for the queen Heleyne,
That was with woe wounded to the heart.
That fro the death she wend not sterte,
For deaths darte her heart made ryue,
And yet she rose again fro death to live,
Only by grace for all her fell rage,
For every woe by process must aswage.
And over gone and wasted by miracle,
For each venym made is some Tryacle,
And every woe has his remedy.
For though Heleyne as tho fayn would dye,
Her kind ne would assent yet thereto.
So suddenly to slay her self for woe.
She was a woman no man should her wit,
Me list no more of her woe endyte.
Lest unto you that it were tedyous,
To heren all her pains furyous,
Her cruel woe and lamentacion,
Which would meue to compassyon,
In very sothe to write euerydele,
Any heart though it were made of stele.
For king Pryam and the queen also,
Had such routhe of her pyteous woe,
To se her weep and furyously complain,
That they of her felt as much pain,
As they did almost for him Paris.
Hereof no more for Pryam by deuyse,
After this rage and this mortal woe,
Amyd the Temple sacred to Juno,
Ordained has with full busy cure,
For the corpse a rich sepulture.
And in all haste therein made it shette.
That in sothenesse if I should not let,
To tell all the rytes and the gyse,
That there were made in their paynim wise,
And the costs of his buryinge,
It should be all to long a taryinge,
Ceryously thereon to abide.
Wherefore as now I let ouerslyde,
Their paynim rites supersticious.
How Pantisilia queen of Amazonis coming in aid of the Trojans, was slain
by Pyrrhus Achylles son. Ca. xxxiiii.
ANd tell I will how king Priamus,
Commanded has of mischyefe and of need,
Through Troy town only of very dread,
To shytte their gates strongly as they may.
And thereupon both by night and day,
To keep watch for shortly they of Troy,
Dysconsolate of all their old joy,
Can no refute but weep and sorrow make.
For they ne durst no more undertake,
Again Greeks into field to gone.
Till on a day king Agamenon,
His messager by good auisement,
To Pryamus into Troy has sent,
Requyrynge him of manhood like a knight,
To issue out with Greeks for to fight.
As he was wont with his chyualrye.
But king Pryam his axinge began deny.
And shortly said to him that was sent,
That he ne would at his assignement,
Not ones pass the gates of the town.
But at his own free electiowne,
When ever him list without compellynge.
And yet in sothe cause of his taryinge,
Was for the hardy queen of Femynye,
Toward Troy that fast began her hye.
Out of her land and little regyon,
The which as books make mention,
After the scyte of the fyrmamente,
Is in the plage of the Oryent.
And called is the reygne of Amazonis.
Of which the custom and the use is,
That only women therein shall abide.
And they were wont armed for to ride.
And have in arms great experyence.
For their labor and their dylygence,
Is finally to have exercise,
Fro day to day in Martes high service.
And ouermore their custom and vsaunce,
As to this day is made remembrance,
Is that no man shall them nygh nere,
But if it be three months in the year.
This to say in June Apryll and May.
And then the women have in custom aye,
Unto an isle a little there beside,
Where as the men by them self abide,
Fro year to year together euerychone,
Unto the men out of their land to gone.
And there abide in that regyon,
Till time comes of concepcion.
Without taryinge any longer while.
For then anon home unto their i will,
They be repeyred out of that country.
Unto time that they delivered be.
And as fast as the child is borne,
For lack of keeping that it be not lorne,
He fostred is till three years be agone,
Among the women and then right anon.
To the isle beside adjacent,
Unto the men the child in haste is sent.
If that it be of kind masculyne,
And if it fall that it be femynyne,
With the women abide still it shall.
Till that it be in acts mercyall,
Full well expert and that she can eke know,
A spear to haddle or to draw a bow.
Like the statutes of that regyon.
The which as books make mencyon,
Is set between Ewrope and Asya.
And of this land was Pantasilia,
Whylom lady and chyefe gouernesse.
Full renowned of strength and hardiness.
Through out ye world both in length and bread,
And yet in sothe to speak of womanhead,
For all her might she had an huge pryse.
For both she was virtuous and wise.
Wonder dyscrete and had an honest name,
Notwythstandynge the excellence of fame,
Of her renown in arms and in glory.
For of conquest and of high victory,
She was most surmountynge out of dread,
Of any woman that I can of read.
And sothely yet books bear witness,
Of womanhead and of gentylnesse,
She kept her so that nothing her asterte,
The which loved with all her hole heart,
Worthy Hector and with all her might,
Only for he was so good a knight.
All her joy and worldly plesaunce,
Her hearty ease and soueraygne suffysaunce,
In very sothe where she wake or wyncke,
Was ever in one upon him to think.
Of very faith without any slouthe,
And unto him she was by bond of truth,
Confederate of old affectiowne.
That when she herd how that Troy town
Beseiged was of the Greeks fell,
This hardy queen list no longer dwell,
But hastes her as fast as ever she may,
Toward Troy infull good array,
With all the worthy women of her land.
Full well expert and preued of her hand.
Well horsed eke and armed rychely,
And as I find in her company,
A thousand maidens rydyng by her side,
This worthy queen that durst well abide,
She with her brought in steel armed bright.
For love of Hector her own true knight,
And on her way fast she began her speed,
To help him if she se cause of need.
For in nothing she could her more delight.
Than toward him her faithfully to quyte.
For that was all her lust and hertes joy,
But when that she come was to Troy,
And has hard tell as by relacyowne.
That he was dead most worthy of renown,
To whom she was so loving and so true,
Anon she began to change cheer and hew,
And pyteously began to weep and cry,
And fared in sothe as she would dye.
For very woe and hertely heaviness.
And thought she would through her wortthynesse,
Avenge his death platly if she may.
On the Greeks and so upon a day,
She prays Pryam with great affectiowne
For to open the gates of the town,
And to go out with Greeks for to fight.
That they may know and be expert aright
Of this women the great worthynesse.
And of this queen the famous hardynesse.
And so the king hoping for the best,
Without abode granted her request.
The next morrow when Phoebus shone full shene
And all tofore out goth Philomene,
The noble king with them of Pafflagonye.
And after him other knights many,
Followed after with worthy Eneas.
The Troyan eke Dan Pollidamas,
And the queen Pantasilla,
By the gate called Dardanica.
Toward Greeks proudly issued out,
With her women riding her about.
The which anon when Greeks did espy,
Into field began them fast hye.
ANd first of all worthy Meneste,
Pantasylla when that he did se,
With his sporres made his stead gone.
And with a spear rode to her anon.
Of whom the queen astoned never a dele,
Kaught a spear that was squared well,
Round ye shafte and the head well ground,
Which as they coupe smet hi^ down to ground.
And maugre him reued him his stead.
But then in haste in came Dyomede,
And cruelly to the queen began ride,
And she as fast on the other side,
Rode eke to him in plates bright and shene,
And as they met with their speres kene,
She hytte so this fell Diomede,
For all his might and his manlyhead,
That she him made his sadell for to lose.
There is no more he might tho not chese.
And in despyte of his men echone,
She has his shield him berafte anon.
And it delyuereth proudly as she rode.
To a maid that upon her abode.
And like a Tygre in his gredynesse,
Or like in sothe to a Lioness,
That day she fared riding up and down,
Among the Greeks till that Thelamowne,
Began to behold the slaughter that she made,
Of high despyte and rancour ouerlade,
As he that might for ire not sustene,
Began reyne his horse to fall upon this queen.
But when that she his coming did espy,
She fell on him in her melancolye,
So mortally maugre his knights all,
That to the ground she made him for to fall
And Greeks put in so great disraye,
Where ever she rode all that ylke day,
That they ne might before her not sustene.
And through the help of king Philomene,
As mine auctour records in his book.
Amyd the field Thelamon she took.
And sent him forth through her hie renown,
As prisoner toward Troy town.
Till unto reskuse came he Dyomede,
And cruelly on them that began him led,
He fell unawarely with an huge route,
Of his knights riding him about.
And from their hands maugre al their might
He him delyuereth like a manly knight.
At which time the hardy queen anon,
With her women about her euerichone,
The Greeks has before her on the plain,
As wryt Guydo so mortally belayne,
That she them made of necessytee,
Out of the field with her sword to fle.
That verily it seemed incredible,
And to leave a manner impossyble,
To se the women Greeks so enchase,
Which might not there abide before their face,
For in the field in any wise stand.
For they them drive to the self stronde,
Down to the clyffe of the salt see.
And slew of them so huge and great plentee,
That finally they had all be dystroyed,
For evermore and utterly acloyed,
Ne had Dyomede stand tho at diffence.
And of knighthod made them resistance.
For he that day in party and in all,
For Greeks stood as a sturdy wall.
And was alone their help and chief succor
But for all that with worship and honor
Pantasilla as made is memory,
Repeyred is with conquest and victory,
With all her women into Troy town.
Upon the hour of Phoebus going down.
And by the side of this hardy queen,
Armed in steel rode king Phylomene.
Whom Pryam has with great reverence,
Knightly received and did his diligence,
Them to refreshe with every manner thing,
That might be unto their lykinge.
And as their hertes could best deuyse.
And after this in full goodly wise,
He thanked has the noble hardy queen,
Of her goodness that her list to seen,
To help him in his great need.
And offered her in Guydo as I read,
All that he has treasour and richesse,
Hoping fully through her worthiness,
Upon Greeks avenged for to be,
And for to keep him safe in his Cite,
Maugre Greeks which of them say nay.
For as I read after day by day,
She slinte not proudly them to assail,
Again whose sword they might not auayl,
So mortally she made their sides blede.
Till Menelay fro king Lycomede,
Repeyred is with Neptolonyus,
Which in his books called eke Pirrhus.
Whylom the son of cruel Achillles,
Whom for to se full huge was the prese,
Of the Greeks going enuyron.
And for he was as by succession,
Borne to be heir of this Achilles,
He has received of Myrmydones,
With great honor and great solempnyte.
So glad were they their young lord to se.
To whom echone they made affiaunce,
And were eke sworn by bond and assurance,
For life or death to him to be true.
And his lieges and change for no new.
To obey his lust in all manner thing.
And after this Agamenon the king,
Made him knight and Thelamonius,
With a sword gyrte anon Pirrhus.
Saying to him in the self place,
With yt baudrik when he him did enbrace,
Take heed quod he mine own cousin dear
To resemble in manhood and in chere.
In knighthod eke and in worthiness,
To thy father which in sothfastnesse,
In his time was so noble a knight,
And ouermore with all thy full might,
To avenge his death that thou do thy pain
And the^ of greeks worthy Dukes twain.
Full humbly began down to knele,
And set a sporre upon either hele,
As was the manner of gold bourned bright.
And in this while Pirrhus is made knighte.
As ye have herd in full high presence,
With great honor and due reverence,
Like the custom of the Greeks lays.
And the rytes used in tho days.
And then anon has king Agamenon,
With full glad chere and great affection,
Delivered him fully by sentence,
The arms hole without difference,
Which Achilles by his life bare,
His worthy father on his shoulders square.
As for next heir of line by discente,
And all his Treasour also and his Tente.
Armure and all delivered were anon.
Unto Pirrhus and Greeks euerychone,
Eight days suynge by and by,
Through out the host full solempnely,
They halowe in honor of this young knight*
Til on a morrow when Phoebus shone full bright
Which with his light that shines fro so fer,
Diffaced has the streams of the sterre,
Lucifer the days messagere.
When Greeks began in plates bright and clear,
Enarmed them that day sour and sweet,
Fulle in purpose with their fone to mete.
And manfully out of their tents wide,
Against Troyans they began to ride.
Ward after ward proudly into field.
And Pirrhus bare that day upon his shield,
His fathers arms like as says Guydo,
And of the same he had upon also,
A cote armure that became him well.
And forth he rode armed bright in steel.
And casually formest as he was,
He met first with Pollydamas.
A knight of Troy a full manly man,
And furyously Pirrhus to him ran,
On horseback with a mighty sword,
And began to hurtle with him in the berde,
So myghtely that in this hateful strife,
Pollydamas had lost his life,
Ne had been reskued without more taryinge,
Of Phylomene the noble worthy king.
Only of knighthod and of worthynesse,
To whom Pirrhus hastily began him dress
With his sword and smit him in the syghte,
That from his horse he made him to alighte.
For he the stroke might not sustene.
And sothfastly this worthy Phylomene,
Of Pirrhus had ytake be anon,
Save his knights assembled into one,
Of Pafflagonye came him to reskue.
But Pirrhus aye so fyersly began pursewe,
Upon this king with Myrmydones,
Beset in myschefe among the great prese,
That many knight of this noble king,
Yslayne was at his reskuynge.
He stood of death in so straight a case.
Till of fortune came Pollydamas,
To his reskuse and did his full might,
Him to deliver and quyte him like a knight.
But in sothenesse there was such resystence,
Of Pirrhus knights standing at diffence
That aye in mischyef stood king Philomene.
Till Pantasilla of femenie the queen,
With her women a great company,
Began this thing of adventure espy,
Which were echone for the more delight,
On their armure that day clad in white.
That verily there was no lylye flower,
Nor snow yt flaketh from Iubyters his tower
Of whytenesse that is fresher on to seen,
Then in field was this hardy queen.
Which first of all among the Greeks chees,
Proudly to fall on Myrmydones,
Among them rydinge up and down,
She the^ vnhorseth through her hie renown
And slew them upon every side,
Making their renges for to sever wide.
Till Thelamon in a furyous heat,
With a spear unawarely did her mete,
And in a rage smote her to the plain.
But she anon full lyfely rose again,
And with her swerd so marketh Thelamown
That from his horse she made him light down
Plat to the ground on his hands twain.
And then her women did their busy pain,
To make their queen her stead to recure.
And all this while stood in adventure,
Of his life worthy Philomene,
Pirrhus knights were on him so kene.
Maugre his men that they have him take,
It geyneth not diffence for to make.
The Greeks have so strongly him beset.
And forth they lad him it might be no bet,
Toward their tents throughout all the field
The which thing when the queen beheld,
With her women that about her rode,
Pursewed after without more abode,
That finally they have so after sewed,
Through their force that he was reskued,
Maugre the manhood of Myrmidones.
And Pantasilla was so mercyles,
Upon the Greeks that of necessyte,
Through her force and her crueltee,
Before her sword they durst not abide,
But when Pirrhus saw her great pride,
To his knights loud he began to cry,
And said it was shame and villanye,
For the women so to lose their land.
And to be slain so felly of her hand.
Wherefore echone your hertes does resume,
And of assent let us now consume,
The pride of them that none away escape,
For but if we some remedy do shape,
This ylke day their force to confound,
Shameful report to us shall rebounde,
Perpetually where we sleep or wake.
And as Pirrhus began his sword to take.
Furyously and with a knyghtly chere,
This hardy queen happed for to hear,
All that Pirrhus to his knights spoke.
All her list not ones to turn bake,
Nor of his thret for to take heed
For platly she had of him no dread.
But right proudly began to draw nere,
And to him said anon as ye shall hear.
Oh thou Pirrhe son of Achilles,
That slew Hector in knyghthod pereles,
Through his trenys and his trecherye,
By malice only and by false envy,
Unware when he nothing did aduerte.
The which never may out of my heart,
So grene it sticks in my remembrance,
Upon his death for to do vengeance,
And it sit well as seems unto me,
That his death be venged upon the,
First of all and on thy fathers blood,
For love of him so gentle and so good,
The death of whom should al ye world compain
Not only men do their busy pain,
To quyte his death but women eke also,
With all their might and help eke thereto,
As right requires without excepcion.
There on to do full execution.
And I now stand in the same plyte,
And for thou have us wonnen in despite,
Of our power shortly in sentence,
Thou shall in haste have experyence.
And know our force sothly euerydele,
Right in short time trust me right well,
Here in this field by shedynge of thy blood.
Wherefore Pirrhus weren began as wood,
As any Tygre bore or wood Lion,
So fret the color in his complexion,
And in his Ire fell and despytous,
He took a spear pale and furyous,
And ran at her with all his might and pain
And agaynwarde as she that list not feyne,
Encountered him all deuoyde of fear.
But Pirrhus first brake on her his spear,
Albe that he might her not remeue.
In her sadell nor but lyttel grieve.
But she again so sore began him hytte,
On his stead that he may not sytte.
But descends endlonge the plain.
And up he rose with full great disdain,
And took a sword in his hand anon,
And made his stead line right to gone,
Upon this queen of passing worthiness.
And inwardly of hate and of woodnesse,
In heart yfret smet at her many stroke,
But ever she sat still as any oak,
And of force in her ire pale,
Efte again she made him to auale,
To the earth maugre all his pain.
And thus the fight lasts of them twain,
A large while till Myrmydones,
Have take their lord by force out of ye prese.
And made him his horse recure again.
And in his time on the self plain,
With his baner he descended down,
The worthy king great Agamenowne,
With kings dukes endlonge the grene.
With their wards that wonder was to seen,
So prudently in the field battayled,
That has Trojans mortally assailed.
But tho in haste king Phylomene,
As ye have herd reskued by the queen,
When he has thanked to her worthiness,
With his knights in he began him dress,
And Pantasilla assembled both in one,
Upon the Greeks began for to gone.
Where men may se with speres sharp ground
Eueryche other bear unto the ground.
There men may se proudly without lack,
The manly knights run on horse back.
And the women mortally oppress,
The fell Greeks through their hardynesse.
Only through force of the mighty queen.
That dead they lay covering all the grene.
Wherewith came in Dan Pollydamas,
Fro death reskued and eke Eneas,
King Esdras eke of Troy the cite,
And tho the wards began together fle,
On either party fell and furious,
But most of all Neptolonius,
That Pirrhus hight ye greeks champiowne,
Irous and wood on them of Troy town,
Made his sword in their flesh byte.
And Pantasilla proudly her to quyte,
Ne spares not with mortal wounds wide,
Greeks to slay upon every side.
Now here now there to their confusyon.
And Pirrhus then is fall on Glawcon,
The half brother to Pollydamas.
For Anthenor eke his father was.
And Pirrhus so in a cruel ire,
With melancolye new set a fire,
Smote Glawcon so or that he took head,
Among the prease that he fell down dead
And Pantasillya from her women all,
The same tide is on Pirrhus fall.
And he of her when he had a syghte,
Rode eke again like a manly knight,
And as they hurtle on horse back yfere,
Of adventure with swerdes styffe and clear,
Eueryche made other to alyghte,
And hatefully on foot so they fight.
Long or other might of other win,
Till they were made of force for to twynne,
By the wards that went them atwene,
I mean Pirrhus and this hardy queen.
And all this time Dan Pollydamas,
So wood for ire in his heart was,
Amyd Greeks for his brothers death,
That whom he met for his love he sleth.
Without mercy in his hateful tene.
That he alone and this worthy queen,
Such a slaughter on the Greeks make,
That they the field vtterty forsake,
And began to fle to their tents down.
Till Dyomede and Ayax Thelamowne,
And Pyrrhus eke made turn again,
But they in sothe were so ouerlayne,
That they ne might all that day releue,
And thus they faughte till it drew to eve,
To most damage of the Greeks side.
Till Phoebus began his bright chair hyde,
Low in the west and to shroude his light,
Under courtayne of the black night,
That either part thought for the best,
To depart and draw to their rest.
And took their ease that night as they may.
And all the month suynge day by day,
Without any interrupcion,
They fought yfere albe no mention.
Be made thereof nor write in special,
Of no person but in general,
Who that ever did evil or well,
In Troy book I find never a dele.
Save the queen like as wryt Guydo,
Of her women an hundred has forgo,
That slain were thylke month day,
The death of whom plainly if she may,
Shall well be quyt if so that fortune,
Be favorable friendly to contune,
That her face change not contrary.
But she that can every day so varye,
Alas the while and selde in one soiourne,
Began fro this queen her look away to turn
To enhaste through her vngoodlyhead,
Attropose to break her lives threde,
As the storye plainly shall you lere,
Beningly if ye list to hear.
THe fatal hour hard for to remewe,
Of cruel death which no man may eschew
Nor in this life finally escape,
Specially when Parchas have it shape,
Approach began it may none other been.
Alas the while of this hardy queen,
Which on a day furyous and wroth,
Into the field out of Troy goth.
And began on greeks proudly for to set.
And alderfyrst Pirrhus with her met,
Of mortal hate and indignaciowne.
And she in haste by the renges down,
Rode unto him swyftly on her stead,
Whose spores sharp made his sides blede,
And as they met their speres in the rest,
They bare so even markynge at the breast,
That their shaftes sothly this no tale,
Began to shyuer all on pieces small,
Without bowynge other back or chine,
For neither made other to enclyne.
Save the head forged hard of stele,
Of Pantasillia that was ground well,
In Pirrhus heart perced has so deep,
That plate in soth nor maile might him keep
But the sharpness of his speres head,
Was of his blood in party read.
The which stroke when Greeks began espy,
For astoned loud began to cry.
And all attones for the noise and sown
Upon the queen in the field came down,
In compass wise going enuyrowne.
But through her prowess and her high renown
She her defends that it was marvel.
But they alas so sore began her assail,
That all to hew they have her basenet,
Amyd Greeks so thycke she was beset.
That with axes and swerdes square.
Her shield in sothe made was all bare,
And her shoulders were naked eke alas,
The mayle hewn of and the rere bras.
And Pirrhus then like as it is found,
For anguishe only of his grene wound,
In doubt plainly where he should eskape,
Toward this queen fast began him rape,
To be avenged whatsoever fall.
Amyd the field among the Greeks all.
And when she saw that he came so fast,
Of force only to mete him yet she cast,
And with her sword first began him assail,
But of her stroke it happed her to fail,
Among the prese so narowe she was besette.
And Pirrhus sword was so sharp whet,
That suddenly of her arm he smet,
Alas there was none armure him to let,
But raceth through all the shoulder bone,
So that this queen fell down dead anon.
And of malice for to venge him more,
At his heart the ire fret so sore,
That with a chere of very anger pale,
He has her hewn all on pieces small.
The which was to foul a cruel deed.
But ever in one Pirrhus began so blede,
Nigh to the death of his mortal wound,
For lack of blood that he fell to ground,
In a trance full long groflynge he lay,
Till knights in all the haste they may.
Have take him up and laid him on a shield,
And dolefully home out of the field.
They have him borne wounded as he was.
And the women of the queen alas,
For very sorrow and inward deadly woe,
When they saw their lady was ago.
For to be dead they were so desirous,
That in all haste wood and furyous,
In a rage without gouernayle,
Greeks they began of new to assail.
To aue^ge their queen they were so herty ki^de
That they slew sothly as I find,
Two thousand greeks on the^ they were so wood
But oh alas in great dysioynt they stood,
Only for lack they have no governor,
For she was gone yt was their chief succoure.
Which was also to speak of hardynesse,
Of women al lady and maystresse,
As of her hand that I can of read.
OH ye Trojans ye stand in great dread,
Amid ye field all out of governance,
The day is come of your unhappy chance,
For now have ye leder none nor guide,
Farewell your trust now on every side,
And Greeks be upon you so strong,
That ye the field may not keep long.
For they cast them felly you to quyte,
This same day as Dares list endyte.
For as he wryt homeward as they draw,
Ten thousand Trojans were of greeks slawe
For all their wards came attones down,
And mortally without excepciowne,
They kylle and slay all that them withstode.
And most they were upon the women wood,
To be avenged plainly as I read,
On every half and their blood to shede,
Without mercy or remyssyowne,
Chasynge Troyans home into the town
Out of the field for there mas none abode,
So pyteously tho with them it stood,
That they ne can none other recure cast,
But keep their town and shit their gates fast
For all their hope clean was agone,
Any more to fight with their fone.
For now their trust of knyghthod was away
Their worthy men slain welawaye.
Refute was none but in their cite,
To keep them close it may none other be.
For them thought they might it keep long,
Their walls were so mighty and so strong,
If they had plenty of vytayle,
Though all ye world attones them assail,
They may be sure while they keep them in,
For evermore that no men shall them wyn.
Yet nevertheless early and eke late,
The Greeks made tofore every gate,
Full mighty watch and awayte full strong
With preuy spies going in among,
That of their foen none escape away.
By none engyne as ferforth as they may.
And in this while within Troy town,
More then I can make descriptiowne,
For the queen there was so great a sorrow,
Of every wight both at eve and morrow,
That she alas was slain for her mede.
And aldermost for they ne might have,
The dead corpse to burye and to grave,
With reverence and with honor dew,
For which they began to the greeks sewe.
With great prayer and with great business,
But all in vain and in ydelnesse,
Was their request yt Greeks were so wroth.
And finally with many sundry oath,
Only of malice and of hot envy,
The dead corpse to them they deny,
And shortly said of mortal enmyte,
That of hounds it shall devoured be,
There was no gain their ra^cour to co^pesse.
But Pyrrhus then of very gentylnesse,
Ne would assent to so foul a deed,
But wood and wroth cruel Dyomede,
Said openly how it was sitting,
That she fail of her buryinge,
That slain had so many worthy man.
And thus the strife among the Greeks began,
With great rumoure and alteraciowne.
Till at the last under Troy town,
Of her they have the dead corpse ytake,
And cruelly in a profounde lake,
They have her cast where I let her lie,
And unto Troy again I will me hye,
To tell forth how they live in pyne.
OH cruel Mars yt have made for to fine,
Through thine ire al ye worthy blood,
Of Troy alas why have thou be so wood,
Against them to slay their knights all.
Why have thou let thy bitter venim fall,
On them alas thou sterre unfortunate,
With all the world to make them at debate.
Oh hateful sterre hot combust and dry,
Fyryirous ground of all envy,
Hasty ever full of discension,
And coleryk of thy complexion.
In murdre and death is aye thy delight,
In taking vengeance most thin appetite,
First meuer of anger and of hate,
Root of contek causinge to debate.
In strife and murmur most is thy desire,
Fearful of look as any wild fire.
And gastfull ever of thy wood sight,
As any leven so flawminge is thy light,
Like in twyncklynge to the spakes read,
In great fyres that abroad so sprede,
Consumynge aye by melancolye,
Hertes that be embraced with envy,
Thy wrath is aye so fretynge and so kene,
And causes men to be long and lene,
Comsumpt sklendre brown and citren hewed,
Vnmercyable and right evil thewed.
Wonder sleyghty and engenyous,
Compassynge and suspecyous,
Tryste and solen and full of heaviness,
And assenting to all cursednesse,
To awaytinge death and roberye,
To murdre also and to trecherye,
Without remors of any conscience,
So venymous is thine influence,
And helper art unto false treason.
The house of whom is the Scorpyon,
And crowned art in the caprycorne,
But in the Bull is thy kingdom lorne.
For therein is thy deiection,
Thy power lost and dominacion.
And have also in thy subjection.
Exyle, werre, chains and prison,
Proscripsyon and captyuyte,
That for thy malice on Troy the cite,
So would god I could chyde aryghte,
That have on them kydde thy fell might,
Of thy rancour holy the outtraunce.
First on them for to do vengeance,
With speres sharp and swerdes kene whette,
And now in prison to enclose them and shet.
So vengeably that they dare not out,
The Greeks fell aye lying them about,
They be not hold in manner wise,
In thy temple to do sacrafyse,
Another with Bulls nor with bores wild,
Nor with beasts that ever be vnmylde.
As Tygres Bears nor the wood Lion,
Of which thou art sovereign and patron.
They are not hold to do the brymstone smoke
On thine Aulters which art so felly wroke,
Of them alas and now worst of all,
Thou have shad out chief of all thy gall,
Among them self to bring in treason,
Feigned truth and symulacyon,
To make hertes among them self divide,
Lo how the serpent of dyscorde began glyde.
Full slyly in till he have caughte a place,
To void away both hap and grace,
With his venym of dyscensyon,
When it is spread in any regyon,
In any common borough town or cite,
Among men of high or low degree.
For when hertes in love be not one,
Farewell fortune their grace is clean agone,
For where dyscorde holds resydence,
It is well worse than sword of pestylence.
For what is worse of her far or nere,
Than a foe that is famylyere,
For who may more harm if him lust,
Then any enemy upon whom men trust,
That to descriue shortly in a clause.
The very root and the true cause,
Of all myschyefe and confusyon,
In every land is discenscion,
And more peryllous if it be pryuye,
Record I take on Troy the Cite.
That found Fortune friendly aye at need,
Till long hid hate began abroad to sprede,
For prudence sothly has provided,
That a renge in it self divided,
Shall recureles turn wild and waste,
And the dwellers desolate in haste.
For Mars that is of envy lord,
Among them self sown has discord,
Again the which may no sucoure be,
For worse than werre sothly seems me.
Treason cured under a feigned peace,
And root of all was old Anchises,
With his son called Eneas.
Dan Anthenor and Pollydamas,
That have contrived among them utterly,
And under veil conceived secretly,
If it fall Greeks Troy to have,
First how they may their own lives save,
By some engyne sleyghtes or treat,
And if so were that it may not be,
As they cast by no manner way,
They would rather traitors be to Troy.
Pryuely so it were not spyed.
And covertly with Greeks ben allied,
Then stand hole with the town of truth,
And wylfully of neclygence and slouthe,
Suraunce and oath of old made to the town,
Refuse plainly in conclusyowne,
And allyaunce let slake and slide,
And their lygaunce set also aside.
In their advise they thought for the best,
For they them cast for to live at rest,
And meryer eke for ernest and for game,
To save their life and wandre forth in shame,
Then wylfully dye at mischyefe,
To trayish their town they held it no reprefe
So they might escape them self alive,
Them list nothing for the town to strive,
They sought in sothe for sour or for sweet,
A mean way to live in queet.
And thereupon they have their way nome,
Unto the king. and when yt they were come,
To his presence in full covert wise,
Under color they began deuyse,
To tell their tail so that finally,
Their counsel was that Pryam utterly
In no manner be not reckles,
To pursewe to Greeks for a peace,
If it so be that he it get may.
And yield again to king Menelaye,
Without strife the fresh queen Heleyne.
And ouermore that he not disdain,
The harms done by Paris gone full yore,
In Citheron justly to restore.
But oh alas of false iniquytye,
This counsel rose for under in secret,
The venim was as sugre under gall.
For well they wyste that the Greeks all,
Ne would accord in conclusyowne,
To have a peace with them of Troie town.
Whiles they were to such mischyefe brought
To treat thereof in sothe it was for naught.
For Pryamus the^ and Hecuba the queen,
With his sons and with Pollycene,
That yet were left with him in the town,
Might have reigned by long successyowne,
If that Greeks full and not repented,
Unto a peace holy had assented.
But that counsel given was to late,
Sythen Greeks of well elder date,
Had proffered first at Tenedowne,
By the advise of king Agamenowne.
A fynall peace shortly for to seyne.
So he would restore again Heleyne,
With amends required of reason,
Of damages wrought at Cytheron.
His messangers first when that he sent,
To Pryamus that would not assente,
To the request justly that they brought.
For of peace the means that they sought,
Of very pride were to them denied,
By wylfulnesse alas so they were guyded,
For lack only of wit and of prudence.
But now they have with cost and great dispense,
With slaughter of men and many great damage
The sharp shoutes and the cruel rage,
Abide fully of this mortal werre.
It is full sure that they will not differ,
The time forth to treat for a peace,
Them list nothing to be so reckelesse,
Nor unadvised what them ought to do.
Trow ye they will so lightly go,
Home into Greece without recompense.
They would seem it were a negligence.
Speak not thereof for it will not be,
Specially now Troy the cite,
In myschyefe stand upon his fynall fate.
This remedy shape was to late,
For greeks thought right of very trust,
That they of Troy stood at their lust,
Holding them self verily victours.
And of their foen fully conquerous.
Without doubt or ambyguyte,
For the counsel of this ylke Enee,
Of Anthenor and of this Anchyses,
As ye have herd to treat for a peace.
Ne rose in sothe but of doubleness.
Only of treason and of high falsenesse,
As Pryamus conceyueth by their chere.
Like in this book as ye shall after here.
For on a day when that Pryamus,
With his son called Amphymacus,
A counsel held with other of the town.
This three have made a suggestyowne,
Unto the king touching the treat.
But he anon discrete and advise,
Prudently or he would assente,
Began vndergrope plainly what they mente,
Only of wit and discrecion,
Or he it put in execucion,
Making thereof a manner of delay.
But proudely then standing at a baye.
This Anthenor without reverence,
Spoke to the king in open audyence,
And shortly said with a stern chere,
If you list our counsel for to hear,
And do thereafter platly thou may chese,
And but thou wylt where thou win or lose
This is the fine thou gettest no more of me.
Work after them that of thy counsel be.
To whom the king wonder soberly,
Answered again full beningenely.
Sir Anthenor ye ought you not grieve,
For mine entente is not to repreue,
Your wise counsel nor your prudent read.
If it conclude to the common speed,
Of my people and salvation.
But wit right well justly of reason,
Under sugar if there be cured gall,
In preiudyce of my lyeges all.
Causynge them in myschyefe for to fine,
I will there from utterly declyne,
As right requires for our alder ease,
And me seems this should not displease,
To thy conceyte nor do the none offense,
For every man is holden of prudence,
The worst to leave and the better take,
Wisdom to sewe and folly to forsake,
And remedy to seek for his sore,
And with that word the Trojan Anthenor,
Of sudden ire began to change his blood,
And abreydynge on his fete he stood,
And full felly said unto the king.
Now sykerly this is a wonder thing,
How your wisdom and auysenesse,
Are blinded so of very wylfulnesse,
That ye may not on no side se,
The great myschyefe and aduersytee,
That we are in upon every side.
For we may not dissimule nor hide,
In what disioynt plainly that we stand,
Be not our foen also here at hand,
And have beset our wall round about,
And we for fear dare not issue out,
Nor be so bold to undo a gate,
With them to fight that us deadly hate,
We be so feeble and they are so strong,
For sothly yet they have them among,
Fyfty kings worthy of renown,
Confederat to our destructiowne.
And thereupon platly will abide,
Which vowed have in their great pride,
Never part hense fro the town,
Till the walls be turned up so down.
Your worthy sons also now be dead,
That you were wont to help in your need,
Your manly knights slain euerychone,
That us to save remedy is none.
It is in vain to treaty of dyffence,
Wherefore I read of reason and prudence,
Or we be slain and our Cite lose.
Of two harms the least for to chese.
This to say that in our entente,
As sitting is and expedyent,
We treat of peace and no longer feyne,
And herewythall restore again Heleyne.
For love of whom many worthy man,
Has lost his life sythen the werre began.
For now Paris is under stone ygraue,
The best read in sothe that ye may have.
To send her home again to Menelaye.
And to profre as fer forth as ye may,
To restore within a littell while,
The harms done by Paris in the isle,
Which men are wont Cithera to call.
This is my read here before you all.
And with that word up rose Amphimacus,
To this counsel full contraryous,
And shortly said that it shall not be,
As Anthenor has rade in no degree.
And ever thus without more respyte,
He spoke to him of very high despyte.
THou Anthenor I have espied well,
We may trust in the never a dele.
With us to stand in our great need,
For troth and faith in the be now dead,
Falshed has slain in the stabilnesse.
And instead of thy sykernesse,
We find in the sothly varyaunce.
Where is become the faith of thy lygeaunce,
The hestes made to stand with thy king.
Where be thine oaths so double in meaning.
Where is now hyd thy old assurance.
Where is become thy feigned false constaunce.
Instead of which mutabylyte,
Has take his place like as ye may se.
With dew change thou art so remewable.
Upon no ground thou may not stand stable
Thy troth is gone of old affectiowne,
That you should have to stand with ye town,
Of faith with us for to live or deye.
For trust and hope exyled be aweye,
In thy person shortly for to write,
That busy art the king to excyte,
In disencrease of his estate royal.
Unto Greeks now be so thrall,
To seek a peace as it were for dread,
Thou should rather of thy manlyhead,
Have proffered him the City to diffende,
There on thy life at outraunce to dispende*
Wherefore in sothe here I the assure,
Rather then we should this endure,
Twenty thousand shall with spear and shield,
Upon a day be slain in the field,
Thy word I hold for no prophecye,
For it proceeds of very trecherye,
Of doubilnesse and of false treason,
Vndermyninge with prodycyon.
Though that thou outward show fair,
The venym hyd thy tail does repair,
Like a serpent styngynge under flowers,
Thereby to feel of such counsayloures.
And in this while with words despytous
Full bytingly has Amphymacus,
All openly Anthenor repreued.
With his counsel so he was agreued.
Seeing the treason that he would mean,
Till Eneas began to go between,
With floryshed speech full of flatterye,
And began his tale so to modefye,
Like as he mente troth in his entente.
But therein was double attendemente,
He spoke but one and yet he mente twain,
Amphymacus only to refrain,
To attempre him of his melancolye,
Only till he might a time epsy,
Like his purpose that he may proceed,
To execute it fully up in deed.
And when that he found had a space,
Under pretense of a true face,
With his tale he began to break out,
Many a Troyan standinge him about.
And shortly said for conclusyowne,
Touching diffence plainly of the town,
How that henge only in balaunce,
For both hope trust and assurance,
Of the Cite taken have their flight,
For finally our manhod and our might,
And our knyghthod together be ago.
With the Greeks more to have ado.
And with them stoutly for to fight,
The which has lost many a worthy knight.
ANd they be ready upon us to set,
And we dare not our gates more vnshet
We be alas supprised so with dread.
Then seems me how it is great need.
By good advise for to seek a mean,
In this matter how we shall us demean.
And for my part sothfastly I say,
I know as now none so ready way,
As prudentlye for a peace to treat.
But Pyram then in a sudden heat,
Without abode of cheer and face pale,
Of rancoure began interrupte his tale.
For he attempre might not his heart,
So fretingely the treason made him smerte,
And for he might him self not restrain,
Thus he said unto both twain.
To Anthenor and also to Enee,
I wonder greatly that ye hardy be,
In very truth for shame so to varye,
And that ye be so rebel and contrary,
Some only of false collusyon,
Us to bring in desperacyon,
Me and my lyeges if I shall not feign,
Of false entente to catch us in a train.
Alas how may you in your heart find,
Again nature for to be unkind,
That whylom were of my counsel chief,
Of every thing or it was brought to prefe,
For ye absente I could nothing fine.
And now alas ye cast to declyne,
Away fro me barayne left and sole,
That to remember it is to great a dole.
How any wight alas so change can,
For who shall more trust any man,
When ye be found double of entente.
Can ye not think how by your assente,
By your counsel and by your advise,
Whylom how I sent forth Paris,
Into Greece of full yore ago.
And Anthenor thou wotest thy self also,
How thou were first made imbassadour.
And thereupon chyefe counsaylour,
Touching the sonde made for Exeon.
But after that cause and mocyon,
Though were in sothe that Paris should go,
Into Greece thou wotest well it is so.
For I ne durst of presumpcion,
Have sent Paris unto Citheron,
Without aduyce and auctorytye,
Of Eneas plainly and of the,
Upon Greeks a werre to have gonne.
I trow in sothe that you never konne,
Excuse him self and you be aduysed.
For every thing wrought was and devised
And execute by counsel of you twain.
For when Paris went for Heleyne,
Ground and root to speak in special,
Were thou Enee and cause principal,
Present also when every thing was wrought
Out of Greece when she was hither brought.
For this the sothe out of that regyowne,
She never had come to this town,
If thou had he thereto contrayre.
Albe thou would with thy words fair,
Thy self excuse here in audience,
As thou knew naught of that offense,
But fully were vnwittinge of the deed.
And now my sons euerychone be dead,
And ye me se alone destitute,
Your counsel is as for chyefe refute,
Me to pursewe to Greeks for a peace,
As I were foryetell reckles,
To remember the infinite outrages,
The mortal werre slaughter and damages,
The cruelte and destructiowne,
That they have wrought herupo^ this town
That verily when I all record,
For to be dead I can not accord,
With them to treat like as ye devise,
For I espy in many sundry wise,
In your entente a right peryllous snare,
So covertly under falshed dare,
That it will be to my confusyon,
If ye acheue your entencion,
Finally as ye have it shape.
For impossyble it were to escape,
Shamefully at myschyefe me to dye,
Without recure of any remedy.
For this the fine I know it out of doubt,
Of the treat that ye be about.
And right anon the Trojan Eneas,
Of ire and rancoure so ameued was,
Again the king with a swellynge heart,
That suddenly out at the door he sterte,
After he had for to be awroke
Full many word again the king yspoke.
He went his way and Anthenor also.
And Pyramus of very ire and woe,
Suddenly braste out for to weep,
He might him self not for anguishe keep,
The anger fret upon him so sore,
Within him self conceyuinge more and more
By euydence of discrescyon,
The covert guyle and the false treason,
That they for him and for his Cite,
Yshapen have but he auysed be,
Dredynge aye that these ylke twain,
By some engyne or conspyred train,
To the Greeks would him betrayet
Wherefore the king cast and would say,
Shape away their malice to withstand,
So the treason that they took on hand,
Only of right in deed or it were found,
Upon them self might again rebounde,
That the full execucyon,
Of their contryued conspyracion,
Resort again in full dew wise.
Only of them that began it first deuyse.
Treason for treason is conuenyent,
For to falshed the guerdon pertynente,
Is shameful death and the fynall mede.
Wherefore to shape in this great need,
A remedy this old Pryamus,
Calls his son Amphymacus.
And pytyously alone but they twain,
In tears drowned began to him complain,
On Anthenor and on this Eneas.
And said son take heed on this case,
And think how I am thy father dear,
And how there be now no more yfere,
Of my sons left with me alive,
But thou alone and therefore as blyue,
Touching ye treason conspyred and ysworne,
What eu^r fall let us be toforne,
Only of wisdom away for to make,
That we may first in the trappe them take
And to puruey for them even ylyche,
That justly they may fall in the dyche,
Which they have made and for us ytreyned.
And in all haste let so be ordained,
That this matter close be kept in mewe,
To fine only that they not eschew.
For to be slayue of equite and right.
In this place even toward night.
For I purpose plainly for their sake,
Again that hour a counsel for to make,
And under color make them both call.
And thou unawarely shall upon them fall,
With knights sworn unto the and me,
In this matter for to be secre.
And right anon this Amphimacus,
Assented is unto Pryamus,
To accomplish in full secret wise,
Fro point to point as ye have herd deuyse.
But sothe is said of full yore agone,
Of old wise ye counsel is there none,
In all this world so pryuely ycaste.
Till it will out platly at the last.
For the people which that is rural,
Says yt secrets which be not known at all,
The earth will as they make mind,
Discure them of his own kind.
And of nature up cast and disclose,
The thing that men are wont in it to close.
Let every man beware as it is good,
Or his counsel go to far abroad.
And specially lords have great need,
Of all men they stand most in dread,
So great awayte is upon them laid.
That when it happeth that a thing be said,
Or ones spoke of a lords mouth,
It falls often that it is full kouthe,
And reported and ysprad full wide,
In many cost by them that stand aside,
Or he be ware by sudden adventure.
For some in hap in whom he does assure,
Will first of all him report amys.
Therefore in sothe best for them is this,
For to beware and keep their tongue.
A purpose cast should not be ronge,
Nor spoke abroad among folks rude.
For gladly aye the worste they conclude,
Of every thing while that it is new,
In report varyaunt and untrue,
For after reason nothing they expowne,
But after will the folk that be of town,
Like the purpose which they desire.
For they fair as a wispe of fire,
When it brenneth brightest in his blase.
Suddenly it wastes as a wase,
On such folk platly is no trust,
That fire and water hold in their fiste,
Being with both ylke indifferente.
Now hot now cold like as their entente
Of new changes so in their courage,
After the calm follows sudden rage,
To day they love and to morrow hate,
To trust a common lasts by no date,
Let not a lord make them to secre.
For now the counsel is run to Enee,
That Pryam wend had be full close,
For the rumor and the wind arose,
By false report is so far yblowe,
That Eneas and Anthenor well know,
End and gynnynge and every manner thing,
And the hole counsel of Pryamus the king
And both two full of one entente,
With other eke that were of their assente,
Conspyred be and together sworn.
And covertly cast a way aforne,
That finally Troy the Cite,
By their engyne shall destroyed be.
And of accord cast plainly thus,
If it hap that king Pryamus,
Send for them shortly to conclude,
They would come with such a multitude,
Of armed men if they se need,
That of him they should nothing dread.
For Eneas was in that Cite,
Of great power and auctoryte,
Both of blood and kynred allied,
And for his gold greatly magnyfyed,
Through the Cite most in special,
That he in might and power perygall,
As says Guydo was unto the king.
And Anthenor almost in every thing*
Was unto him egall of power,
And both twain of one heart entyre,
Conspyred have in sothe again the town,
Finally to this conclusyowne,
That they of Greeks might have suerte,
With their treasour to go at lybertee,
With their allies borne of Troy town.
When all were brought to destructyowne,
With life and good saufe without more.
At which time for Dan Anthenor,
And Eneas Pryamus has sent,
To accomplish the fine of his entente.
And they in haste with so great a route,
Came of knights stuffed him about,
That thereof was astoned Pryamus.
And made send for Amphimacus,
Commaundyng him to change his purpose.
For well he wysse his counsel was not close
And by signs began well understand,
That the matter which they had in hand,
Discured was to his confusyon.
Both the murder and conspyration.
Apparceyuynge in his inward sight,
The great power of this Troyan knight.
And the favor of this Eneas,
And of the common how he fostred was.
The which proudely in open audyence,
Tofore the king declares his sentence,
Fully concludyng maugre who says nay.
How that there was none other mean way
Refute nor gain nor other remedy.
But only peace who so it deny.
Other escapynge plainly was there none.
And thereupon the commons euerychone,
With one voice began call and cry,
And his counsel began greatly magnifye.
Albe the king was thereto al contrary.
But Eneas list no longer tarry,
Nor dyfferre the fine of his purpose.
But wonder Irous from his see he rose.
And full ungoodly spoke unto the king,
And shortly said without more taryinge.
Where so befall thou be lefe or loathe,
Or with his purpose pleased outher wroth,
Thou may well trust it shall none other be.
For finally harken this of me.
Maugre thy will and also all the might,
This same day or it be night,
For a peace with greeks we shall trete.
And when the king saw the fervent hete
Both of the common and of Eneas.
He began anon dissymule in this case.
For of prudence he began to se,
For that time it may none other be.
Wherefore sith he might it not amend,
He wisely began for to condescende,
To the purpose platly of Enee.
And said he would goodly take at gree,
And except what them list ordeyne.
And so the king learned to feign,
Again the conceyte platly of his heart.
For otherwise he could not asterte,
Coacte of force and of vyolence.
And when he saw in his aduertence,
That he might dyuerte on no side,
From the fraud that sown was so wide,
Without grutchynge he falsely gave assent.
That Anthenor should forth be sent,
By common choice to treat for the town,
Which was tofore inconclusyowne,
With the greeks accorded finally,
Touching the effect of his ambassadrye.
Fro point to point where he would stand,
Variaunt fro that he took on hand.
And for they had before him full conceived,
With better chere he was of them received.
And in this while that Anthenor was out,
For to treat with the greeks stout,
As ye have hard for a peace fynall.
In the town about on every wall,
They of Troy began ascend blyue,
With the branches of many fresh olyue,
In token of peace and greeks eke again,
Amyd the field endelonge the plain,
Showed them that all might seen.
Eke of Olyue lusty bows grene.
And to confyrme this fro point to point,
And that nothing stood in disioynte.
The worthy king great Agamenon,
Committed has of high discrecion,
Fully power and auctorytie,
For the greeks plainly unto three.
First of all for a peace to treat,
Unto the wise king of Crete.
To Vlixes and to Dyomede.
And to chese mo the^ thought it was no need,
For what they do they will hold stable.
And finally not be variable,
From the end platly that they make.
And thereupon was assurance take,
Of either part by bond of sacrament.
And so they be with Anthenor ywent,
Out aside this worthy lords three.
And when they were at their liberte,
From all tumulte alone pryuely.
This Anthenor full of treachery,
Respect of falshode and of doubleness,
Began his purpose unto them express.
Behotynge them to trashe the cite,
So they would make him surety.
That first him self and with him Eneas
Shall fredom have in every manner case,
With plain power committed to the town.
But king Priam hash aye suspectiowne,
To Anthenor and also to Enee,
How that they shall destroy his city,
And to him self trist of hertye woe,
He said al as what is best to do,
In this myschyefe that I am in fall.
And yet is this to me worst of all,
That I am now through mine aduersytye,
Bound and compelled of necessytye,
Maugre my head in manner of raunson,
For my life to make redempcyon,
Unto my foen that I have most at heart.
I se right well it may not asterte,
For I must pay there gayneth no succoour.
My good my gold riches and treasoure,
To my most foen and dare it not deny,
And yet I stand most in ieopardye,
Without refute hanginge in balaunce,
Alas constreyned through my woeful chance,
To obey their lust that mortally me hate,
Driven thereto of birth through my fate,
So Parchas have my destynye yshape,
By none engyne I may it not escape.
ANd while Pria^ began thus to complain,
To Anthenor came the queen Heleyne,
Besechynge him in his embassadrye,
Of gentylnesse for to specyfye,
Through his prudent medyacyon,
To find away in conseruacyon,
Of her estate finally that she,
To Menelaye may reconsiled be.
If so fall that the treat hold,
So that her lord of his grace would,
Restore her unto her degree,
Only of mercy and of high pytye.
And Anthenor unto her request,
Gave audyence making a behest,
How he would with all his heart entere,
Be dilygent to treat of this mattere.
And therwithal of him she took her leave,
And this was done on the same eve,
That Anthenor I pray god give him sorrow
To Greeks went on the next morrow,
Only to treat for a peace fynall.
And in this while the feast funeral,
Was hold in Troy mine auctour writes thus,
Of a lord that called was Glaucus,
A manly knight tofore in his living,
And son was of Pryamus the king.
And over this like as says Guydo,
The king Pryam busyed him also
Of Pantasylla how the body might,
Be conserved freshly to the syghte.
And for love of this hardy queen,
Of pured gold and of stones shene,
He let make a vessel full royal,
And fylde it full with bawine natural.
To keep the corpse from corrupciowne,
Till the werre of Greeks and of the town,
Through the treat were ystynted clean.
SO that the king called Phylomene,
This dead queen might of affection,
Carye it home into her regyon,
With the aunceters buried for to be,
Like the manner of old antyquyte.
It were in vain more for to ryme,
I pass over unto the Treatee,
Atwene Greeks and Troy the Cytee.
And for the party of Greeks as I read,
First Vlyxes and with him Diomede.
Assygned were and the king of Crete,
With Anthenor and Eneas to mete.
And all yfere shortly in sentence,
By conduyt first and after by license,
Of the noble wise Agamenowne,
They entered be into Troy town,
By conueyinge of this Eneas,
Of whose coming such a joy there was.
Of the comunes which in things new,
Rejoice aye after though they rewe.
Wenynge full well in their opinyon,
That by the good medyacyon,
Of Vlyxes and the king of Crete,
And Diomede that came eke to Treat,
That these three should make as fast,
A fynall peace ever for to last,
And a full end of their alder sorrow.
And thereupon early the next morrow,
Pryam let make a conuocaciowne,
Of all the worthy within Troy town,
And when they were assembled al in one,
The wise Vlyxes rose up anon,
And his tale began in such wise,
So prudently his words to deuyse.
That to harken every man has joy.
And specially they that were of Troy,
That of his inward meaning fraudelente,
Full little wist nor of his entente,
To their pleasaunce so he could feign.
And first he axeth of them things twain.
The one was this that of the City,
He would have gold an huge quantytye,
In recompense of harms that were do.
An other thing he axed also,
Without abode that Amphymacus,
That son was to king Pryamus,
Perpetually that he exyled be,
Never to enter Troy the Cite,
For gold, prayer, nor for no raunson.
And this was done by suggestyon,
Of Anthenor false and malycyous,
Only for he was contraryous,
That he should treat for to a peace,
And for that he was not reckles,
To say a truth this Amphimacus.
Therefore in sothe this serpent enuyous,
Now he has found a time for to byte,
He though the would cruelly him quyte,
For truth only that was in his entente.
Therefore it is full expedyent,
Of prudence every man to charge.
That his tunge be not over large.
Trouthes all be not for to said.
For wisdom is sometime to feign,
And dissymule in aduersytye,
Specially when men in trouble be,
And se their speech may them not avail.
Better is then that their tunge fail,
Than folyly to their damage speak.
Men must among cure and over reke,
The truth of things only of prudence,
And humbly suffer in pacyence,
For false report of folks enuyous.
Who can so do I hold him virtuous.
For better it is a while to abide,
Than say all out of rancour and of pride.
Silence in sothe has often in hasty strife,
Had of vyctorye a prerogatyfe,
And the palm of debates won,
That well are they that so suffer konne,
And be of speech not presumptuous.
For as I told this Amphymacus,
Notwithstanding that he troth mente,
Yet for a word he into exyle went.
Albe that god full justly afterward,
Has Anthenor quyt for his reward.
For with the same he was after hit,
For his falsenesse duly as it sit.
This to say of old antyquytye,
He was to exyle and captyuytye,
Foriudged after into proscripsyowne,
And relegate out of Troy town,
Perpetually by the procuring,
Of Eneas. loo how the ryghtfull king,
That all may se in his drouydence.
Full justly can make recompense,
Of doubylnesse and symulacyon.
And of all such contrived false treason.
For who auengeth with falshed on his part
He shall be hit with the same darte.
He skapeth not for to have a wound.
For falshed aye will again rebounde.
Where it is rose first to his orygynall,
Resort again right as does a ball.
For who for fraud ever does him cast,
Trust right well it will out at the last.
And who supplanteth shall supplanted be,
By good example as ye shall after se.
OF Anthenor the storye if ye read,
And whiles that they treat and proceed,
Touching the exyle and prescripsion,
Captyuytye and relegacyon,
That they cast for Amphymacus.
There was herd a noise meruaylous,
A great tumulte and a wonder sown,
Like as it were a lamentacyowne,
Of sundry folk playning in distress,
For hertye woe and inward heaviness,
Out of the treat even when they gone,
This confuse cry after began anon.
Whereof Vlyxes and eke Dyomede,
Suddenly fell in a dread,
Supposing in their oppynyowne,
That some rumor was fall in the town,
Among the people in the comontee,
Of hasty rancour avenged for to be.
For the love of Amphimacus,
That causeles was exyled thus,
Of volunte again all truth and right.
Wherefore the dradde when it drew to night,
To be murdered of the commons of the town,
For the fraud and conspiracion,
Falsely of old enmytee.
By Anthenor and by false Enee.
And sothly yet there was no manner man,
That could wit whereof it began,
Nor espy first when it arose,
In all the paleys nor throughout the close,
They herd it well but they say naught,
Whereof they were astoned in their thought,
And affrayde of very sudden dread,
Vlixes first and also Diomede,
Lest with commons they had be byset.
But Anthenor without longer let,
To make them sure from all tumulte and cry,
The Greeks has conveyed secretly.
And when they were assured of their place,
Vlixes first with a changed face,
Began pynche sore in the self while,
At Anthenor of reason and of guyle.
That with his hestes so fro day to day,
Of very sleyghte put them in delay,
Semynge fully for ought he could espy,
There was deceyt fraud or trecherye,
In the couenauntes that he has behight.
To whom anon this false Trojan knight
With sad cheer and sobre countenance,
Well auysed in his dalyaunce.
Answered again and plainly did express,
Iwysse quod he I take unto witness,
The high gods that every thing may se,
Without fayninge that I have busy be,
Fro point to point your purpose to acheue.
So that I do you not grieve,
And finally that ye list to hear.
There is one thing perturbeth this mattere,
Which I shall so it be none offense,
Plainly remember here in your presence.
This to say of old antiquitee,
First at the building of Troy the City,
That whilom was ycalled Yllion,
For cause only at his foundation,
King Ylyus sithe go full long,
The founder was of the wall strong.
After whom as made is mention,
It called was and named Yllyon.
In the which with great and busy charge,
In Pallas name he made a temple large,
That passingly was had in reverence,
And when this Phane of most excellence,
Performed was by masonry full well,
And save the rose complete euerydele,
Of mighty stone the buyldinge well assured.
But or it was with led and timber cured,
Again tempest for to be obstacle,
There tell a wonder only by miracle,
That I dare well affirm it in certain,
Such an other was there never seyne.
Who so list se and consydre all,
This marvel was so celestial.
FOr there came down from ye high heaven,
By Plyades and the sterres seven,
And through the air holding his passage.
Like a fair and meruaylous image,
That in this world though men had sought,
Ne was there none half so well ywrought.
For as it is truly to suppose,
Pygmalyon remembered in the rose,
In his time had no conning,
To grave or paynte so curyous a thing.
For it was wrought with dylygent labor,
By hand of Angel in the heavenly toure.
Through gods might and divine ordinance
And hither sent through his purueyaunce,
For a relyke only of his grace,
There to abide for a protection,
For a diffence and salvation,
Perpetually while the world may dure,
Again all mischyefe and mysauenture.
Every trouble and trybulacyon,
In susteynynge and releuacion,
And soueraygne help eke of this Cite.
The which never may destroyed be,
By no engyne that men may purchase.
The gods have granted such a grace.
And such virtue annexed eke thereto.
That Troy in sothe may never be fordo,
Till this relyke stole be away.
And yet in sothe there is no man that may,
From the place slere it nor remewe,
But the preieste to whom it is dew.
Only of office to touch it with his hand,
So mightily conserved is the bond,
That who attempteth in conclusyon,
It to remewe of presumpcion,
At the fine platly he shall fail.
For force none may him not avail.
For it in sothe will not remeued be,
Except of him to whom of deutee,
It pertayneth as ye have herd toforne.
And ouermore there is no man yet borne,
That read can nor tell in no degree,
Verily where it be stone or tree.
Nor how it was devised nor ywrought.
There is no wight so subtle in his thought,
Ceriously to tell the manner.
For Minerua that is so fresh and clear,
The stern goddess through her great might,
That is so dreadful both of look and sight,
Which on her breast has of cristall,
Her shield Egys this goddess immortal.
Ygraunted has in books as I learn,
Through her power which that is eterne.
This holy relike for a memoryall,
To her Temple of buildinge most royal,
It to conserve from all assault of dread,
And to succoure in every manner need,
Again their foen unto Troy town,
While it is kept with deuocyowne.
So that always by successyowne,
From king to king in the line down.
But just title lively succeed,
Thereto annexed that they take heed,
Prudently avoiding necligence,
It to conserve with due reverence,
As they are bound and yholde of right.
The^ shall no enemy power have nor might,
To do damage in hindering of the town,
And why it is called Palladyowne,
Like as clerks write of it and said,
Is for Pallas to make her town certain.
This relike sent fro the heaven down.
And to conclude shortly my reasowne,
This the cause our purpose is so let.
Than quod Vlixus since it may be no bet,
Our labor is in ydell and in vain,
Without recure if it be certain.
As thou have said this town in no degree,
Through this relyke may not destroyed be.
It was folly the to undertake,
Unto Greeks beheste for to make,
Without this thou had be well sure.
Quod Anthenor yet there is recure,
As I have hight ye shall have the town,
Although there be a dylacyowne,
And the manner anon I shall tell,
If it so be ye list a while dwell,
Without noise other perturbaunce.
The priest the which the governance,
Of this relike shall be spoke unto,
By good advise and ytreated so,
That he shall be full of our assente.
For he with gold and treasour shall be blent,
That he accord shall to our purpose,
To bring the relyke which is kept so close,
To what place that ye list assign.
Be still of port goodly and benygne
In your works till I have brought about,
Fully this thing and be nothing in doubt,
I dare my self take it well on hand.
And when they had his meaning understand
They took leave and went out of the town.
But first to void all suspecyowne,
At their going Anthenor has hight,
How that he would go the same night,
To Priamus to make ordinance,
How the bonds and the assurance,
Of the peace should ymaked be.
And for to know eke the quantytye,
Of the gold that ye shall receive.
Thus shall I best the purpose apperceyue.
Of the king and know it eueridele.
And they consent and like it wonder well,
Every thing that Anthenor had said.
And so they part glad and well apayde,
And went their way and made no tarying.
And Anthenor goth unto the king,
Him counsaylinge he make no delay.
To call his lords again the next day,
And his lyeges to assemble yfere.
Finally to engroce this mattere,
As it was sitting and expedyent.
And when the king in open perliament,
Crowned sat in his regalye.
This Anthenor began to specyfye,
In audyence that men might know,
To each estate both to high and low,
The Greeks will if they agree thereto,
And what the sum was of gold also.
Which they are if the peace shall stand,
Twenty thousand mark to have in hand,
Of pured gold which must anon be paid,
And of silver that may not be delayed,
They must eke have the same quantytee.
And over this as they accorded be,
Certain measures by covenant also,
Of wheat and flower their lives for to save,
In their repair by the large sea,
When they sail home to their country.
And that the collecte made be anon,
By good advise of them euerychone,
That all be ready by a certain day,
There was no man that durst tho say nay,
Nor contrary that Anthenor had said.
Where so they were well or evil paid,
But full assent in conclusyowne.
And in all haste throughout all the town,
The collatours gathered up the gold,
Like the sum that I have you told,
Of poor and rich there was spared none.
The which time Anthenor is gone,
Unto the priest that called was Tonaunt,
If he might in any wise him daunt,
To make his heart fully to enclyne.
Full craftily he laid out hook and line,
With lusty bayte of false couetyse,
Excytynge him in full secret wise,
That would be of his assente,
And condescende unto his entente,
To put him in possession,
Of the relyke called Palladion,
Without abode it may delivered be,
And gave him gold an huge quantytye,
And him to blend much more behyght.
And this was done pryuely by night.
Shortly concludinge if he condescende,
That he would his state amend,
So passyngly that for ever more,
He and his heirs should have gold and store
Plenty enough that none indygence,
Should have power him to do offense.
For unto the this a vow I make,
Quod Anthenor and platly undertake,
Of gold and good thou shall have suffysaunce,
And of treasour passing habundaunce,
That thou shall in very sykernesse,
All thy kyn excelle in richesse,
If thou deliver like to mine axynge,
Palladyon which is in thy keeping.
And I behote thou may trust me,
By bond of it shall be secree,
Lest it were hyndrynge to thy name.
For if so be that thou dreadest shame,
To be esclaundred of so foul a deed,
I shape shall that thou need not dread,
Nor be agaste in no manner wise.
For such a way in sothe I shall deuyse,
That no man shall be suspecyous,
To thy person or engenyous,
To deem amysse how this matter goth.
For be well ware that me were as loathe,
To be diffamed of so foul a thing,
To know thereof or be assenting,
In any manner that they of the town,
Should to me have suspecyowne.
Let be let be lever I had deye,
We shall therefore cast an other wey,
Our honor save so that thou and I,
Shall go all quyte I say the utterly.
That neither shall behold ne perceyuere,
Of this theft but stand hole and clear,
What ever fall without any shame.
For Vlyxes shall bear all the blame.
Of this deed and this thief also.
For men shall say when it is ago,
By his engyne and his sleyghty wyle,
Through his traynes and his false guyle,
That he has stole away Palladyowne,
From the temple in leasing of the town.
That finally during all his live,
Men shall to him his falshede descryue.
And all the gylte arreten his offense,
That thou and I only of innocence,
Throughout the world of this iniquytye,
Shall be excused platly and go free.
It needs not tarry in this mattere.
Come of attones lo thy gold is here,
For thou ne shall longer delayed be.
And since thou see no difficultye,
Is on no part perle nor reprefe,
Shame nor dread slaundre nor mischyefe,
Delay not to take this thing on hand.
And first this priest began him to withstand,
Full myghtely and said for nothing,
Another for prayer nor for manasinge,
For gold nor good ne no manner mede,
He ne would assente to so foul a deed.
Thus he answered at the pryme face.
But often since it happeth men purchase,
By gift of good to speak in words plain,
That troth in pouerte might never attain
For mede more by falshed may conquer,
Than title of right that men in truth lere
And gifts great hertes can enclyne,
And gold they may in steel and marbyll mine
This priests heart has so deep grave.
That Anthenor shall his purpose have,
For to possede the Palladion.
Through false engyne and conspiracion,
Of this priest that called was Tonaunte.
Which of falshede might him best auaunte,
That this relyke fro the temple rent,
And to Vlyxes Anthenor it sent,
Out of the town in all the haste he might,
By a servant secretly by night,
Whereof Trojans mortally dismayde,
And through treason finally outrayed.
Wrought by this priest with couetise blent.
False Anthenor being of assente.
How the Greeks made an horse of brass wherein was men of arms, and under
color of peace brought it into Troy, by the which it was utterly destroyed
for ever. Cap. xxxv.
OH Troy alas well may you morn and weep
In complaynyng with hertye sighs deep
Falsely defrauded of Palladyon,
And put for ever out of possessyon.
Oh mighty gods yt the world govern,
And euerything through your might co^serne
Right as it is of your duty,
And truth and falshed may together se.
In every heart through your purueyaunce.
Why took ye not on this priest vengeance,
That traytoursly through his inyquytye,
For gold and good betrayshed the city,
Of Troy alas without more recure.
Who shall emforth and more be suer,
Or any place stand in sykertee,
Sith holiness of so high degree,
May be infecte and corrupt with mede.
Every heart ought quake and dread,
To se alas by false ypocrasye,
Priests that should the world exemplefye,
With good doctrine of perfection,
To make so soon a transmutacion,
Of double intent suddenly to varye.
For doubtless if the Sanctuarye,
Be pollut found in conuersacyon,
Naked and bare of devotion,
And that the shynynge of their parfyte light
Ytourned be by derkenesse unto night,
Unto what place shall men further go,
To take example what them ought to do.
Certys the root and ground of euerydele,
Is couetyse who so look well.
Of which the grain is so far ysowe,
That who so list aueryce to know,
Among priests he shall it rathest find.
For therwythall they be made blind,
To their estate that they may not se.
For in sothenesse there is no degree,
Gredyer nor more rauynous,
Of worldly good more covetous,
Than priests be to catch what they may.
For it is gone sith many a day,
That in their breast fyxed was the root,
Of couetyse which sit so soote.
That no man may arrace it nor remewe.
For at their tail ever it does them sewe,
This false worm mother and noryce,
Of all myschyefe and of every yvce,
For gold is now so shynynge and so bright
So persynge eke and so clear of light,
That priests be with his steemes blent.
For in sothnesse they be in their entente,
Of couetyse very receptacle.
And to possede eke the tabernacle.
Their heart is aye so gredy to embrace,
That aueryce has his dwelling place,
Mid of their breast this vice of vices all.
That causes virtue rather for to fall,
Where he abide so he can supplaunte,
Record I take of the priest Tonaunte.
That for treasour to Anthenor has sold,
The rich relyke that he had in hold.
Palladion while they of Troy town,
Have gathered up about enuyron,
Of rich and poor throughout the city,
Gold and silver an huge quantytye,
Flower and whete to pay their raunsom,
The which sum of entencion,
They made keep wisely and conserve,
In the Temple that longs to Mynerue,
Purposynge after of one affectiowne,
The citezyns throughout all the town,
Hopinge thereby for to fare the bet,
Upon a day assygned and yset.
To Apollo in their panym wise
Solempnelye make a sacrafise,
With slaughter of bestes with encense and blood,
On which day when the pryestes stood,
In compass round about the aultere,
And began to kyndle the coals bright and clear,
Upon the altar plainly as I read
To offer up the beasts that were dead,
In the flawme and the great leven,
To Apollo stellyfyed in heaven,
When they to offer were most laborous,
The first was that the sacryde fire,
Ne would brenne like to his desire,
Nor the flawme up ascend alofte.
Albe that they assayed full often,
More then ten times and yet it ne would be
For aye it queynt that they ne might se,
Naught but smoky resolucions,
Horrible and blake like exalacyons,
Of new lyme when that it is meynt,
With water cold and of his heat queynt,
That they might in no manner wise,
For lack of fire do their sacrafyse.
For aye they found a wonder obstacle,
And the next was a more miracle,
On their altar when they began to sprede,
The entrayles of beasts that were dead,
To queme Apollo with flawme bright and fair.
There came anon down out of the air,
A royal Egle full perfynge of his look,
And in his claws the offering up he took,
And the entrayles lyinge enuyrowne,
In his descence making such a sown,
That none so hardy of heart nor manhood,
But that he was astoned there he stood,
And supprysed through nerfe and every vain,
Of this marvel and this case sudden.
But the Egle abiding there no more,
Over the town full high began to sore,
Toward Greeks enhastyng what he might,
And on their ships suddenly alyghte,
And the entrayles of the beasts all.
This Egle let from his claws fall,
Whereof Troyans when they took head,
Dismayed with a mortal dread.
By signs have clearly comprehended,
That their gods greatly were offended,
Again the town when the fire went out.
And for they would be put out of doubt,
To be sure what this marvel mente.
To Cassandra in all haste they sent,
Fully to have declaracyon.
And thereupon plain exposycyon.
And she told them platly out of dread,
That the quenchynge of their fyres red,
Was unto them a demonstracion,
Both of ire and indygnacion,
That Apollo has to Troy bore,
For the blood that was shed before,
Of Achylles in his temple slawe,
Vengeably murdered and ydrawe,
Without any manner reverence,
Or honor done to the excellence,
Of Apollo being there present,
That the Phane and plates adjacent,
Were desolued and pollut with blood.
Wherefore she said shortly it is good,
That they went on prosessyon,
With heart contryte and devotion,
To the tomb of Achylles at night,
Only to fette on their tapres light,
Sacred fire brennynge at the wake,
Fully in purpose by assente to make,
For his mordre satisfaction.
The which fire by none occasyon,
Shall not quench but his flawmes hold,
Through none assault of stormye winds cold
The sacrafyse upon the aultere
Tofore Apollo brenne shall so clear,
And they of Troy wrought by her read.
But of the Egle she bad them take heed,
That nothing was but token of treason,
Pronostyke and declaracyon,
Finally how Troy and Ylyon,
Shall turn in haste to destruction.
For the flyinge of this foul royal,
Over the town and the mighty wall,
With his feathers mayled bright and shene.
And the entrayles in his claws kene,
To Troy was a fynall demonstraimre,
Soth fast showing and signifyaunce.
The grace and ewer and hap of old fortune,
By lyklyhead might not contune,
Nor persevere in the first light,
For all attones they have take their flight.
Palladion might them not witholde
That stole was like as I you told,
For no man may his fatal chance refuse.
And Greeks eke fast began to muse,
And inwardly in their wits sought,
Of the entrayles that the Egle brought,
And thereupon began together round,
Til that Calchas did every thing expowne,
And unto them full began assure,
That the fine of this adventure,
Conclude should upon their welfare.
And bad also for no cost they spare.
To persevere and be of heart stable,
By fortune them self to enhable.
Them counsaylynge to do their busy pain
Solempnelye in haste to ordain,
A certain offrynge borne out of the field,
To fair Pallas with her cristall shield,
And to her make a rich sacrafyse,
As the storye by order shall deuyse.
Bishop Calchas with his locks hoar
Traitor forsworn sith go full yore.
That falsed has truth and his allyaunce,
Whom clerks have put in remembrance,
In their locks with letters old and new,
To exemplefye no man to be untrue.
For though years pass fast away,
Rust of sclaunder lightly will not deye.
The fret thereof is so corrosyfe.
That it lasts full many man's life,
And is full hard to arrace away,
Of whose venym full selde is made allaye,
Report thereof blown is so wide.
Perpetually that it will abide,
Remembered new and freshely had in mind
Record of him that could a way find,
Old Calchas evil mut he sterue,
Under color of offrynge to Mynerue,
To make Greeks enter into town,
This sleyghty serpent father and patrowne,
And fynder up of treason and of guyle,
Compassed has and yfounde a wyle,
How Greeks shall the City win and take.
Pretendynge them sacryfyce to make,
Unto Pallas as I shall express.
For this traitor merour of falsenesse,
The Greeks bad for to do their pain,
To Minerua an offrynge to feign.
And in all haste that they should them speed.
And of assente they did make a stead,
Large and wide of coper and of brass,
By craft of Synon that contryued was,
That it might receive large and well,
A thousand knights armed bright in steel.
Through the sleyght and the compassynge,
The subtle wit and meruaylous working
Of this wise and crafty Greek Synon,
Which through his casting and discresion,
Performed has this rich stead of brass,
As ye have herd by byddinge of Calchas,
And by the advise of Appius the wise,
That help also the stead to deuyse,
To fine only that of deuociowne,
Greeks might requere of the town,
When it were made to grant them license,
It present in the reverence,
Of mighty Pallas in steel armed bright.
Amyd her temple large and full of light,
By the offringe to find occasyon,
To have enter freely into town,
By pylgramage their vows to fulfill,
In which stead daren shall full stylle,
A thousand knights as Calchas by devise,
Ordained has that was so slye and wise.
By craft of Synon and of Appyus,
This large stead of making meruaylous,
Under pretense of oblacyon,
Was completful to his perfection,
Of workemanshyppe as I told before,
When the siege sothly began to fine,
And the Cite was brought to ruin,
Through Greeks might and the wall strong
Were beat down large thick and long.
The which year as made is menciowne,
A little before taking of the town,
Kings echone that came fro so far,
Alive left after the mortal werre.
When they saw how Priam by couenaunte,
Unto Greeks that utterly made grant,
All haste possible to pay his raunsowme.
They took leave and went out of the town.
And first I find how king Phylomene,
With him lad the body of the queen,
Pantasillia home to her country.
Full richely there to buried be.
And of.ij. thousand knights that this king
Brought unto Troy first at his coming,
No mo than fyftye home with him he ladde.
And of women that the queen had,
Of a thousand the storye says certain,
But four hundred home again.
And thus when all were fro Troy gone,
The morrow next Priamus anon,
With his lords rode out of the town,
As was the accord for confyrmaciowne,
Of peace fynall upon outher side.
And in the fyelde Greeks him abide.
And for greeks first swore Dyomede,
They of Troy taking little head,
How the oath was in condition,
Cured above under false treason.
Sith greeks tho in their swearynge,
Ne bound them self to no manner thing,
To stand to as in special.
But for to hold and keep in general,
The points hole engressed and no more,
In thilke treat that Dan Anthenor,
With greeks held this traitor fraudulent.
In which they were full double of intent,
Meynt with treson as ye have herd toforne.
Which to observe only they were sworn,
By fraud of oath and not by words plain.
Their adversaries to take in a train.
Excludynge them from their meaning far.
Peace in the face, but in the heart werre.
All openly confirmed with their hand,
Inward treason by assurance of bond.
But though the venym was closed with a wall,
It was not hyd from him that knows all.
For certaynely as clerks teach,
Who that swereth falsely in his speech,
Flouryshynge outward by a fair color,
For to deceive his true neighbor.
He is forsworn what so ever he be.
The treason hyd though men may not se,
How so the word be away yborne.
Who swereth by craft by craft is forsworn.
There may be made no excusacion.
For god that knows the entention,
Demeth the heart and the word right naught
For he the will knows and the thought,
Of every man nygh and eke aferre.
Therefore beware no man him forswere,
As greeks did Troyans to deceive,
That the fraud could not conceive.
Supposing that Greeks had be,
Faithful and true of their suretye.
But nothing on they in heart thought,
which in the end they full dear abought,
When they found fully the reuerse,
And to their speech the deed so diverse.
It were but feign by and by to write,
Their feigned oaths nor their words white.
Nor the cheris that they could feign,
But to conclude with the queen Heleyne,
During the treat upon the same day,
Delivered was to king Menelaye.
And after that was paid the raunsowne,
Granted tofore and gathered in the town,
Gold and silver where also and flower.
And to their ships with diligent labor,
In full great haste every thing was brought
Where through the city after came to naught
And greeks than by symulacyon,
Making a color of devotion,
Through holiness under ypocrisye,
Falsely feigned by fraud and flaterye.
The king have prayed to have lybertye,
Freely to enter in to the City.
To make assete by oblacyon,
For the theft of Palladyon.
And offer up the rich stead of brass,
To the goddess that called is Pallas.
What king Pryam lyketh to assygne.
That she to them be wyllinge and beninge.
In their repeyre saylynge by the sea,
Home into Greece toward their country,
When she is quemed with his large stead.
Of which alas Pryam took no head.
The treason hyd he could not aduerte,
But granted them with all his hole heart.
When that them like to bring it into town,
By false entysinge and suggestiowne,
Of Anthenor and also of Enee.
Having no dread nor ambyguite,
In his intent nor suspection,
Another of fayninge nor of false treason,
But right frendely like to his beheste,
Condescendeth unto their request.
Their auowes that they might observe,
To offer up this horse unto Mynerue.
And greeks tho with great diligence,
Full great honor and huge reverence,
Have shapen them with processiowne,
To bring the stead into Troy town.
The men of arms being aye therein,
By whom they cast Troy for to win,
In short time for it stood on the date.
And when this horse brought was to ye gate*
It was so narowe that there was no space,
For the stead in to town to pass,
For the stead into the town to pace.
Albe that they assayed over all,
Wherefore Pryam bet a down the wall,
To make it large right at their deuyse.
In which thing alas he was unwise.
For cause chyefe of his confusyowne,
Was that this horse came into the town,
But humbly forth they began to proceed.
To the temple with this large stead.
And to Pallas mekely knelynge down,
They all attones made there oblacyon.
With feigned chere and false deuociowne.
Whereof in heart glad was all the town,
And special they that were of Troy.
But sothe is said that aye the fine of joy,
Who occupyeth as men full often se.
For unawarely comes aduersytye,
After gladness. woe and mysauenture,
When men best wene for to standen sure.
In worldly blyshe there none affyaunce,
So diverse is his unhappy chance.
Full of deceyte ever meynt with trouble,
And for to trust varyaunt and double.
And selde in one abiding any throw,
For worldly lust though it be now blow.
With pomp and pride and with boste and sown,
Anon it passes record of Troy town,
That wend well by this rich stead,
To have be sure and deuoyde of dread,
Perpetually as I have told tofore.
But when greeks have this horse ybore,
Tofore Pallas as ye have herd me tell,
Them lyketh not longer for to dwell,
In the bounds of this mighty town.
But of purpose to the Greek Synowne,
They have committed hole the gouernayle,
Of this stead the which will not fail,
When he sees best opportunyte,
By this engyne to trayshen the City.
And greeks have in this while found,
A new sleyght them fully to confound.
This to say they have made their sonde,
To king Pryam they would go fro land,
Unto the sea toward Tenedowne.
And thither sail for this conclusyowne,
For that Heleyne by good auysement,
In secret wise thither shall be sent,
For they dradde if upon the land,
She were delivered shortly to their hand,
Greeks would of malys do their pain,
The more party to sleen this Heleyne.
For she was ground and gynnyng of their woe,
The very rote and the cause also,
Of the slaughter of many worthy man,
Sythen the time the syege first began.
Wherefore they said for to stynte all strife,
And to be sure for to save her life,
The best was to send her out of sight.
Secretly to Tenedowne by night.
Thus they feigned of full false treason,
Pryam to put from all suspection.
As chance they would after in all their live,
Resort again unto Troy for to strive.
Thus they made Pryam for to wene,
But in the hand he was deceived clean,
Of their deceyte knowing never adele.
For in his heart he thought not but well.
Grauntyng to the^ all that might them please,
And when they had at leyser and good ease,
Fro Troy sailed unto Tenedowne.
With their nauye the false greek Synowne
In Troy waker began to taken keep,
The time when men were in their first sleep
And in all haste with his sleyghty gynne,
Many vyse and many sotyll pynne,
In the stead he made about gone.
The crafty locks undoing euerychone,
And out he goth and began anon to call,
Within the horse the worthy knights all.
So secretly no man might espy,
And traitorously he began him for to hye,
Upon the walls the self same night,
And toward greeks began to show a light,
Where as they lay tofore Tenedowne.
Ready armed to fall upon the town.
And when they had this sudden light espied
On horse back anon they have them hyed,
Toward Troy armed clean at all,
And in they went by the same wall,
Which for the horse was but late broke.
And mortally for to be a wroke,
The knights eke in the stead of brass,
Have with them met a full stern pace,
And began anon throughout the City,
On every half for to kylle and slay.
With bloody sword upon every side.
And made their wounds broad large and wide
While they alas no thing aduertynge.
At mydnight hour abedde lay slepynge,
Full innocent and thought not be good.
All forbathed in their own blood.
Both man and child without exception,
The greeks sparynge no condicyon,
Of old nor young woman wife nor maid.
That with the cry Pryamus abrayde,
Out of his sleep and sodeynely awoke,
Which lay all night and no head ne took,
Of the slaughter nor murder in the town.
But tho he wiste that there was treasowne
Falsely compassed unto his cytee,
By Anthenor and also by Enee.
Of whose malys he was no more in doubt,
For the venym was now taken out,
And now the galle of conspyracion,
That under sugre of symulacion,
Has so long closed be and hyd,
In deed is now execute and kyd.
And now the fraud fully of treason,
The castes also of false collusyon,
Be raked out and abroad yblowe.
And the auctours openly yknowe.
Now has envy and contryued hate,
Of their engyne set abroad the gate,
Now hate deceyte and old conspyracye,
And feigned oaths all of one allye,
All openly showed their falsenesse.
And disclosed all their doubleness.
So far abroad that now is there no geyne
For now alas the wild fire is seyne,
In towers hye with the wind yblased.
Whereof Pryam astoned and amassed,
All awaped sterte out of his bed,
And comfortelesse to the temple is fled,
Of Apollo to save him if he might.
And aye the flawme of the fyres bright,
Brent in the town and consumes all.
The rich byldynge whylom so royal,
That the walls with the rofes huge,
Covered with led for a chyefe refuge,
Were now alas bare and bareyne makyd,
The greeks aye with their swords naked,
Murdre and slay where so that they go.
That twenty thousand they yt night and mo
There killed have long or it was day.
And in this slaughter and this great affraye,
Spoil and rob and take what they find,
Treasour and good, and left not behind,
By mighty hand and sturdy vyolence,
And the temples without reverence,
They have despoiled throughout all the town
And gredely rent and raced down,
Of gold and silver the ornaments all.
Tofore the gods foul mote them fall.
King Pryam aye with a deadly chere,
To Apollo making his prayer,
Furyously this deadly woeful man,
As he in soth that no read ne can.
But wait his death and his fatal eure,
And Cassandra that holy creature,
Of inward woe desirous to sterue,
Complaining hyed unto Mynerue,
Making to her a lamentaciowne.
With other gentle women of the town.
And there alas as they wolden dye,
Full pyteously they sobbe weep and cry,
And in their dole there I let them dwell.
For all there sorrows if I should do tell,
In this storye and their woe discryue,
My dulled pen of ruthe should also rite riue
Rehersynge eke how in every street,
Their clothes black ready moist and wete,
As they alas both in one and all,
On their lords down aswone fall.
With their blood be dewed and ysprent,
Where men may see the crystal tears meynt,
Of their weeping in their wounds grene,
That lay and blede again the son shene.
With deadly eyes casting up the white,
It were but vain their woeful case to write,
Nor the manner of their mortal sorrow.
But Guydo wryt that the same morrow,
How Anthenor and with him false Euee,
Conveyed have throughout the cite.
The mighty Greeks unto Ilyon.
The royal toure and rich mansyon,
That whylom was of most excellence,
In the which they found as tho no dyffence
Of high nor low nor of none estate,
For it was left alone all desolate,
With all the gold and richesse of the town,
Shet and enclosed in the chyefe dongeowne.
But there was no man that withstode,
They brake the locks and raught away ye good
And the treasure that was shet within,
Each for his party that he might wyn.
They gave no force who was life or loath.
And Pirrhus after to the temple goth,
Of Appollo by great cruelte.
And fell on Pryam knelyng on his kne,
And with his sword furyously and wood,
Tofore the altar shadde there his blood.
So hye raught both in length and bread,
What the streams of his wounds read,
That the statute of gold borned bright.
Of this Apollo for all his great might.
For all his power and his stern face,
Defouled was and pollut all the place.
Only by death of this worthy king,
By Pirrhus slain while he lay knelynge,
Of old hatred and old enuyous pride.
While Anthenor and Enee stood beside,
That routhe was and pytye to behold.
To se him lie on the stones cold,
So pyteously tofore the altar blede.
Whereof alas when Hecuba took head.
And her fair daughter Polycene,
With heir to rent as any gold wire shene.
Inly supprysed with sorrow to the heart,
When they began consider and aduerte,
The noble king with bloody streams red.
All for drowned his eyes derke and dead.
With Pirrhus sword girte through outher side
For mortal fear they durst not abide.
But inwardly through darted with the sight.
All in a rage took them to the flyghte.
And yet in so the through out the Cite,
They wyste never whytherwarde to flee.
Rescuse was none nor no remedy,
Of kynne nor friend nor of none allye,
With greeks sword the town was so be set
And in her flight this woeful queen has met,
Eneas causer of all this wrake.
Unto whom rebukynge thus he spoke.
Oh thou traitor most malycious,
Thou false serpent adder enuyous,
Croppe and root fynder of falsenesse,
Soures and well of unkindness.
How myghtest thou in thy hand find,
Unto thy king to be so unkind.
Gynner and ground example of treason,
And fynall cause of our destruction.
How myghtest thou deuoyde of all pytye.
Beholdynge alas through thy cruelte,
Of the king shed so the blood,
That ever has been so gentle and so good,
So gracious lord specially to the.
And ouermore through his high bounte,
They honored and ymagnefyed,
All his life it may not be denied.
That lies now dead in the temple alas.
Thou were not only traitor in this case,
But to his death conspyrynge and unkind.
Pirrhus conueying where he should him find
Tofore Apollo mids of this cite,
Where thou should of very duetye,
Rather have been his protection,
His mighty shield and sauacion,
That haste this city and this town ylorne,
In which thou were fostred and yborne,
On the greatest of reputacion,
Of all the lords dwellinge in this town.
In which thou had whilom most plesau^ce
But all is now out of remembrance.
Yet in thy heart if any drape be,
Of gentylnesse mercy or pytye,
In this deadly rage full of tene.
Rewe on my daughter young Polycene,
From greeks sword her youth for to save.
If thy heart may any routhe have,
Of manly pytye on her maydenheade.
Defend her now and keep her out of dread
If thou canste find any weye,
In any wise that she may not deye.
That hereafter when men se and read,
The false treason and the foul deed,
That thou haste done unto Troy town.
It may in party be protectiowne,
To thy fame the venym to allye,
Of this treason when men will assaye,
By just report thy name to accuse.
This deed may the help to excuse,
Against tongues that speak of Enee.
Than will they say thou had yet pytye,
On Polycene only of gentilnesse,
Therewith to sugre all the bytternesse,
Of thy deserte blow forth by fame,
By rehersayle of the foul blame,
That shall of the through the world be borne
With sklau^der infect when thou art al to torn,
That thou ne shalt the shame mow sustene.
Then shall my daughter fair Polycene,
Be thy defense again such famous strife,
If it so be now thou save her life.
Of me no force though thou make as blyue,
The sword of greeks through my heart ryue
And so by prayer of this woeful queen,
This Eneas took to him Polycene,
Whose traitor heart for all his cruelte,
On her youth was meued of pytye,
Only of routhe that in his breast arose.
And secretly put her up in close,
Lest that greeks found occasyon,
Against him and Ayax Thelamon,
Took to his ward Andromecha.
Hectors wife and wife Cassandra,
Out of the temple longing to Mynerue.
From greeks sword their lives to conserve.
And Menelaye took the queen Heleyne,
Into his guard for whom so great a pain,
Bode in his heart many day toforne,
By whom alas the city is now lorne.
And greeks aye were busye in their ire,
To slay and kylle and crullly to fire.
On every side and to beat down,
Palyce and house and wall of the town,
They spare naught for all goth to the fire.
So fervent hate brent in their desire,
Of old envy avenged for to be.
That they ne left within the Cite,
Nothing vnbrent and also ylyowne,
Was in this rage turned up so down.
There made were none exceptions.
Only but take the possyons,
Of Anthenor evil mote he fare.
And Eneas whom the greeks spare,
As they to them were bound by their oath.
And thus the greeks furyous and wroth,
Have all that day robbed and ybrent.
Till that the king Agamenon has sent,
For his lords to assemble yfeare,
In Pallas temple only for to here,
There wise advise upon things twain.
First if they would hold and not feign,
Holy their hope without exceptiowne,
To the^ by whom they won first the town
And over more he axed them also,
Touching the gods what they would do,
With gold treasour and possessyowne,
That they have won through their hie renown
And they answered without more taryinge
They would their faith keep in every thing,
As they were sworn and hestes hold.
And over this they said how they would,
That gold treasour and good of the Cite,
As right requietrh and also equitye,
Be justly parted by deuysion,
To every wight made distribucyon,
Like his meryt of high and low degree.
And that the king eke of reason se,
Each to reward after his labor.
So as it longs to a conqueror,
That no man have matter to complain.
And so they fell in speaking of Heleyne,
Eueryche after his opinion.
And tofore all other Ayax Thelamon,
Shortly said she has deserved death,
For whom so many have yield up the brethe.
Plainly affyrmynge there in Parliament,
Of ryghtwysenesse and true judgment,
She should not escape with the life,
That gynnyng was and cause of all their strife
Rote and ground of all their sorrow and woe
And so said eke many an other mo.
And for the noise and the great affraye,
Agamenon nor king Menelaye,
Ne durst a word for her party meue.
To save ye queen lest greeks would them grieve
Against them there was so great rumor,
Till Vlixes chiefly her socour,
Through his wit and his eloquence,
His deuer did and his dylygence,
To have her life and fully to purchase,
Of the greeks for to get her grace.
And as Guydo also does us lere,
Agamenon greeks began requere,
To grant him for a chief guerdon,
Of Cassandra to have possession,
All her life with him to abide.
Eke Eneas and Anthenor beside,
Of Helenus to the greeks told,
How to the werre he never assente would,
And how that he prudennt and virtuous.
In counsaylyng was contrarious,
To all tho of high and low estate,
In Troy first that began debate,
Atwyxe greeks and this mighty town.
Eke by his help and medyatiowne.
Achylles was buried and ygraue,
The dead corpse from hounds for to save,
When he was slain in full cruel wise,
By night time as ye have herd deuyse,
For sothly he and Cassandra both,
Of this murder in heart were full wroth.
And sorry eke of many an other thing.
Wrought in the town without their wyttynge.
And for they were of malice Innocent.
The greeks have fully by assent,
Granted to them a prerogatyfe,
By Parliament for to have their life.
But Helenus first in tears drowned.
Tofore the king pyteously has sowned.
And abraydynge with a deadly face,
In humble wise besought him of his grace.
Of knyghtly pytye to have his aduertence.
To spare his sword fro blood of Innocence.
And of mercy that he not disdain,
To grant life to the sons twain,
Of worthy Hector his brother most entere
And eke to rewe on their mother dear.
Only of grace that she be not dead.
A wydowe left a lone and can not read.
And so the king ameued in his heart,
And wot not whither that she may diuerte,
Of his words and his woeful chere,
Benygnely granted his prayer.
And gave eke life and fredom for to go,
To the mother and her children two.
And to ladies and gentle women all,
That for mercy to his grace call.
He granted eke of compassyon,
A safe conduite and a fre pardon.
Where that them list in the town abide,
Or in the country adjacent beside.
He put it hole in their electiowne.
And thanking him they fell on knees down
With many tear dewed in the face.
And so the king parts fro the place.
And after that greeks right anon,
Fully purpose to ship for to gone,
In haste to sail toward their country.
But such a tempest rose up in the sea,
Of wawe and wind also of clouds black,
All a month that they dare not take,
The water salt for dread of Neptunus.
Of very Ire and also Golus,
Was unto them in every thing contrary.
That on the land made them long tarry.
The sea was aye so fell and boylynge,
Till the greeks of Calchas enquyryng,
By one assent what it might be,
That ever in one so diverse was the sea.
In his rage both eve and morrow.
And he answered god give him evil sorrow
This old shrewe with all his prophecye,
That can so well when him list to lie.
How this tempest caused was at all,
By the gods and furyes infernal,
That never would appease nor be stylle,
Till the number platly of Achylle,
Avenged be and shedynge of his blood.
For which he said Apollo was eke wood
For his temple to him consecrate.
Was through his death in Troy violate,
By blood again be made satisfaction.
Wherefore there must through redempcyon,
Of her that was root in special,
Through her beautye and orygynall,
Cause of his death young Polycene,
And gynnynge first of his mortal tene.
Therefore to Apollo she might up offered be,
By sacrafyce to please his deyte.
With death again to make recompense.
Right as by death first was the offense,
This greeks must utterly fulfill,
If they desire for to have at will,
The large sea to sail in quiet.
And Pirrhus tho in a furious hete,
Began enquire about of every man,
For Policene but no wight tell can,
Of her a word nor shortly where she was.
Saufe some said how that Eneas,
And Anthenor had hyd her pryuely.
Whereof there rose among them suddenly,
Such agrutchynge of greeks all about,
Of their life that they were in doubt.
So inwardly this things they took at grefe
Till Anthenor god give him evil prefe,
That may of treason as wardeyn bear ye keye
To show out his malys every way.
So long has sought till in a chamber old,
He has her found and the greeks told,
And brought her forth unto their presence,
By cruel force and hateful vyolence,
Without pytye or compassyon,
And her delivered to Agamenon.
And he alas by hastye Judgment,
Without respyte or auysemente.
Shortly has dempte that she shall be dead
That was flourynge in her maydenhead.
And for to do excepcyon,
She was assygned by Agamenon,
Unto Pirrhus and he of tirannye,
Ladde her forth and fast began him hye,
To the place where she should dye.
Great was the prease that in the weye,
Began croude and shoue to behold and seen,
This young maid fair Pollycene,
That for her beautye and her semlynesse,
Her womanhede and excellent fayrenesse,
Of all yfere when they took head.
They had routhe that she shall be dead.
Without gylte or any more trespace.
Where men may se upon many face,
The salt tears fast fall down,
Of very pytye and compassyowne.
For man nor child was none so hard of heart
But he felt for her sake some smert.
Her goodly face when they behold and se,
And feign would if it might have be,
Delivered her of very force anon,
Fro Pirrus hand but for they wend echone
Without her death never to have repeire,
Into greece nor the wether fair.
As Calchas had made suggestion,
And brought them all in opinion.
And at the last when this Policene,
Of deed and will a very maid clean,
Was to the grave of Achylles brought.
She kneleth down and with an humble thought
Cast up her eye and began syghe often,
And to the gods humbly and soft,
With dreadful heart and devotion,
Made in this wise her lamentacion.
OH ye mighty yt in this world govern,
And every thing consider and diserne,
By whom this world so huge large and round.
Both air and sea heaven and eke ye ground,
At your deuyse with a word was wrought.
And sothfastly know every thought,
Right as it is of every manner wight,
Without lettynge so persynge is your sight,
That nothing is conceyled nor ywrye,
From the beholdynge of your eternal eye,
And every thing may attones se.
Upon my soul have mercy and pity.
And of your grace and beninge cure,
Upon my woe and pyteous adventure,
Have some routhe now that I shall deye,
My woeful spyryte to lead and conueye,
Where as you list now that I shall pace.
For unto you in this self place,
I me confess with all humilyte,
That hitherto I have in chastyte,
Ladde all my life and kept my mayde^head,
In your service both in thought and deed,
In port in chere and in countenance,
Or for feture of any daliaunce,
With one misloke I never yet abrayde.
So that in sothe I dye shall a maid,
As ye well know of sin all innocent,
Though I be now dempt by judgment,
For to be dead without gilte at all.
Witness on you that be immortal.
Clean of entente of that I am accused.
And yet alas I may not be excused,
But that the sword of vengeance must byte
Routheles which am nothing to wite.
But stand clear and pure of all offense.
And discharged in my conscience,
I dare affirm and fully giltles,
Touching the murdre of worthy Achilles,
Which slew my brother and after loved me,
And is now cause of mine aduersyte.
And yet in will deed word nor thought,
Unto his death assentaunt was right naught
But thereof was right sorry im my heart.
Albe that I may not now asterte,
For to be dead only for his sake.
On me alone vengeance shall be take,
Without mercy in full cruel wise.
With my blood to make sacrafise,
To the gods their wrath for to queme.
Oh people blind in sothe amiss ye deem,
Against me your heart is so cruel,
To mercyles to yrous and to fell,
Without routhe to mikel indurate,
To sley a maid alone desolate.
Out of your heart alas pitye is gone,
Harder in truth than any stock or stone,
And more cruel in your opinion,
For lack of pitye than Tigre or Lion.
Certis ye be greatly for to blame,
And ought thereof for to have great shame,
To assent to so foul a deed,
To sley a maid quakinge in her dread,
And grant her none oportunitye,
For to be weep her virginyte,
That of this cruel and this piteous wreche.
My blood your gylte hereafter shall apeche,
And accuse also your great envy,
To the gods that shall iustyfye,
Every unright both of high and low.
Full egally and make to be know.
The truth plainly spare and no degree,
But make open that is now secree.
I say not this nor my self complain,
To have redres of my fatal pain.
For death is now more welcome unto me,
Than is my life and more I take at gree.
Sithen my brother most worthy of renown,
Be slain all and buried in this town.
My father dead in his unwieldy age.
And I alone lest in all this rage.
And have abide pyteousely to se,
Finally ruin now of this city.
Which at my heart sytteth now so sore,
That lever I have then to weep more,
Dye attones in relesse of my woe.
Since all my kynne is passed and ago.
Longer to live were to me a death.
For better is here to yield up the breath,
Then to be led out of this Cite,
Among strangers to live in pouertee,
OH death welcome and longer let,
Thy dredefull darte to fyle and to whette,
My tender heart therewith all to ryue.
Again thy might I will never strive.
Now is time to keth the power,
On me that am of will and heart entere,
A clean maid so as I began,
Without touch of any manner man.
In all my life to this same day,
This little auaunte yet make I may,
In mine end to the gods all.
After whose help I clyppe and call,
And to their mercy mekely I commend,
My woeful spirit and pray them that they send
To every maid better hap and grace,
Then I have now and a longer space,
In hertye joy and honor to contune,
Without assault of any infortune.
To lead their life in prosperitye.
And all maidens remembers upon me,
To take ensample how ye shall you keep.
And that ye would a few tears weep,
When that ye think upon fair Pollyne,
That was of age and of years grene,
When she was slain by cruel adventure.
And to the gods for to have in cure,
My dreadful ghost holely I betake,
Eternally and thus an end I make.
And with yt word her head she began enclyne
Full humbly when she should fine,
And of her eyes held the ledes down.
And Pirrhus then wodder then Lion,
Dismembered has with his sherpe sword.
This young made dredefull and aferde.
And over more his cruelte to show,
On pieces small he has her all to hew,
Endelonge his fathers sepulture.
Alas how might his cruel heart endure,
Mercyles to do so foul a deed.
I am astoned sothly when I read,
After her death how it did him good,
Like a tiraunt to cast abroad her blood,
Or a Tygre that can no routhe have.
Round enuyrowne about his fathers grave
He sprent of hate and of cruelte.
Oh thou Pyrrhus thou may well ybe,
Achylles son by lyneall descent.
For like to him of heart and of entente,
Thou were in soth deuoyde of all pytye,
And worse then he yet in one degree.
For of thy father in all his lyuinge,
Ne radde I never yet so foul a thing,
Though I would of hatred him abrayde,
For no rancour that ever he slew amayde.
I find well that he had his part,
Whylom in love of Cupydes darte,
That made him sore in his live smerte,
When that he was wounded to the heart.
With the casting only of an eye,
Wenynge thereby wystly for to dye.
He might not the sodeyne stroke escape.
And afterward as his fate has shape,
He murdered was for the love of Pollicene,
Whom thou haste slain in the cruel tene.
Furyously without routh or shame.
For which thing the foul hateful fame,
Through all the world hereafter shall be spread.
When this story rehearsed is and red.
Then shall be said that Pirrhus routhlesse,
Slew in his ire a maid gyltelesse,
And woryed shall thy name most odyble.
Be for this deed passyngly horrible.
For love only of fair Pollycene.
The death of whom when Hecuba the queen
Has seen alas as she beside stood.
For very woe began to be wood,
And for sorrow out of her wit she went,
And her clothes and heir she rent,
All in a rage and wot not what she does.
But began anon with hands and with tothe,
In her furye scrache and eke byte.
Stones castes and with fystes smite,
Whom she met till greeks made her bind.
And sent her forth also as I find,
Into an isle to Troy partment,
Where she was slain only by Judgment,
Of the greeks and stoned to the death.
And when she had yield up the breath.
This woeful queen by cruel adventure,
The greeks did make a sepulture,
Ceryously of metal and of stone.
And took the corpse and buried it anon,
With great honor and solempnitee.
That long after men there might se,
The rich toumbe costfull and royal.
There set and made for a memoryall,
Of Hecuba whylom of great fame.
And after gave to that place a name,
And called it to be long in mind.
Locus in festus) in Guydo as I find.
And thus the queen only for sorrow wood,
When her daughter had shad her blood,
Of greeks stones did her end make.
As ye have herd plainly for the sake,
Of Policene whylom in Calchas,
Unto Apollo falsely offered was.
By Pyrrhus sword Achylles auengyng,
To make the sea calm and blandysshydg,
That the gods take no vengeance,
Upon greeks that on evil chance,
Come to this false gods euerychone.
And their statues of stocks and of stone.
In which the serpent and the old snake,
Satan him self began his dwelling make.
And fraudently folks to yllude.
Full suttyll can him self illude.
In images for to make his hold,
That forged be of silver and of gold.
That by error of false illusyon,
He has ybrought to confusyon.
Through mischance the worthy kind of man
Sith time that alder first began,
The false honor of ydolatrye,
And the worship unto maumetrye,
By sacrafyce of beasts and of blood,
To appease them when that they are wood.
And to queme both at eve and morrow.
I pray to god give them all sorrow,
Where so they be within or without.
I none except of the false route.
Saturn nor Mars Pallas nor Juno,
Iubyter Mercurius nor Pluto,
Another Flora that does the flowers sprede.
Another Bachus with grapes white and read,
Nor Cupydo with his eyes blind.
Another Daphne closed under rind,
Through Tellus might of his laurer tree,
Nor thou Dyane with thy chastitee.
Mighty Venus nor Citherea,
With thy darts nor Proserpyna,
That lady art deep down in hell.
Nor Bellides that draws at the well.
Ixyon nor thou zezyphus,
Nor with thine appyll thou cruel Tantalus
Nor the furies that be infernal.
Nor ye that spynne the lives threde fatal,
Upon the rock of every manner man.
Nor the Muses that so sing can,
Atwene the Coppys of Nysus and Cira,
Upon the hylle beside Cyrrea.
Nor the Cybeles nor Ceres with thy corn,
Nor Golus of whom the dredefull horn,
Is herd so far when thou list to blow.
Nor Ianus Byfrons with back corbed low
Nor Pryapes nor Genyus the pressed,
That cursed aye with candylles in his feste.
Them echone that froward be to kind.
Nor Ymeneus whose power is to bind,
Hertes that be knit in marriage,
Till the goddess of discord and rage,
Disseuereth them by division.
Another Maues that have their mansyon,
Myd the earth in derkenesse and in woe.
Nor this Elues that are wont to go,
In vndyrmeles when Phoebus is most shene,
Another Fawny in tender greues grene.
Water nymphs nor this Naydes,
Satyrye another Driades.
That gods be of wood and wilderness,
Nor other gods another more nor less,
As Morpheus that is the god of sleep.
I hold him wood that takes any keep,
To do to them any obseruaunce.
He may not fail for to have myschaunce,
At the end plainly for his mede.
For all such feyned falsenesse out of dread,
Rose of the devil and first by his engyne,
And of his sleyghty treynes serpentyne,
Only mankind when he made loute.
To false ydoles the which out of doubt,
Are but deuylles Dauyd bears witness,
In the saulter where he wryt express.
And confyrmeth there as he endites,
How the gods of Paganism rytes.
One and all he excepteth none,
Be made of gold of silver and of stone.
Forged of brass of metal and of tree.
And eyes have of and yet they may not se.
And all are fendes so as Dauyd says,
That who in them haueth any faith,
Hope credence or in them delight.
It is no dread that they will him quyte,
With such guerdon as the soul sleeth,
Perpetually so that the fine is death.
Of their service when men hense pace.
And in their life unhap and evil grace.
Mischyefe and woe and confusyowne,
As men may se example by the town,
That wend well assured for to have be,
And to have stand in long prosperitye.
Again their foen through help of Apollo,
Of Venus eke and favor of Juno,
Through Pallas might Dyane and Mynerue,
Whom they were wont to honor and serve,
With cerimonyes and with sacrafyce.
As ye tofore have herd me deuyse.
That them have brought now to ruin,
By cruel death in a bed them to fine.
Here may ye se how the venym bytes,
At the end of such old rytes,
By euydence of this noble town.
What may avail now Palladyowne.
What may now help their frauded fantasye,
Of all their old false ydolatrye.
Alas alas they bought it all to sore.
Now farewell Troy farewell for evermore.
Farewell alas to cruel was thy fall,
Of the no more now I write shall.
For thy sake forsooth when I take heed,
Of inward woe my heart I feel blede.
And when that I remember in my thought,
By ruin how thou art brought to naught.
That whylom were so noble and so rich,
That in this world I trow none was liche.
Nor perygall to speak of fayrenesse.
To speak of knyghthode or of worthynesse,
As clerks say that thy byldynge knew,
That all the world ought for to rewe,
On thy piteous waste walls wild.
Whylom so royal when men began to bylde,
Thy towers hye and king Pryamus,
The first began most rich and glorious.
And set his see in noble Ilyon.
Oh who can write a lamentacion,
Convenient Oh Troy for thy sake,
Thy great myschiefe to complain and cry.
Certes I trow not old Ieremye,
That so be wept the captiuitye,
Of thylke noble royal chyefe Cite,
Jerusalem and his destruction.
With all the hole transmygracion.
Of the Jews nor thou Ezechyell,
That were that time when the mischief fell,
Unto the king ycalled Sedeclye,
In Babylon and for thy prophesye,
With stones were cruelly yslawe.
Nor he that was departed with a saw,
Ye both two that cold so complain,
Nor Danyell that felt so great pain.
For the kings transmutasyon.
In a beast till through the oryson,
Of Danyell he restored was.
To mind again and eat no more grass.
Yet verily though ye all three,
With your weeping began alive be,
And present eke at the destructiowne,
Of this noble worthy royal town.
To have bewailed the mischief and the woe,
And the slaughter at the syege do,
On outher party in full cruel wise,
All your tears might not suffyce,
To have bewepte their sorrows euerychone.
By treason wrought as well as by their foen.
Hereof no more for it may not avail.
But like as he that gynneth for to sail,
Again the wind when the maste do ryue,
Right so it were but in vain to strive,
Again the face bitter then galle,
By the vengeance upon Troy fall.
Nor to presume their furyes sharp whette,
Ceryously in this book to set.
So great a thing I dare not undertake.
But even here a pyteous end I make.
Of the syege after my symplesse,
And though my style be blotted with rudeness
As of meter both rusty and vnfyled,
The fourth book that I have compyled,
With humble hand of dread yt does me quake
Unto your grace holy I betake.
Of your mercy nothing in dispryre,
So as I can making my repeyre,
To the greeks and no longer dwell,
Their adventures of the sea to tell.
In their resort home to their country.
And how that they there received be.
Only of supporte so ye not despise,
The fyfthe book I shortly shall deuyse.
Thus ends the fourth book.
The fyfthe book.
Here begins the fyfth book How the Greeks returned into Greece after the
destruction, and how they were perysshed almost all in the sea, and after
they that escaped dyed myscheuously. Cap. xxxvi.
WHen Eolus which does the wyndes rore,
Appeased was yt he blewe no more
Which is of storms gouernoure and lord,
And was also fully of accord,
With mighty Juno lady of the air,
To make the sky and the wether fair,
That cloud none in heaven did appear,
And Neptunus blaundyshynge of chere,
Was of assent the story says for soth,
To make the sea fro tempest calm and smoth
Without boiling or trouble of any wawe,
The mighty greeks to shipward began the^ draw
For to repeyre home to their country.
After they had wonnen the city,
And put their fomen fully at the werse.
But fortune aye froward and perverse,
Has with their mirth meynt aduersyte.
For when they wend full assured be,
And have stand steadfast in quyete,
This blind lady falsely made to flete,
Into their sugared galle of discordaunce:
Among them self to bring in varyaunce.
And their hertes of rancour and of pride,
Contagyously to seueryne and deuyde.
When they sat highest in their glory,
With the palm of conquest and victory,
Fully reioysynge through their hye renown,
The crown of laurer in possessyowne.
And had also at their lust all won,
When bryghtest shone the lustye fresh son.
From East to West of their worthynesse,
A cloudye sky unawarely with derkenesse,
Eclypsed has a party of their light.
And eke diffaced the wholesome beams bright,
Of their welfare and prosperity.
By the enuyous false contagyosytie,
Of the serpent pompouse and ellate,
Among them self to make them at debate.
Indusynge in rancour and discord,
For or they enter within ships board,
Again Vlyxes worthy Thelamon.
In presence of the king Agamenon.
Purposed has plainly his mattere,
Tofore greeks anon as ye shall here.
SIres quod he so it you not grieve,
Me seems justly of reason I may meue,
Touching ye winning and getting of the town
With gold richesse and possessyowne,
Fully delivered and taken to our hand,
With all the treasour found in the land,
The which me thincketh in my inward sight
Ne has not ben departed half a right,
Among us by just deuysyon,
Ne by egall dystribucion.
Considered first by title of equity,
Of every wight the estate and dignity,
Remembered eke how in this sharp shoure,
The worthyest the merit and labor,
And deserts in this mortal strife,
Granting to eueryche his prerogatyfe,
And like fortune as he has deserved.
But this order has not be observed,
Among us without excepcyon,
In delyueraunce of Palladyon,
Which Vlyxes I say without dread,
Tofore you all unjustly does possede.
On him usurping by false opinion.
By merytorye retrybucyon,
And appearance his title for to ground,
Under pretense of color falsely found,
That he this relyke rejoice should of right.
By sleyght won rather then of might.
And usurps by manner of a vaunt,
As it were given unto him by grant,
Of you echone for a chyefe guerdon.
But I will make a replycation,
That this relyke is not to him mete.
Which he shall not rejoice in quyete,
If that I may disturb him or do let.
For I it cleyme duly as of debt,
And for guerdon to me conuenyent,
So that ye list to be indifferent.
Of reason only as it does you seem,
Atwene us two egally to deem,
Justly first with every circumstaunce,
Our outher merit weyed in balaunce,
First considered forth fro day to day,
By all the long while that the syege lay,
That ye should of plentye of vitayle,
On no side fro no myschyefe fail.
And if I shall without auaunt out break,
As of arms and knyghthode for to speak,
In the fyelde by long continuance,
Of manly force and perseueraunce,
Upon our foen that were so fell and kene,
Day by day I was armed clean,
It needs not to make mencyon,
With my right hand I slew him Phylomene
As ye well know which had in his keeping
The young son of Pryamus the king.
Fresh and lusty and of great fayrenesse.
And with him had infynyte richesse,
Of treasoure gold passyngly plentye.
And every dele was brought to you by me,
If ye remember and list to take heed.
That ye were quiet of indygence and need,
By occasyon of that great good.
And through my manhood shed I not ye blood
Mercyles in full cruel wise,
For your sake of the king of Fryse.
And the treasour in his cofers sought,
And all yfeare to the syege ybrought,
And by my knyghthode sith go full yore,
Have I not eke augmented and made more,
The greeks land with possessions,
By conquest only of two regyons,
Through my prudence and my labor won,
Sythen that ye the syege first begone,
With prouynces to Troy adjacent,
To your increase I was so dyligent.
And with Achylles the worthy warryour,
Ye be expert full well of my labor.
What we wrought to your advantage.
And sythen ye so prudent be and sage,
Not foryetell but fully remembrynge,
It needs not rehersen every thing.
And so to dispreue manly as a knight,
His title and cleyme that he has no right,
The dome co^myttynge to your opynyons,
By rehersayle of his condycyons,
He another has manhood nor prowess,
Force knyghthode another hardynesse,
And at a point for to have a reward,
In darynge do is preued a cowarde.
Experyence has showed you in deed,
How that he is when it comes to need,
But word and wind and sleyghty co^passyng,
And on falshode ever imagining,
For never yet to this day was preued,
That any thing was by him acheued,
Which might be entitled to his laud:
But the end medlyd were with fraud.
For under color he can cure all,
Pretend fair like a painted wall,
Diverse hewed that another hye nor low,
There may no man his plain mening know.
And with such sleyght compassed by treason
Out of Troy he gat Palladyon.
Which is great shame and sclaunder to us all.
For of our conquest it is thus befalle,
More of treason we have the city won,
Than of knyghthode as men report koune.
And crop and rote if I rehearse shall,
Vlyxes there is ground and cause of all.
And gynnynge first of this unhappy fame,
That reboundeth to our alder shame.
And sith the truth is platly known and wiste
My tale is ended demyth as ye list.
VLyxes then in his aduertence,
Conceived has the great inpacyence,
Of Thelamon and the great envy,
The fervent rancour and melancolye.
Forbear him first by full great advise,
As he that was full prudent and right wise,
And thought he would make thereof no iape,
By no word for haste that should escape,
Another by none unbridled countenance,
Outward conceived in his regardaunce,
And abraydynge with a stable face,
Syres quod he so I may have grace,
Under supporte of your high presence,
That my tale may have audyence.
I another am in doubt nor in dread,
Of equytye that I shall possede,
Palladyon during my lives day,
Maugre the might of who that say nay.
For if ye list of reason for to se,
At the syege laid first to this cite,
I have my self in double wise acquyt.
As well by knyghthod sothly as by wit,
And through my counsel and my busy cure,
Be ofre cause of their discomfiture,
Aye dylygent to your advantage,
Wrought and compassed unto their damage.
That to this day in sothe ne had I be,
They had floured in their felycytye,
In their force contuned and welfare.
And if that I the troth shall not spare,
If it be dempt and looked of reason,
I was most cause of their confusyon,
Who so ever against it replye.
How often went I on your imbassadrye,
With importable charge and dyspense,
The treat aye concludynge in sentence,
To the forthrynge of your entenciowne,
And disencrease and hindringe of the town.
And when I saw other mean none,
In mine advise and wits euerichone,
By our force the cite for to win,
While they had yt relyke them within,
Thereupon so sotylly I wrought,
That unto you Palladyon I brought.
Which Thelamon that of malice strives,
Of old hatred unto my gilt ascriueth.
Holy this thing yt I have for you wrought.
But ye that be so prudent in your thought,
Aduerteth wisely and an end makes,
And in your hand this quarrel fully takes.
Palladion justly to provide,
And all favor let be laid aside.
Since all this thing ye platly understand,
And let us both to our demynge stand.
By one assent how so the matter wend,
Lo here is all my tale is at an end.
Then Thelamon in Ire full fervent,
And through rancoure made inpacient,
And of envy inwardely ameued,
Vlyxes has dispyteously repreued,
Only of malys and of high disdain.
And Vlixes rebukyng him again,
Full bytterly without abode anon,
And so they twain made full mortal foen,
In the presence of Agamenon.
But furyously Ayax Thelamon,
Of melancolye pale and nothing red,
Thrette Vlyxes that he shall be dead,
Of his hands he should it not eschew.
And greeks tho all rancour to remewe,
This quarrel put in arbytration,
Of Menclaye and Agamenon,
That caused after a full mortal strife.
For by sentence anon dyffynytyfe,
They put Vlixes in possessyon,
Perpetually of thilke Palladyon.
With him confyrmynge to abide stable.
And cause why they were favorable,
To Vlyxes like as Guydo write.
Was for that he so goodly has him quyte,
Unto Heleyne at getting of the town.
Being in cause of her sauaciowne,
Dispeyred and of her life in dread,
Greeks willing to have had her dead.
But through his prudent mediacyon,
Maugre the might of this Thelamon,
He has the queen fro the death preserved,
Albe that she the same had well deserved.
As greeks said in their opinion.
And thus defrauded of Palladyon,
As ye have hard was this worthy knight,
For all his manhood and his great might.
Where through there began in his heart bread,
Passing envy and full great hatrede.
And thought he would avenged be some day,
Upon Vlixes and on Menelay,
And eke also upon Agamenon.
And out he brake like a wood Lion,
With his knights about him yt were strong,
And said plainly of this great wrong,
For to be dead he would avenged be.
And specially on this ilke three,
And therwithall furious and wroth,
Tournyng his back out anon he goes,
In heart fret with full mortal tene,
With many greek his quarrel to sustene,
That in heart sore began dysdayne,
Again Vlixes and the the other twain.
But they full ware what so ever fall,
Their knights made about them for to call
And with great stuff where they wake or sleep
To awayte on them and manly for to keep,
With full good watch enuyron all the close.
But full erely or the son arose,
This worthy Ayax in his bed vpryght,
Ymurdred was the self same night,
And albe blede in the morrow found.
On pieces hew with many mortal wound.
That for this thing cruel and horrible.
To god and man loathsome and odyble,
Full many greek that woeful morrow weep.
To se a knight so murdered in his sleep.
That the cry and the noise ran,
Throughout the hooste anon fro man to man
And for constreynt of this foul deed,
Eueryche of them felt his heart blede,
Full desirous to make an ordinance,
On this murdre for to do vengeance.
Having thereof great suspection,
To Menelay and to Agamenon.
But to Vlixes most in special.
By common voice to him arrettynge all,
The foul fame he might not asterte.
But Pyrrhus most took this thing at heart
Making a vow furyous and wood,
To be venged plainly on the blood,
Of Thelamon upon Vlixes head.
Him manasynge that he shall be dead,
So sore on him frettynge was the sorrow.
But Vlixes erly on a morrow,
For dread of Pirrhus taken has the sea,
And with his ships fast began to flee,
But or he went platly as I read,
Palladyon he took to Dyomede,
Having in heart thereof full great remorse.
And Pirrhus then taken has the corse,
Of Thelamon for love in special,
And did make a flawme funeral,
Large and great of coals hot and red,
And amyddes the fervent fyry glede,
Full many a greek stondynge to behold,
He let it brenne into ashes cold,
And in the storye after as is told,
He closed them in an vrne of gold,
Full reverently and after has it shette,
And thereupon he has the prynte ysette.
Of his arms curyously ygraue.
From all myschyefe the ashes for to save.
And sent them home by great affection,
To be conserved in the regyon,
Where he was king while he was a live.
And every thing was performed blyue,
After the rytes in tho days used.
And ever in one Pyrrhus has ymused,
Upon this murdre traitorously ywrought,
And cast it should be full dear abought,
The pyteous death of this Thelamon,
Having aye hate as to Agamenon.
And had eke suspecte old Menelay,
That in a wait each for other lay,
Making the^ self with their knights strong,
To try out who has right or wrong.
For Pyrrhus ne would let it lightly gone.
And thus they were made mortal fone,
This ylke three platly to the death.
Through false envy which their hertes sleeth
And while they were among the^ self untrue
Strife upon strife began every day renew,
And debates for to multiplye.
Till Anthenor began this thing espy,
And by his wisdom to stynten all disdain,
Them reconsyled unto peace again,
And caused them to accord in all.
And after made a solemn feast royal.
Besechynge them full lowely al three.
To grant to him thereat for to be,
Of gentylnesse that Greeks might echone,
Outward conceive that they were al alone,
And to this feast he goodly made to call,
As writ Guydo the worthy greeks all,
Of hye ne low was none excepcion.
But if I should make descrypcion,
How the lords and estates set,
Of sundry courses and the gifts great,
That Anthenor gave on every side.
It were to long to you for to abide.
There was of plente so great suffysaunce,
And I find they fell in dalyaunce,
Syttyng at meat to speken of Enee.
Brought in of hate and of enmite,
And of disdaye shortly in sentence,
They put on him many great offense,
And specially in their hasty tene,
Whylom how he concealed Polycene,
And by his sleyght made her be withdraw,
Which was in cause Achylles was yslawe.
Shortly concludyng by one opinion,
His fynall exyle out of Troy town.
Notwithstanding the grant and lyberte,
Given to him to abide in the cite,
Also long as him list deuyse.
But greeks have adnulled his fraunchyse,
Fro the lowest up unto the meste,
That were present at this hye feste.
But doubtelesse I can not well espy,
By whom was brought this conspyracye,
In Troy book I find can no more,
Save that him self wit it Anthenor,
Ylyche false both in one degree,
As ye have herd betrayshynge the City.
Like as they had spronge out of one root.
And when he knew there was none other boot
This Eneas his dome to modefye,
He prayed them of their courtesye,
At the least to graunten him grace,
Four months that he might have space,
To make his stuff and his apparayle,
And him self to puruey of vytayle,
Eke to grant him that they would assent,
Thylke ships that with Paris went,
To Cytheron unto that temple old.
That were in nombre two and twenty told.
And with full grant of his petycyowne,
He is returned home to Troy town.
Tryste and heavy to se and behold,
The waste City with his walls old.
And for sorrow felt his heart blede,
Within him self when he takes head,
And remembered in his aduertence,
To false treason and the great offense,
By him compassed to the town aforne.
And how that he so sodeynely has lorne,
The grace of greeks and stood disconsolate,
That whylom was of so great estate.
Now in his heart he fully dispeyred,
That he unawarely was so evil apayred,
Unto greeks beyond at his back.
Being unguilty and without lack.
And by whom he could not well deem,
Save by signs as it should seem,
That Anthenor was most for to wit.
And cast plainly that he would him quyte,
And through the town he made send blyue,
For thilke few that were left alive,
Coming anon at his commandment,
And when they were euerychone present.
SIres quod he ye se how that fortune,
Toward me gynneth discontune,
Aye unstable with her eyes blind,
As ye expert in your self now find,
Whilom froward now turned into werse,
That of clerks called is adverse,
When her list her cruelte to show.
Now so it stands ye be here but a few,
And I must part and ye still abide,
But it so be that ye will provide,
Standing alone deuoyde of all succoure,
Among your self to make a gouernoure,
I can not se beauty shall be acloyed,
On every part and finally destroyed,
As sely sheep that ne can no read,
All disparkled when no man does the^ lead.
Wherefore best is in this dredefull thing,
By one assent to chosen you a king,
And most able the estate to occupye,
From all assault manly you to guye,
Is Anthenor of knyghthode and renown,
If it accord with your opynyowne.
Wherefore in haste unto this intent,
Without abode let for him be sent.
And at his coming plainly into town,
Upon his head let be set a crown,
Granting to him scepter and regalye,
By his wisdom that he may you guye.
From all assault of any parturbaunce:
By his knyghthode and prudent governance.
And they assent making no delay,
There was never one that lyketh to say nay,
But were right glad in all manner thing,
As ye have herd for to make him king.
But they full little sothly in their sonde,
Of Eneas the meaning understand,
For he ne mente but treason and falsehede,
How at his entering that he shall be dead,
Full traitorously in awayte lying,
To slay him falsely at his in coming.
But Anthenor of all this nothing ware,
Dysarmed came and no weapen bare,
And Eneas with an huge route,
With swords draw set him round about,
Till they of Troy both the young and old,
Ran atwene and manly him with hold,
And on their knees fell mekely down,
Besechynge him to have compassyowne,
Of worthynesse and also of manlyhead,
Like as a knight for to taken head.
How they were left but of people bare,
Besechynge him his dreadful sword to spare
And his rancoure and his ire leave.
Lest the slaughter would them all grieve,
And on the common they besought him rewe.
As says mine auctour at mischief to ye land
And there he was found on the sonde,
Almost at death without remedy,
To him Mynerua has so great envy,
For he so woodly to her temple went.
And Cassandra after her autur hente,
By cruel force and hateful vyolence.
Lo what peril is to do offense,
Of hye dyspyte to any holy place.
I doubt not he shall fail grace,
Who so ever uses it in deed.
At the last god will quyte his mede,
And reward him like as he dysserueth.
And for such thing many greek now strives
Because only of such occasyon,
To exemplefye for no presumpcyon,
Folyly to attain as I have told.
For again god who so be to bold,
Shall repent sooner than he weneth.
And many man that no harm ne meneth,
Suffers vengeance for trespass of one.
The first Auctour goth not quyte alone,
But many other his offense abayth.
For ceryously Guydo wryt and says.
Suynge in order the woeful adventure,
That every greek homewarde did endure.
Of high and low sparynge none estate,
Wholesome welfull and some unfortunate,
Both of their woo and of their welfare,
Right as it fell the storye shall declare.
IN Greece whylom was a worthy king,
Manly and rich and prudent of living,
And had in soth like as write Guydo,
In his time worthy sons two.
Pallamydes was the eldest brother,
And Oetes called was the the other,
Both twain of one mother borne,
And as the storye rehearsed has toforne.
Pallamydes was a noble knight,
Full famous eke of power and of might,
And fer spoke of in many sundry cost.
And had also of all the greeks hooste,
For his wisdom whylom gouernayle.
But he alas was slain in battle,
Through unhap of Martys cruel tene.
When the son shone most bright and shene.
Of his knighthode and his worthynesse.
Like as tofore the story bears witness,
And of his death does plainly specyfye.
But now of malice hatrede and envy
Of such as have tunges unfortunate,
To make only king Naulus at debate,
With the Greeks contrived have of new,
An hye treason false and full untrue,
The which i^ soth was never do nor wrought,
Nor in effect ymagined nor thought,
But a false thing yfeyned of malice,
That this king so manly and so wise,
And so prudent this Pallamides,
Should of envy god wot causeles.
At the siege of Troy the Cite,
Upon a night falsely murdered be.
So that this slaughter and this loathsome deed,
By Vlixes and by Diomede,
Were fully wrought as ye have herd devise,
Which every heart ought to agryse.
This false also that this tale have feigned,
To king Naulus have traitorously complained
Albe in deed it was never mente,
That greeks were also of assent,
To this murdre and conspyration.
Both Menelay and Agamenon.
Albe in soth that every dele was false,
That hanged be they hye by the half,
That can tales so forge and contryue,
To make friends causeles to strive.
For they through fraud of false collusyon.
King Naulus put in suspection,
That greeks had conspyred doubtless,
Upon the murdre of Pallamydes.
Making their ground which they did feign,
That fro Troy were sent letters twain,
To Pallamydes immediately direct.
Which concluded treason in effect.
How that he was for all his high estate,
Falsely allied and confederate,
To them of Troy for a sum of gold.
All this they have feigned and ytolde.
And how he had out of the City,
Of good received huge quantite,
To fine only Greeks to betraye,
And to prolonge them platly and delay,
At the syege in getting of the town,
By his engyne and medyacygwne.
And to confirm all this in sentence,
To make Naulus give full credence.
They said plainly in confusyowne,
The letters which yt were sent fro the town,
Yfounde were enclosed in a shield,
Upon a knight yslayne in the fyelde,
Comprehendynge hole the trecherye.
The treason full and confederacye,
Atwene the town and Pallamydes.
Verily though he were gyltles,
And to give more open euydence,
To make a prefe of this great offense.
They said Vlyxes affyrmyng in certain
Accorded was with a chaumberleyne,
That was in office with Pallamydes.
Wonder secret and nothing reckeles,
For to assente to this conspyracye.
Wrongly compassed of brennynge hot envy
Behotynge him guerdon and great mede,
Like his devise to execute in deed,
To take a treasour and a sum of good,
Full secretly and knit it in a hode,
And hid it when voyded was the prese,
Under the bed of Pallamides.
And more to put Greeks in suerte,
The treasour was the same of quantyte,
That it ne might after be denied,
Like as the letters had specyfyed.
And when all this found was and know,
Throughout the host noised was and yblowe,
Both of the letters and the gold also,
Fro point to point according both two,
Which that this king assentinge to tresowne
Received had out of Troy town,
To be assented as ye have herd me tell.
The Greeks tho no longer would dwell,
But shope them forth all of one entente,
And in all haste came unto the tente,
Of this king full innocent and clean,
That litell knew what they would mean,
But upon him full knightly as he stood,
In their ire furyously and wood,
To be venged loud began to cry.
There may no man their malice modefye.
They were on him so merciles at all,
And as I find most in special.
King Menelay and Agamenon,
Only meued of indignacion,
Would have proceeded unto iudgemtnt,
Of hasty rancour without auysement,
On this treason avenged for to be.
Notwithstanding al his hie degree.
But in sothnesse when this worthy king,
Conceived has this malice in workinge,
First astoned in his inward sight,
All suddenly stert vplike a knight.
This wise worthy this Pallamides,
Hardy as Lion amid all the prese,
Nothing agaste him knightly began express,
And plainly said he would not refuse,
To acquit him self of this mortal case,
Not accepting that he so worthy was,
Of birth and blood and of hye kindred.
All this deuoyding of knighthod and ma^hed,
As he that gave of life nor death no forse,
Tofore them all to ieoparde his corse,
Within a field where them list ordeyne,
Like as a knight this quarrel to dareyne,
With whom that list or durst it undertake,
Exception him liked none to make,
Of hye nor low who that were so bold,
To prove the reason that I have you told.
Besechynge them to make no delay,
Nor prolonge him but the same day,
Manly requiringe it may be do in haste.
But they yt had falsely this thing compaste,
Of his answer stoned were echone.
In all the host that there was not one,
That hardy was if I shall not feign,
In chaump close this quarrel to dareyne.
Another Vlixes nor yet Dyomede,
Chief workers of this foul deed.
But Vlixes as he was customabe,
In every thing to be deceyuable,
Double in his work and aye full of deceyt,
Like a serpent that lies in awayte,
Which under flowers began so glide and trace.
Right so Vlixes with a feigned face,
When yt he saw the knightly hye prowess.
The manly cheer and the hardiness,
And high renown of this Pallamides.
Anon of falshed put him self in prese,
And like a friend that mente not but well,
Brotyll as glass pretendinge outward stele
With one the first began him to excuse,
Them counsaylinge no longer for to muse,
On this matter for their alder ease,
And by craft began them so appease.
Touching the rumoure of this hye treason,
That he has voyded all suspection,
Out of their hertes concludinge in certain.
This accusynge made was in vain,
And conspyred only of hatrede.
Albe him self was root of all this deed.
But when he saw he might not acheue,
As ye have herd this worthy king to grieve
Some spot of treason on him for to lay,
He has anon found an other way,
By the assente fully of Dyomede,
Under pretense plainly of frendlyhed,
Coming to him again a certain night,
Under suraunce as he was true knight,
Counsel to keep either for sote or sour,
Enfourmynge him of a great treasoure.
Of gold and good and infynite richesse,
To him discured under secretnes.
The which sothly no man did know,
Hyd and enclosed in a well low,
Within a field a litell there beside.
The which him list fro him not to hyde,
But of trust unto him dyscure,
So he would do his busy cure,
The same night with him for to go,
Unto the well they three and no mo,
To fette away that great sum of good.
And he in sothe that nothing understood,
What they mente assented was anon.
And so they three be together gone,
Unto the well like as I have told.
And for that he most manly was and bold,
Pallamydes like as they him tell,
Descended is low into the well,
Supposing to have a treasour found.
But they alas him falsely to confound,
Have murdered him with stones great and huge,
He in the botome having no refuge.
And when they had accomplyshed their intent,
They be repeyred eueryche to his tent.
THis tale the story tells us,
That feyned was to the king Naulus,
Touching the death of Pallamides,
Them to desclaunder that were giltles.
For Vlixes and with Dyomede,
Were innocent platly as I read,
And Greeks all both nigh and far.
For he was slain knightly in the werre,
During the siege of Paris with an arowe.
But who is false, feign can full narowe,
To find a tale that never yet was thought,
And of the treason yt should have be wrought
Touching the letters sent out of the town,
There was no such conspyracyowne,
By Greeks wrought but a fable vnsothe,
Falsely feyned to make Naulus wroth,
With Vlyxes and Dyomede also.
Agamenon and other Greeks mo,
To let them homewarde in their way,
And hyndre also there is no more to say,
As they repair to their regyons.
And Naulus then by this occasyons,
And Oetes his son a manly man,
Accorded be in what they may or can,
By one assente to avenge mercyles,
The cruel murdre of Pallamides.
And to ordain at their home passage,
To work fully into their damage.
For Greeks must of necessitye,
Homewarde sale foreby his country.
Wherefore this king shapen has a wyle,
On hills hye by a little isle,
In winter season every manner night,
To make fyres and to set up light,
To cause them on the sea to err,
For as Greeks saw the fire a far,
Unware of harm cast them for to land,
As they that could no peril understand.
But shope them with all their full might,
For to ariue fast by the light.
Wherewith.ij. hundred of their ships brake,
Among rocks and fully go to wrake,
That there was drowned many worthy man.
And thus the vengeance alderfyrst began,
That king Naulus has on Greeks take,
Of deadly hate for his sons sake,
To great mischief and confusyon.
Of Greeks nauye. but Agamenon,
With great peril is the death escaped,
That had almost among them be beiaped,
For earls dukes and worthy kings crowned,
Through his train in the sea were drowned
But Menelay and also Dyomede,
Escaped this mischefe as I read.
And when they were from all danger gone,
This Oetes wood for ire anon,
In his heart shope an other wile,
And thought he would Agamenon begile,
Compassynge a full mortal strife,
Let send a letter anon to the wife,
Of this mighty great Agamenon,
In which chere was included false treason.
For even like if I shall not lie,
Thus in effect they did specyfye.
First how her lord Agamenon the king,
Had at the syege wrought a wonder thing,
In preiudyce and slaundre of her name,
Albe in her was no manner blame,
Like as he wrote platly nor trespace,
His knyghtly honor of folly to difface.
This to say Guydo tells thus,
He loved a daughter of king Pryamus.
And for beauty had her to wife take,
And her in heart finally forsake,
This worthy queen whilom of great fame,
And Clemestra sothly was her name,
Wonder semely and right fair with all,
And by dyscent borne of the stock royal.
Her cellynge eke for all her excellence.
Albe that she never did offense,
Yet her lord of newfangilnesse,
Took an other the letters did express,
Fully in purpose anon at his repair,
Though Clemestra were both good and fair,
All suddenly her to exyle:
Out of his land many thousand mile,
Warning her that she be prudente,
This was the substance as in sentemente,
That Oetes wrote unto this queen,
Albe the king was innocente and clean,
And was to her in all his fore living,
Loving and true in all manner thing,
And her to please passing ententyfe,
In word and deed during all his life.
As fer as ought of reason be desired.
But the letters that falsely was conspyred,
They have her put parcase of Innocence,
For to give to hasty credence,
Thanking first Oetes for his truth,
That so goodly him list to have routhe,
Upon her wrong of high compassyon.
And yet the storye makes mention,
Here afterward as I shall descriue,
That she was the fal'est one alive,
Unto her lord and in his long absence,
And in all haste she made strong diffence,
Again this thing and began her to purueye,
By such fraud that she not ne deye,
But of her work in sothe she was to wit,
The which alas I must anon endyte,
As the story platly does me lere,
Which doleful is and mortal for to hear.
OH unsure trust of all worldly glory,
with sodayn change put out of memory,
Oh joy unstable of vain ambycyon,
With unware turn reuersed up so down.
Oh ydell fame blow up to the sky,
Over whelmed with twincklinge of an eye,
Oh pomp oh boste of tryumphe and victory,
Like a shadow waste and transytorye,
Oh fortune false and unassured,
That to no man may fully be lured.
To high nor low of no manner estate,
With bond of faith to be conferate,
Again whose might no man may him diffe^d,
But at his turn that he shall discende,
When he sit highest on thine unstable whele,
Thy brotyll favor forged not of stele,
Meynt and all allied with mutabylytye,
For welfulnesse and false felicitye,
With sodayn sweygh froward you can auale.
Now fresh of chere now for anger pale,
Of high disdain thou sparest no degree.
For Princes Dukes highest in their see,
Mighty kings and worthy Emperors,
That richest reygne in their royal flowers,
With Scepter and crown you can pull down,
I take witness of Agamenowne,
That was so noble and mighty in his live,
As sundry auctours his hie renown desriue.
But sothfastly for all his excellence,
He might not make no diffence,
With all his knights that his baner sewe,
Conspyred murdre to void and eschew,
Rescuse was none that he could make.
For which alas I feel my pen quake,
That does mine ink blotte on my book.
Oh mighty god that with thine inward look,
See every thing through thy eternal might,
Why will thou not of equit and of right,
Punish and chastise so horrible a thing,
And specially the murdre of a king.
Alas the pain of Ixion in hell,
Or of Manes that with Satan dwell.
Were not egall nor equipolent,
To venge murdre nor sufficient,
For it excedeth in comparison,
Al felonye falshed and treason.
Wherefore oh lord that see and know all.
Through thy power that is eternal,
Suffer no such to live upon the ground,
Worse than Tygre or Cerberus the hounde,
That chayned lies bound at hell gate,
Which of malice plainly though he hate,
He berketh first or he do offense.
But murdre gladly is wrought in silence,
Or men aduerte or take any keep,
Alas a Prince to sley him in his sleep,
On his pyllowe when he slepeth soft.
That cries wreche to hye god alofte,
And axeth vengeance to take as fast,
Though it abide it will out at the last.
Alas a king spoken of so far,
That was so worthy outward in the werre,
His cruel fate passing odyous.
Dysposed has in his own house,
His mortal end to be execute,
Against which there was no refute,
For right as he his ship to land set,
The queen Clemestra on ye strond him met.
With humble cheer and look full beninge,
And showed out full many faithful sign,
Of wisely truth in her countenance,
Albe in heart there was varyaunce,
Not perceived plainly in her face,
Whom the king goodly did embrace,
As he in sothe that but troth mente,
And to his paleys the hye way he went,
Not aduertynge the treason that was shape,
The which alas he might not escape,
Of the falshede he could nothinke feel,
But I ne may no longer it consele,
Again her lord how Clemestra wrought.
For on her bond of wedlock she ne thought
The true look sothly of spousayle.
Again her malice little might avail,
Unto her lord her truth to conserve,
Newfangilnesse caused to sterue,
Her old faith and her assurance,
Her love abode on a fykell chance,
Long absence had her heart apalled,
She loved one that was Egistus called,
Which before all in her grace stood,
That another was of birth nor of blood,
Little or naught of reputacyowne,
Nor renowned of manhood nor renown,
Nor of knyghthod nor of high prowess,
But for his labor and his business,
And good awayte upon her by night,
Therefore he was best furthred in her sight.
Such dread had she for to live alone,
Sorowles so well she could groan,
I can not say what life that she ladde,
Except that she by him a daughter had,
And Exyona Guydo says she hight,
And unto him Clemestra behyght,
Assuringe him upon pain of her head,
He should raygne when her lord were dead.
And to enhaste this conclusyon.
Her worthy lord king Agamenon,
The next night was murdered and yslayne,
By false Egistus and the queen full feign.
No longer bode the storye can you lere,
But in all haste they wedded were yfere,
And by her false and sleyghty compassynge,
Of Messene she made him crowned king,
And put him full in possessyon,
Alas that sin has dominacion,
To further wrong and abate right,
For in this world falshed has more right.
Full often sith than has ryghtwisenesse,
And in the estate set of worthynesse.
Lo how the sin of auoutrye,
Brought in murdre by conspyracye,
Sin upon sin lynked both twain.
And embraced in the fendes chain
Perpetually in hell to endure.
Alas who shall him self full assure,
Fro cruel murdre his body to withdraw.
When that kings in their bed are slawe,
Which brings in alyenacyon,
By extorte title false succession,
There may color of pretense seem,
But full streyghtly god shall after deem,
And justly venge with due recompense,
Intrusyon brought in by violence,
And felly quyte such horrible things,
And sudden slaughter and specially of kings,
Greatly to dread in every regyon.
And as I find that Agamenon,
By Clemestra the false double queen.
Had a son passing fair to seen,
Right gracious in every man's sight,
And Horestus the book says that he hyghte,
Wonder semely and but young of age,
And for great fear of this mortal rage,
Lest he were slain as it was to dread,
To anul his title that he not succeed,
Him to preserve that he were not shent.
King Taltibus with power has him sent,
Full secretly out of that country,
Unto a king called Ydume.
That held his scepter and his royal sete,
Full mightily in the land of Crete.
And Carkasis named was the queen,
That had a daughter called eke Climene,
Borne to be heir of that regyon.
And as it is made eke mencyon,
This Horestes to reken all thing,
Was with the queen and also with the king,
Cherished as well the storye can you lere,
As Climena their own daughter dear.
And was eke kept and had in cherte,
Fro point to point like to his degree,
With attendaunce conuenyent and dew,
To his estate that ever upon him sewe.
Of such as were most expert and sage,
To govern him till he came to age,
To rejoice if god gave him might,
His heritage to which he had right,
By clear descent if happy were his chance.
Thus leave I him under governance.
The young son of Agamenon,
For I must make a dygressyon,
Fro this matter and tell of Diomede,
The auentures in Guydo as I read,
His woeful fate and his pains smerte,
The which alas he might not asterte,
As is remembered plainly in writynge,
That Oetes son of the rich king,
Called Naulus as ye have herd toforne,
Such heaviness in his heart has borne,
Unto Greeks repeyringe home fro Troy,
That his lust and his inward joy,
Was them to hyndre both high and low,
And cause why to you it is unknow,
To them he was so passing enuyous.
In will and thought ylyke desirous,
If he might sothly this no les,
The death to venge of Pallamides,
Like as tofore the storye can deuyse,
To you that be so prudent and so wise.
And how Oetes now of malice wrought,
And traitorously new mean sought,
If he might by any manner way,
Diomedes unawarely to destroy,
Of all this thing I cast not to fail,
Ceryously to make rehersayle.
IN Greece was a kingedome wide and large,
Coniunct in one Calidonye and Arge,
Full habundaunt of richesse and of rent.
Of which the king called was Pollente,
A worthy man and of noble fame,
And had a son Assandrus was his name,
And a daughter passinge fair of sight.
And sothly Egra I find that she hight,
And for her father like as write Guydo,
Had no mo but these children two,
For them he has of wisdom so provided,
This mighty reygne for to be divided,
Atwene them two after his decease,
Each with his part for to live in peace,
To exclude them fro indigence or need.
And she was wife unto Diomede,
Albe tofore the storye of him said,
That he whilom loved one Crysayde.
I can not say where it was doubilnesse,
But well wot I Guydo bears witness,
And in his book sothly says none other.
And how Assandrus his own wives brother
Full lusty fresh and full of manlyhead,
To Troy went with this Dyomede,
But in the sea fordriuen up so down,
They riued up in the regyon,
Called Boece all disconsolate,
With tempest drive weary and full mate,
Them to refreshe and for none other thing.
In which land Thelephus was king,
Of whose riuayle when he herd said,
In his heart he had high disdain,
That they were bold to do so great offense,
To enter his ground having no license.
And yet in sothe they did no damage,
To high nor low of no manner age,
Nor took naught that might disauayle,
Unto that land but it were vytayle,
For which they paid justly at the fine,
For flesh and fyshe and for bread and wine.
Yet for all that of indignaciowne,
King Thelaphus is descended down,
With great array to harm the^ if he might.
And so they began to bicker and to fight,
And Assandrus full of high prowess,
Like a Lion his fomen began oppress,
And wonder knyghtly the field vpen the^ wa^,
And slew that day many worthy man,
Of high courage and of manly pride.
And when the king which that stood aside,
Saw his men slain on every part,
Of high dysdayne hent anon a darte,
And cast at him alas the mortal fate,
And perced has through mayles and through plate,
Of Assandrus that he fell down dead,
The soil about of his blood all read,
His deadly wound so began to blede.
And wood as Tygre tho came Dyomede,
And him to avenge bare him like a knight,
Sleeth and kylleth and put them unto flight
And after that such sorrow began to make.
Of knyghtly routh for his brothers sake
That he ne wist what was best to do.
But as I find myd of all his woe,
From beast and foul the dead corpse to save,
Like his estate he let make a grave,
And buried him after rites old.
But Oetes to his sister told,
That he was slain by fraud of Dyomede,
To fine that he might full possede,
The reygne of Arge hole without strife,
With the purpartye annexed to his wife.
For by his death he might season take.
And told her eke that she was forsake,
This fair Egra for all her womanhead.
Of her lord callled Dyomede.
All this he told in hell be he chayned.
And ouermore he forged has and fained,
How of envy Assandrus lost his life,
And how her lord has take an other wife,
That was to her dishonor and shame,
And passyngly great sclaunder to her name,
In preiudyce ydone of her estate.
All this he told to make them at debate,
Like as he wrote in conclusyon.
To Clemestra of Agamenon,
Which her heart made sore grieve,
For he put her fully in believe,
Of all the treason ye have herd me told,
That for ire she pale was and cold,
Unkindness so her heart sleeth,
And heaviness of her brothers death.
For never yet Guydo does assure,
No woman loved better a creature,
Than she loved him in no manner age,
For first at naught she set her heritage,
In comparyson of her brothers life.
Lo how Oetes made a new strife,
As ye have herd in the storye read.
That gyltles worthy Dyomede,
When he has long at the syege layne,
And to his kingdom would have come again
By migyhty hand of this worthy queen,
And her lyeges that assented been.
He was exyled out of that regyon,
There may be made no medyacyon.
Thus in him self mate and dyspeyred,
Dysconsolate he is again repeyred,
To Salerne a land of great richesse,
Where that Tenter through his worthynesse
With crown and Scepter had reigned long,
With his lyeges and his knights strong,
And brother was to Ayax Thelamon,
Murdered tofore as made is mencyon.
And Dyomede pore and destytute,
May in Salerne find no refute.
For when Tenter first began him espy,
He sewed him by full great envy,
Having to him aye suspection,
Touching the death of king Thelamon.
But Dyomede on a certain night,
Full secretly has taken him to flight.
And fro Salerne fast began him hye,
In hope to find better remedy.
Help or socour in some other place.
If fortune would grant him grace,
For of him self ashamed and confuse,
As man forsake abiecte and refuse.
Right so fared he wandrynge to and fro,
As he that ne wist what was best to do.
But I find the Troyan Eneas,
That all this while still at Troy was,
Only of routh and compassyowne,
To support the^ that were left of the town,
Being always of their life in doubt.
Of their fomen round beset about,
As they that lived for lack of an head,
Contynually in myschyefe and in dread,
Knowing no refute nor comfort in this case,
Till by counsel of this Eneas,
To supporte them in this great need,
They sent in haste for this Dyomede,
Knowing full well his desolacyon,
How he was proscrypt fro his regyon,
Besechynge him of manhood and of routhe,
Him to enhaste without any slouthe,
With all the stuff that he get can,
And souldyers also manly every man,
Without abode and to Troy them led,
To succoure them in this great need.
And Dyomede came and tarried naught,
At their request as he was besought,
To releue them in this sharp shoure,
And with him brought many a souldeour.
And Eneas on the way him met,
In friendly wise and into town him fette,
And to him made passyngly great chere,
And there they began to commune yfere,
Their auentures both of land and sea,
Entermedled with great aduersyte.
That no man may deuoyde nor eschew,
But take his part as it to him is dew,
As sort or hap does his brydell led.
And in this storye shortly to proceed,
Cely Troyans that were almost shent,
With their fomen of yles adjacent,
That them besette about enuyrowne.
But through the manhod and the hye renown,
Of Dyomede and his souldeours,
And other knights noble werreours,
They were reskued and helped utterly.
And four days they fought by and by,
In knyghtly wise defending the Cytee,
And through prowess also of Enee.
They slew and took all that them withstode
And in diffence of Troyanyshe blood,
Such as they fond to the city false,
They hang them up hye by the halse.
And punyshed them for their great wrong.
And Dyomede thus began wexe strong,
By long process as made is mencyon,
Chief protector now of Troy town,
That envy none by a large space,
Durst abide that he had grace,
To his lygeaunce so he made them loute,
And thus his name sprede began about,
That of his fame the great opinion,
Dylated is unto the regyon,
By swifte report to Calydonye and Arge,
Which the queen greatly began to charge.
And astoned when he takes head,
His power began and his might to dread,
Lest he would her land upon her win,
And of knighthod a werre new begin,
And secretly began muse on this thing,
That her lord and her mighty king,
Late exyled and yput to flight,
Has grace found in fortunes sight,
And is remonuted to high estate.
Whereof she was in her self check mate,
And ways cast as he that was prudent.
By hole advise of her parliament.
Without grutchynge or rebellyon,
Him to revoke to his regyon.
And thereupon to him lowly sent,
And with letters the messager forth went,
The cause annullyng by which he was exiled,
And how he was fully reconsyled,
By hole assent of his lyeges all,
And full lowly euerychone they call,
For their offense and of their trespace,
Without rygour for to do them grace.
And he anon like a manly knight,
More of mercy sothly then of right,
When he has their sonde well conceived,
And their meninge fully apparceyued,
To stynte all strife thought for the best.
In goodly wise to grant their request,
And to his reign within a certain day,
He is repeyred in full rich arraye,
Of whose coming full glad his lieges been,
And reconsiled both he and the queen,
And all rancour of any old offense,
Only of wisdom they put in suspense,
And of one heart a blisful life they led,
In Troy book no more of him I read.
But let him live in felycytee.
Again resorting to tell of Ene,
After how he has his time spent,
Which is fro Troy with many Troyan went,
His ships stuffed he and his meyne,
Be sailed forth by many strange sea,
Many danger and many strayte passage,
Tofore or he aryued in Cartage,
Ledinge with him his father Anchises.
And by the way I find that he les,
His wife Crewsa by fatal adventure.
But all the woe that he did endure,
Who so list ceryously to seen,
And how that he falshede the queen.
I mean Dido of womanhead flower,
That gave to him her richesse and treasoure,
Iewelles and gold and al yt might him please,
And every thing that might do him ease.
But for all that how he was unkind,
Read Eneydos and there ye shall it find,
And how that he falsely stale away,
By night time while she a bed lay,
And of his conquest also in ytayle,
Where he had many strong battle,
His auentures and his works all,
And of the fine that is to him fall,
Ye may all se by soueraygne style,
Fro point to point compyled in Virgile,
Write and made sythen go full yore.
For Troy book speaks of him no more,
But proceeds as I shall endyte,
How Horestes cast him for to quyte,
His fathers death plainly and not spare,
If ye list hear as Guydo does declare.
IT is required of equit and of right,
Of that judge that is most of might,
And egally holds his balaunce,
On death conspyred for to do vengeance.
The voice of blood does so aye contune,
To cry wreche with clamor importune,
On them in sothe that it iniustly shede,
For murdre wrought will have his egall mede
And his guerdon as he has deserved,
They may not fle the judgment reserved,
Of him that sit highest in his trone,
And all beholds by him self alone,
Full rightfully the noble mighty king.
For though he suffer he forget nothing,
But all consydreth in his in inspectyon,
And for the murdre of Agamenon,
The mighty lord yt is most soueraygne good
Made of mynystre of the same blood,
Young Horestes full of high prowess,
To execute his dome of ryghtwisenesse,
And gave to him grace power and might.
And he anon took the order of a knight,
Of Ydumeus like as it is told,
When he was four and twentye winter old
Fresh and lustye and wonderly prudent.
And inwardly desirous of intent,
If fortune would him not with said,
His heritage to recure again.
Which Egistas falsely him denies,
And the crown unjustly occupyeth,
By false title of her that was his wife.
But Horest's will ieoparde his life,
And adventure while him lasts breath,
First to be venged on his fathers death,
Upon them tho that the treason wrought.
And alderfyrst full lowly he besought,
King Ydinne of his goodlyhead,
To further him in this great need.
And the king benignely anon,
Assigned has with him for to gone,
A thousand knights manly and right strong,
To redress the great horrible wrong,
Of Egistus wrought by violence,
And by his wisdom and his dyligence.
This Horestes began him so purueye,
Within a while there is no more to seye,
That he him gat the storye will not lie,
An other thousand to his company,
Of worthy knights all of one accord,
To go with him as with their soueraygne lord
In every thing his biddinge to obey,
As ye have herd Egistus to werrey.
And thus Horestes in full rich arraye,
Began hooste and made no delay,
And his lodginge alderfyrst began chese,
In a City that called was Troyese.
Received there with great reuernece,
Of the king that named was Forence,
A manly knight as books specifye,
And bare in heart passinge great envy,
To Egistus by double occasion.
First for the death of Agamenon,
And eke for he had a daughter dear,
That was to him inwardly entere,
Both good and fair and but young of age,
That whilom was given in marriage,
To Egistus but he of doubilnesse,
Of false treson and newfangilnesse,
The kings daughter has utterly forsake.
And in all haste did a libell make,
And forge a writ of repulsyon,
Albe he had no true occasyon,
This Egistus that he her forsook.
Save that he falssy to wiue took,
The queen Clemestra again al right and law
When by assent they murdered have and slawe,
Agamenon as it before is told,
That whylom was so mighty and so bold,
And for the hateful false conspyrasye,
As well of murder as auoutrye.
To venge both by dew recompense,
The worthy knight ye mighty king Forence,
Offered Horestes for to make him strong,
And go with him to help venge his wrong
And with him ladde armed bright in steel,
Four hundred knights horsed wonder well
Taking the fyelde with a manly chere.
And so Horestes and the king yfeare,
Be ryden forth with many manly man.
But Horestes or he this werre began,
When bright Phoebus in the bole shone.
To the temple is full lowly gone.
And to the gods in most best wise,
With humble heart did sacryfyce.
Fully in hope the better for to fare.
Where he was bode for life nor death to spare,
Without mercy or remyssyon.
The death to venge of Agamenon,
On Clemestra that was most to wit.
And that he make first his sword to byte,
On his mother with his hands twain.
And ouermore to do his busy pain,
Without pytye and no mercy show,
On small pieces till she be to hew,
And dismembered a sonder joint fro joint.
And eke that he for yet not a point,
Justly to punyshe by rycoure and by right,
Egistus eke the false untrue knight,
And that he be not slow nor neclygent,
To execute the commandment,
Of the gods list what after fall.
And than Horestes with his knights all.
And Forenses the mighty king also,
Of one heart be to the syege go,
Of the Cite that called was Methene.
Within which was the false queen,
Clemestra god give her herd grace.
And when Horestes syeged has the place,
With his knights set it round about.
False Egistus was yryden out,
To gather men and to be a wreke,
And fall upon and the syege break.
If he might on any manner side.
And with great stuff thus he began to ride,
Taking up men fro every cost,
Till he him made a full mighty hooste.
But Horeste which at the syege lay,
His governance espyeth day by day.
And sent out men as he that was full sage,
To stop ways and let his passage,
And made knights a full huge route,
To pursue him every cost about.
And of the syege manfully begone,
By assaute he has the town ywonne,
And entered in on a night full late,
And set wards strong at every gate.
And in a doungeon most strong and princypall
That was of buildyng mighty and royal.
This Horestes first his mother fond.
The queen Clemestra lady of that land,
Which for dread sore began to quake.
But mercyles anon he made her take,
And put in chains till the next morrow.
And Egistus god give him evil sorrow,
With all the stuff that he might accroche,
Toward the town fast began aproche.
In purpose full Horestes for to grieve.
And them within sodeynely releue.
But all in sothe might not avail,
For or that he the city might abayle.
Horestes knights unawarely have him met
And all attones proudely on him set.
First slew his men and put them to flight,
And taken him maugre all his might,
And with chains like as they him find,
Mercyles full fast they him bind,
And shet him up fetryd in prysowne.
And all false found in the town.
That were assented wyllinge or helping,
To the murdre of the worthy king.
Greeks workers and conspyratours,
Again their lord ryfynge as traitors,
All were take and bound by rycour.
The same night and shet up in a toure,
Till on the morrow like as the lot be draw,
Eueryche of them under fonge his law,
Like his decerte excepcion was none.
And when the night passed was and gone.
And Phoebus rose estwarde in his sphere,
And on the toures shone full bright and clear.
When Clemestra rote of all falsehede,
Was brought forth quakyng in her dread,
Before Horestes to judgment yfet.
He with a sword sharp and kene ywhet,
Like as the gods charged him toforne,
On pieces small he has her all to shorn,
And made her bear out of the towns bounds
To be voured of beasts and of hounds,
Pytye was none in his breast reserved,
But quit her fully as she has deserved.
Fro point to point and forgot right naught.
And the^ chayned Egistus was forth brought
And justly dempt by rigor of the law,
Of an herdell naked to be draw,
Through the town that all might se,
And after hye hanged on a tree,
For to rot and dry against the son.
Lo how murdre has his guerdon won,
Lo how falshed his master can awake.
And all the traitors in the town ytake,
Were on galowes enhanged euerychone.
Till they were severed asonder bone fro bone
Hye on an hill again the sterres shene.
Thus was ye town fro treason purged clean,
And with troth augmented and ymored,
And to his reygne Horrestes full restored,
As the storye sewinge shall expowne,
And of the day when he took his crown.
ANd when the mist and every cloudy sky,
Of false treason and conspyracye,
Were tried out upon every side,
The falshed had no place to abide,
The storye says in order rehersynge.
The same time Menelay the king,
Out of the sea full of wawes wete,
Fro Troyewarde yriued was in Crete,
Freely escaped many dread and pain,
With his queen the goodly fresh Heleyne.
And for cause she was so famous fair,
Great was the pres and meruaylous repair
Fro every part her beauty to behold,
For whom Troy with walls not full old,
Destroyed was the noble royal town,
And many man full worthy of renown,
Has lost his life there may no man say nay,
All for Heleyne wife to Menelay.
When thing is done it may be none other.
But when this king knew fully of his brother,
Agamenon murdre and euerydele,
He was full trist and liked nothing well,
But inwardly felt full great smerte,
And his neuewe he had also at heart,
I mean Horrestes that so mercyles,
Like a tyrant that were graceles,
His mother slew and had no pytye,
Of mortal ire in his crueltye.
And fully cast that he would bline,
Of scepter and crown platly him deprive,
Full afferminge of this mortal case,
By all law that he unworthy was,
His fathers reygne as heir to possede,
Justly consydred his horrible deed.
And all at ones furyous and wroth,
Without abode unto ship he goth,
Melancolike in his great tene,
Out of Crete saylinge to Athene,
And took the land out of ships board,
Where duke Nestor was governor and lord
Which them receives like a gentle knight,
With all his power diligence and might.
But Menelay of rancour and great heat,
Began with the duke secretly to trete,
To find a mean in his inward sight
For to deprive Horrestes of his right.
And thereupon to have a judgment,
At Athenes was hold a Parliament,
Of all the lords of that regyon,
To give thereon a diffinicion.
In which was showed openly enough,
How Horrestes his own mother slough,
And the manner of his great offense,
Him self tho being in presence.
And when this thing he fully did espy,
For his party he began again replye,
As he that felt him freely at his large,
For him alledginge how he had in charge,
Of the gods shortly to declare,
His mortal sword that he not ne spare,
Upon Clemestra root of false treason,
That slew her lord king Agamenon,
And the murdre through her malice wrought
Wherefore Horrestes humbly besought,
The lords all with a manly heart,
Of equit consydre and aduerte,
For no malice rancour nor for rage,
Him to deprive of his heritage,
Since he was son of Agamenon
Borne to be heir of that regyon,
As ye have herd that called was Methene,
Albe his mother Clemestra the queen,
Compassed had his destruction.
But duke Nestor ymeued of reason,
In sustaynynge of Horestes right,
Rose up anon like a manly knight,
Offrynge him self proudely for his sake,
This hye quarrel for to undertake,
With his body to the death darreyne.
With whom that list his title to withseyne.
But there was none in all that company,
That durst a word again him replye.
So hoole he stood in his opynion,
And by his knyghtly mediacyon.
He bare him so feynynge in nothing,
That Horestes was ycrowned king,
Of Meneste all being of assent.
And when dissolved was the parliament.
This Horestes of his lyeges true,
Received was with a crown new,
And by treat of lords many one.
King Menelay and he were made atone,
And began their Ire and their rancour let.
And Ydume the worthy king of Crete,
So prudently governs this mattere.
That Hermyone the young daughter dear,
Of Menelay and the queen Heleyne,
So young so fresh of beauty sovereign,
Ywedded was without more taryinge,
To Horestes the young lusty king.
And because of this allyaunce,
Deuoyded was all rancour and distraunce,
Atwene the kings Menelay the old,
And Horestes of whom right now I told.
Thus leave I them as it was the best,
Each in his reygne live in peace and rest.
For all strife was ceased in this case.
But Erygona that the daughter was,
Of Egistus as ye have herd me tell,
For sorrow and dread list no longer dwell,
But took a rope and list nothing to spare.
And therwithall began her self to gnare.
The storye says hye upon a tree.
This was her fine ye get no more of me,
But I will forth ceryously entreat,
Of the storye to tell you the great.
OH Vlixes by order in my writing,
Thine auentures come on the ring.
Full wonderful both on land and sea,
Entermedlyd with great aduersytye.
For Guydo first descryuynge thy repair,
Says how thou found wether foul and fair
Now agreeable now the thonder sown,
Now still and smoth now with clouds frown
And says also that thou dyddest ordeyne,
To thy passage mighty ships twain.
Apparayled all for marchandyse,
That thou myghtest in most secret wise,
Every myschyefe of the sea escape.
But for all that thou had a fell iape,
For as this auctour thy resort does write,
He says Vlyxes for all his words white.
Yrobbed was of richesse and of good,
Contraryous wind so again him stood.
That he was drive to his confusyon,
In to the mighty strong regyon,
Where Thelamon reigned by his live.
And there he was hent and take blyue.
By mighty hand seized by the breast,
And mercyles put under arest.
For they him had suspecte in workynge.
Touching the murder of the same king,
But he so wrought by his sleyghty wyle,
And his tale set in such a style,
That them all he plainly has be iaped.
And fro their hand freely is escaped.
Except that he for all his queynt fare,
Of his treasour was ymade full bare.
And for his passage was to him uncouth,
He fell again into the wolfes mouth.
For verily as it is specyfyed,
King Naulus men have him efte espied,
Take and bound and chayned mercyles,
For the murder of king Pallamydes.
But the storye reherseth in certain,
By his prudence he escaped is again,
For he was both expert wise and old.
Although the manner be not fully told,
Of his escape through his busy pain,
Out of danger of these kings twain.
Till through fortune he came fro mischefe fre
To the presence of king Ydume,
In simple arraye and torn apparayle.
Whereof the king greatly began marvel,
To se his pouert in so low manner.
But for all that he made him good chere,
Though that time ye were unfortunate.
He him receives like to his estate.
And when they were both twain alone,
In complayninge Vlixes made his moan,
Unto the king as he that was full sage,
Ceryously the sort of his passage,
With face sad and a sobre cheer,
Fro point to point anon as ye shall hear.
My lord quod he shortly to express,
Of trust I have in your gentylnesse,
I shall to you my auentures all,
Rehearse here right as it is fall.
First when that I Troy land forsook,
And the water with my ships took.
I was anon with wind peceably blow,
To an isle which was to me unknow,
Called Mirma of great habundaunce,
And all thing that was to my pleasaunce.
That may for silver or for gold be bought,
I ready found and wanted right naught.
And there abode full long while in joy,
With the treasour that I gat at Troy.
My ships stuffed my men safe and sound,
And for commodyte of that ylke ground,
We lyked so the country enuyron.
That for disporte and recreacyon,
Our taryinge there we thought not full long,
For no man did unto us no wrong.
Till on a day that the eyer was still,
The wind also fully at our will.
We sailed for the in quyete and in peace,
Unto a port called Claustafages,
Wherwyth my meyne long and many day,
I found all thing according to my pay,
The wether lusty agreeable and fair.
But who may trust other wind or air,
For upon faith of the smothe sky,
Again to ship fast I began me hye,
Tarried naught but took anon the sea,
Smothe and calm enduringe days three,
That in the wether found was no lack,
But suddenly the heaven tourneth black,
The hidous tempest and the wawes grene,
Out of hope have me dyspeyred clean,
Troubled my spyrite and made me so pensife,
Without refute to escape with the life.
Tossed and driven by many sundry isle.
Till the last cast up at Cecyle,
Recuringe land with great annoye and pain,
Where that time reigned kings twain.
And as I can remember doubtless,
The tone of them called Sorygines,
Which unto me full contrarious was.
And the the other named Coclopas,
Brethren of birth and in conclusion,
Ylike cruel of condycyon.
For though my sort had shape for the nones
Both twain fell on me attones,
Oppressinge in full great dystresse,
Spoiled my ships of treasour and richesse,
And for pity liked not to spare,
Till I was left destitute and bare,
Of all my good alas my mortal chance.
And most of all was to me greuaunce,
When of my gold they may no more restrain
They sent down their mighty sons twain
Alipham that was full large and long,
And Polipheme ye mighty gianut strong,
Which on my me^ to avenge the^ wereful fame
That they of them have an hundred slain,
Disarayed to stand at diffence,
And of malice with sudden violence,
They took me for mischief almost lorne.
And Alphenor mine own brother sworn
And hatefully as they have us found,
In chains cast and in stocks bound,
And after that ylocked in prison.
And for to make platly mencyon.
This mighty man this great Polypheme,
A sister had shortly for to deem,
One of the fairest that ever yet was borne,
She might in beauty so be set aforne,
Nature her gave such a prerogatife,
A clean maid sothly and no wife,
Flouringe both in fayrenesse and bounte.
Whom Alphenor when he did se,
Albe he was fetred in prison.
For love he lost wit and eke reason,
And wex al mad so narowe she did him bind
Save upon her always was his mind,
And closed aye was his perilous wound,
And six months thus we lay bound,
Both he and I to say the platte truth.
Til Polipheme had upon us routhe,
And through his grace and mediacion,
He quit us fre out of that prison.
And showed us of mercy and pite,
After our sorrow great humanite.
But Alphenor ylike of one entente,
Was with the bronde of Cupide brent.
And felt his part with many mortal fit
Till he so wrought with his sotyll wit.
That on a night who was leef or loathe,
He stale this maid and his way he gothe,
Through help of men with him at that time
But on the morrow at the hour of prime,
Poliphemus began us for to sewe,
Whose mighty hand we might not eschew.
And such assault on us they began make,
That of force they have the maid take,
From Alphenor mauger all his rage.
And Polipheme unto my damage,
With his knights so sore upon me lay,
That I might uneath escape away.
To save my self compassed enuyron,
To death pursewed of that champyon.
But when I saw there was no other gain,
To fle death shortly for to said,
While this giaunt most fiersly on me set,
With my sword out his eye I smet,
And unto ship with my company,
I fled in haste that no man might espy,
Where I became nor Alphenor my fere.
And when the wawes began for to clear,
And gracious wind began to us awake,
That country we have anon forsake,
It was not wholesome for us to abide.
But of this man like as write Ouide.
Poliphemus the Giaunt out of dread,
Had an eye amid of his forhead
Which Vlixes smote out at a stroke,
And like the brows of a branched oak.
Was all his heir and his long berde,
On whom to look children were aferde.
And when that he had lost his sight,
Among the hills he runs day and night,
In a rage to find him some refuge,
Cast rocks and great stones huge,
On every part enuyron the country,
On Vlixes avenged for to be.
Thus says Ouide in conclusion,
In his book of transformacion,
Metamorphoseos there ye may it se,
When so ever that your leyser be,
Ceriously the storye for to read.
And in my writing forth I will proceed,
How Vlixes with face dead and pale,
To Ydume told forth his tale.
Rehersinge thus supprised and awaked,
Fro Polipheme when we were escaped,
Through our unhappy and infelicyte,
Into an isle mids of the sea,
We were drive when it began to night.
And Elidiu^ that litell kingedome hight,
Where that Circes the great enchauntresse,
Thilke time was lady and goddess,
That could her craft so wonderly perform,
All suddenly a man for to transform,
To have the liknesse and lose his reason,
Of Horse, of Bear, Tygre or Lion.
Wolf or For or what her list devise,
Her dreadful craft was shapen in such wise.
So mighty were her strange pocions,
Her letuaries and confections.
And she also so fair upon to se,
That tho her power no man might fle.
For by the work of this sorceresse,
I was so founced upon her fayrenesse,
That finally thus with me it stood,
That all a year I with her abode,
And paynly had power none nor might,
For to deparie neither day nor night.
So lusty was the life that I ladde,
In which time by me a child she had,
Right inly fair and goodly to the sight,
And Thelagonius in sothnesse he hight,
Which afterward I well rehearse can,
By process wexe a manly man.
And by my subtle secret providence
Of her craft I had experyence,
That maugre her enchauntementes old,
I stale away she might me not hold.
And finally my fate to conclude.
With my conning her craft I can delude,
That with my men I escaped fro her hand,
And went at large fre out of her land.
But all this thing me litell did avail,
For on my way as I began to sail,
For all my sleyght in a litell while,
Yblowe was up into an isle,
Where Calipha sister to Circes,
Was crowned queen and held her scepter i^ peace
Whose crafts were so mighty and so strong,
Maugre my will she held me there full long.
But she in sothe to speak of womanhede,
Of bounte fredome and of goodlyhead,
Surely had so soueraygne excellence,
That mine abode to me was none offense,
But who soever thereat cry or clappe,
At the last I escaped fro her trappe,
And came to an isle right as any line,
Which specially through high power divine,
Ordained is of yore by miracle,
As it were a spiritual oracle.
A man to have in a temple there,
Sudden answer of what him list enquere,
Of questions and demaundes all,
And of souls what shall eke befall,
When men are dead and graven under stone.
And I began axe in the temple anon.
Mine auentures that should after sewe,
And where a man might his fate eschew,
And of all this like to mine intent,
I had answer full convenient.
Save what befalls when a soul is gone,
Diffinicion unto me was none,
Such thing to assoyle accords not to right
It is reserved unto gods might,
And excedeth reason and wit of man.
And fro thense forth to sail I began,
Driven with wind and no part succored.
Where I was like to have be devoured.
Of Karibdes with his profounde well,
Where Syrines Meremaydens dwell,
That fro the breast with scales silver shene,
Be of their shape fishes fresh and clean.
And ouermore kind does compass,
Them to appear feminine of face,
Like virgins that were of nature,
Without spot vndefouled pure,
And of custom in wawes as they flete,
The song of them is so heavenly sweet,
So aungelike and full of armonye.
That verily the sugared melodye,
Rauishe would any man alive,
Of inly joy almost his heart ryue,
Make a man of sudden high pleasaunce,
Forget him self and lose his remembrance,
Deuoyde him clean from his own thought,
Till unawarely he be to mischief brought.
And with their song or he take keep,
He shall be brought in a mortal sleep,
And they anon yt may not be withdraw,
Will drenche his ship low under the wawe.
Thus the sweetness of their heavenly sown
Brings a man to confusyon,
Who so ever by their bonds pass.
But with the life I escaped by grace,
For mine ears with wax and gommes clear
Were stopped so that I ne might hear,
Touch nor werble of their instruments,
Whereby the reason of a man blinded is.
And finally through my subtyltee,
I and my men be escaped free,
Saylinge forth all mate of werinesse.
Till we came up with full great distress,
At Phenice and took anon the land,
Cast anchor and our ships band.
But sothly there it fell us full vnfayre,
For the people cruel and contrayre,
Only of malice fell on me anon,
And slew my men almost euerychone,
Treasour and good litell that I had,
Was me berafte and all with the^ they ladde,
And few of them that were left alone,
They took them and put in prison bliue.
Thus has fortune lad me on her dance,
With litell joy and plentye of mischaunce.
Of whose danger learned and expert,
I am fall in mischief and pouerte,
And with great dole and sorrow full my breast
On sea and land by South and not by East,
I am come unto your presence,
And have declared plainly in sentence,
Min auentures to your worthiness,
Of trust only and of faythfulnesse,
That I have to you in special,
And now I have rehearsed and told all,
To your highness and my best wise,
Without more to me it does suffyse.
And though in heart he was constrained sore
Thilke time Vlixes spoke no more,
But held his peace full heavy in lokinge.
And Ydumeus like a gentle king,
Comforted him all that ever he might,
And busy was his heart for to light,
And him besought his heuinesse let.
And as long as him list in Crete,
With him abide he made him suerte,
He should fare also as well as he,
And not want of what may do him ease.
And when his sorrow some what began apease,
That his rage drew unto an end,
Leave he took and said he would wend,
Out of that land home to his country.
But first the king of fredome and bounte,
Gave unto him great richesse and arraye,
And what soever was to his pay,
Gold treasour and many other things.
And at partynge of these two kings,
There were ships when you list to sail,
Ready stuffed with meyne and vitayle,
And thus Vlixes began him ready make.
And when he has his leave fully take,
He hasted him and took anon the sea,
And began to sail toward his country.
But first he went to king Alphenon,
Which passingly had affeccion,
To se Vlixes at his home coming.
And desirous over all thing,
To have of him newly acquaintance.
For unto him was inly great plesaunce,
To hear him talk for his eloquence,
For his wisdom and his high prudence,
And there he was after all his smerte,
Received plainly with as glad an heart,
As ever yet was any manner man,
Sithen time that the world began.
And to increase of his felycyte,
There herd me first of Penolopee,
His true wife without spot of blame,
Of whom yet grene is the noble fame,
Which from her lord for all his long abse^ce,
In thought nor deed never did offense.
But sothly was both in chere and deed,
Throughout Greece example of womanhede,
And yet was she as books list express,
Throughout ye world myrrour of fayrenesse,
And among Greeks borne of highest blood,
Called of Auctours both fair and good.
And yet say books of her doubtless,
Was never none that had so great prese:
But she her kept chaunginge for no new,
Unto her lord ever ylyke true,
Of heart aye one not parted into twain,
That she is called queen and soueraygne,
Of wifely truth in this books old.
And often I find her heart would cold,
She turn pale fro her lord so far,
In her closet to hear of the werre,
Of dread she had and for fear eke quake,
Of fantasyes for her lords sake,
For his absence both eve and morrow,
Was death unto her and importable sorrow.
And aye in sothe for joy or any game.
When it fell she herd Hectors name,
In any place anon she fell a swowne,
And began her self in tears drown,
Of womanhead so she was aferde,
To hear the slaughter of his mortal sword
Lest her lord of knyghtly surquedrye,
Had of fortune fall in ieopardye,
Of had or sort to a met that worthy knight
That seld or never she felt her heart light.
And many dream on nights did her gaste,
All the while that the siege last.
And every play was venym in her sight,
When that she was from her own knight.
For in this world joy had she none,
Of high nor low plainly but of one,
For whose sake all mirth she refuses,
And who so be that in his heart museth,
Of any woman any thing but good,
Of melancolye meued in his blood,
Let him aduerte of wisdom and ysee,
And remember on Penolope,
For his deserte lest that he be blamed.
And oh Guido thou should be ashamed,
To say of wives any thing but well,
For in good faith as far as I can feel,
Though one or two do among offense.
She that is good through her providence,
Is thereof nothing for to wite.
And though Guydo in his books endite.
The varyaunce of Heleyne or Criseyde,
Or Medea that for sorrow deyde,
Let the again of right and equity,
The wifely troth of Penolope.
The maydenhode of young Polycene,
And the goodness of Hecuba the queen.
Of Cassandra eke the steadfastness,
And with all this take the unkindness,
Of Pantasyll without variaunce,
And put all this together in balaunce.
And ye shall find if ye list accounte,
Maugre who grutcheth troth shall surmou^t
I dare affirm and bear the prise,
There will no man replye that is wise,
He were to feeble in his opynion.
And while Vlixes was with Alphenon,
It was to him made relacyon,
Of an hateful conspiratyon.
That certain lords enuyron his country,
Rauishe would his queen Penolope.
Maugre all tho that were there again.
Albe that she was ever ylyke plain,
In her truth steadfast as a wall,
Yet they have cast platly that she shall,
Be take of force it may not be eschewed,
But it so be in haste she be reskued.
For they them cast the time not aiourne,
For day and night with her they soiourne.
Inly in heart for love disamayde,
But of wisdom she has them so belayde,
There was none so manly nor so sage,
That could of her get advantage.
So advise s;he was in her workynge.
And when Vlixes conceyueth all this thing
And fully knew by open euydence,
And had also in special credence,
Sent unto him fro Penolope,
The matter hole declarynge in secretee,
His own son Thelamonius,
He wexe in heart wood and furyous,
And would make no dylacyon.
But in all haste besoughte Alphenon,
The mighty king of his high bounte,
To releue him in his aduersyte,
And that he would through his mighty hand,
Of gentillesse conueye him to his land.
He grants him and say not ones nay,
And both two in full great array,
Took the sea when the wind was good,
Well fortuned for nothing them withstode.
They be arrived and had no lettynge,
Where Vlixes as ye have herd was king,
And secretly in a night they were conveyed,
To them that have his ligaunce disobeyed,
And mercyles or they might awake,
In their beds they have them all take,
Making no prolongyng till on the morrow
But in all haste for no wight durst the^ borow
Smet of their heads by judgment fynall,
And set them upon the castle wall,
Eueriche by other endlonge the row,
Upon the toure when the cock began crow,
And thus all night they kept them self close,
Till that Phoebus meryly arose,
In the Orient when the lark song,
And tho these kings with their meyne strong,
Freshly besene enter the cetee,
Who was so glad but Penolope,
Who made joy but this goodly queen,
Full desirous her own lord to seen.
But if I should all in order set,
The great myrthe they made when they met,
Make rehersayle of complayntes old.
And how they began their hertes to unfold,
Each to other and list nothing concele,
And the gladness that they inly feel,
If I should put all in memory.
The reioysynge and the hertye glory,
That his lyeges made at his coming.
The cost eke they had at his metynge,
The gifts great and presents rich,
In all this world I trow none ylyche,
It were to long taryinge for my book.
And how that he new assurance took,
Of his lords and lyeges all,
And how that they to his grace fall,
The cheer he made eke to Alphenowne,
Of gentylnesse through his high renown.
And how the daughter inly debonayre,
Of Alphenon Nausica the fair,
By Vlixes medyacyon.
Ywedded was unto Thelamon,
Borne by descent there may no man say nay,
To rejoice his crown after his day.
And thus came in by his purueyaunce,
Of two reygnes the mighty allyaunce,
And how all this brought was to the knotte,
Men would deem plainly me to sotte,
To presume of opinion,
For to delate a description.
Sythen Guydo touching but the chyefe,
In this matter of style was but brefe.
Shortly rehersynge how king Alphenon,
Repeyred is home to his regyon,
And Vlixes in his chief cite,
Abode still with Penolope.
Where I him leave in joy and in solace,
Till Attropos likes to purchase,
For to fyche finally the date,
The threde to untwine of his lives fate.
How the translatour writes the stock of Pirrhus by lyneall dyscent, and how
his father hight Pelleus, and his graundmother called Thetydes. Ca. xxxviii.
NOw must I full busy be a while,
To direct the traces of my style,
In discriuinge shortly of entente,
The stock of Pirrhus by lyneall discente,
Mine Auctour follow and be compendious.
Whose old father hight Pelleus
His graundmother called Thetydes,
Of which two came worthy Achilles,
That at Troy by treason lost his life.
And Dardanica called was his wife.
Pirrhus mother and daughter as I read
Unto the king called Lychomede,
Having a father that Atastus hight,
Which in sothnesse all that ever he might,
Bare heavy heart to king Pelleus,
To Achilles and also to Pirrhus,
To all the kyn plainly on that side,
And of malice rancour and of pride,
And of envy in an hateful rage,
When Pelleus fall was in age,
He berafte him both scepter and crown,
And from his see low alight him down,
And into exyle avail may no strife,
He made him go with Thetydes his wife.
Of high disdain gain may no grace.
And in his heart began day and night co^pace,
The death of Pyrrhus keep him if ye can.
And thereupon maliciously began,
To shape a way by awayte lyinge,
Him for to sley at his home coming.
But this Pyrrhus from his treynes free,
Many danger escaped of the sea,
Many wawe and many tempest wood,
With great loss both of men and good,
At Malasus alderfyrst began land,
A strong Cite a little from the stronde,
Where that he was refreshed wonder well,
And there he knew ground and every dele,
First of Thexyle like as men him told,
Of Thetides and Pelleus the old,
And how Atastus bare to him hatrede,
Unto the death whereof he began dread,
And thought he would as he yt was right wise
By some engyne eschew his malice,
And thereupon do his busy pain.
Now had Atastus other sons twain,
Menalippus and Polistenes,
And a daughter ycalled Thetydes.
And all this while woeful Pelleus,
In a castle old and ruynous,
With Thetydes full of sorrow and care,
For dread of death day and night began dare,
Dispeyred in his unwieldy age,
Recure to find of this mortal rage,
Except that he had an hope of yore,
That Pyrrhus should help him and restore
At his repeyre when so that it fall.
After whose coming often he began call,
The time curse that he so long abode.
But when Pyrrhus all this understood,
At Malasus by relacyowne,
Full fast he began haste out of the town.
Took the sea and fast began him hye,
Toward the land called Thesalye.
Of intent to make ordinance,
On Atastus for to do vengeance.
But alder first this Pyrrhus full prudent,
Espyes twain he tofore has sent,
To Thesalye forth together gone.
And Crilippus named was the tone,
And Adrastus named was his fere,
They were expert them needs not to lere.
In whose exployte to more advantage.
This Pyrrhus has dyrecte his message,
Of Thesalye to a cytezyne,
Called Assandrus a manner chamberlayne,
With Pelleus and whilom full secree,
While he was flourynge in felycytee.
And when Pyrrhus in conclusyon,
Knew all the sothe by relacyon,
On sea nor land him ne list to tarry,
Albe that he found the wind contrary.
But he escaped many dreadful stoundes,
Of Thesalye approaches to the bounds,
For Eolus that his lust obeyed,
And of fortune wonderlye conveyed.
He driven was as it were by grace,
So ariue in the same place,
Where Pelleus in a doleful cave,
For dread of death lay him self to save.
Sole save his wife withouten any feres,
Al enclosed with bushes and with briares,
And Pirrhus there went up first to land,
Sole by him self walking on the stronde,
Pensife and trist and his way took,
Where Pelleus in a cave quoke,
Having with him tho no other guide,
Save his sword hanging by his side,
And unawarely with a dreadful heart,
Pelleus out of the cave sterte,
Dismayde of his life in doubt,
When he beheld a knight there walk about,
And astoned abode and stood full still
Ymagyninge that he saw Achille,
By this Pirrhus stondynge in the place,
By all the signs showed in his face.
For nature without varyaunce,
Made them so like of cheer and countenance
Of form of shape and limbs euerychone,
That difference in effect was none.
And Pelleus without longer space,
Began anon Pirrhus to enbrace,
And enbrayde out of his deadly thought,
And for joy set all his sorrow at naught,
And began to him by and by declare,
Both his exyle and his evil fare,
His pyteous life his pouerte and mischau^ce,
And fortunes false varyaunce.
And of Atastus the fervent hoote envy,
The cruelte and the tyranny,
Ceriously he told Pirrhus all,
And he full sobre stood still as a wall,
With face pale and in heart wroth,
Specheles to ship again he goth,
And there he was informed doubtless,
That Menalippus and Polistenes,
And Atastus together all three.
With huge array and a great meyne,
The same day full surquedous of pride.
Hunte in a forest little there beside.
And when Pyrrhus thereof took good head,
Without abode change began his wede,
Full porely rent and dismayde,
Like a man that were disarayde,
Gyrte with his sword made no delay,
But to the forest took the right way,
Sole by him self without company,
So secretly that no man might espy.
And as he drough many diverse bounds,
He herd horns vncouplinge of hounds,
And like a man that list make his moan,
Fro sight of folk he drew him aye alone,
And casually disseuered fro the prese.
First he met with Polistenes,
Menalippus ridinge by his side,
And both two on Pirrhus began abide,
And boystously of him to enquere,
Fro whense he came and also what he were,
So febly cladde and of so pore estate,
Walkinge there as he were desolate,
And lowly he of chere and countenance,
Still and humble in his daliaunce,
Answered again and said how that he,
Fordriuen was with myschiefe of the sea,
And affirmed pale and nothing read,
His fellowship drowned was and dead,
Five hundred the wawes were so rage,
Of old and young and of mydell age,
And he escaped the tempest was so rife,
As he them told uneath with the life.
And ouermore he told them platly eke,
Touching his birthe that he was a greek,
And went there destitute of joy.
Late come fro the siege of Troy,
And besought them towerde his living,
To help him with some refreshinge,
As him that had cattle lost and good,
Like as they saw naked as he stood,
Prayinge also in hope it should avail,
Him to releue with clothinge and vytayle,
To his refute some what to provide.
And they bad him that he should abide,
For they will wit plainly what he can.
And that while beside them there ran,
A full great heart down by the river.
And Menalippus pricked his courser,
As it seemed it was to him dew,
Through thin and thick only to pursewe
He spares not but always after rode,
And his brother with Pirrhus still abode,
Polistenes and took of it no head,
But in all haste alight fro his stead,
On the grene to rest him there beside,
As he that was weary for to ride,
Without meyne being him self sole,
Listing of Pirrhus ye complaynt and the dole
But suddenly or he might aduerte,
Cruel Pirrhus ran him to the heart,
And left him dead lyinge on the plain.
When Menalippus repeyred was again,
Seeing his brother baskynge in his blood.
And Pirrhus efte furyous and wood,
With a face of color pale and wan,
To Menalippus in his ire ran:
And slew him eke or that he took head.
And thus they lay on the ground and blede,
The brethren two with Pirrhus sword yslawe.
And he anon aside began him draw.
Metinge a knight were it of sort, or case,
As says the storye called Cinaras,
Of whom Pirrhus began in haste to enquere,
Whose man he was or what he makes there.
To whom he said withouten tarying,
He servant was with the mighty king,
Called Atastus lord of that country.
And Pirrhus tho of deadly enmyte,
With cruel sword al fresh and red of blood,
Ran him through out as any Lion wood,
And after that the forest he forsook,
And in all haste the right way he took,
To ship again pale and black of hew.
And began anon to arraye him new,
All in purple which as clerks tells,
For kings is and for no wight else.
And then Pirrhus fresh and well beseyne,
To the forest repeyred is again.
Where suddenly of hap in his walking,
In short while he meteth with the king,
Old Atastus that asked of Pirrhus,
What man art thou that by thy self thus,
Disconsolate here walk to and fro.
Certes quod Pirrhus full of sorrow and woe.
Inly supprysed of hertye complaining,
One of the sons to Priamus the king,
I lately was now out of memory.
Since Troyans fall that whilom was in glory
Now refewteles and into mischief brought,
Thus walk I sole full of care and thought,
Far in exyle out of Troy town,
With cruel Pirrhus to live in prison,
Bound unto him though me be full loathe,
My hand assured with full many oath,
To serve his lust aye in captyuytye,
Lo here is all thus stands it with me,
Atastus tho of full entencion,
After many an other questyon,
Enquered of him as in his daliaunce,
If he ought knew of Pirrhus governance
Or if that he could ought understand,
Where he him kept since he came to land.
Ywisse quod he if ye list him have,
He keeps him close lo in yonder cave.
Among brusshayle with a shrouded face,
Making a sign to the same place.
And all was done for an ydellmase,
For while the king thitherwarde began gase,
Hasty Pirrhus began his sword outdrawe,
In purpose fully Atastus to have slawe,
But wonderly the storye can you lere,
Queen Thetides d^d anon appear,
Albe reigned with tears on her face,
And began the sword of Pirrhus to embrace,
Prayinge him his deadly hand restrain.
Have thou not killed my young brethren twayn
And now alas my father hoar and graye,
Merciles fro me wilt take away.
Put up the sword and no blood ne shede,
And have some pytye upon thy kinrede,
And do aduerte clearly to the fine,
How thou art come of the same line,
And hateful is who so can look aryght.
Unkind blood in every man's sight.
And Pyrrhus tho as any Tygre wroth,
Afferme began with many sacred oath,
That who so grutche or against plain,
He shall him sle with his hands twain.
For has not he by false extorsion,
Put Pelleus out of his regyon,
Which is your lord and ye his true wife.
That finally he shall lose his life,
And here anon of mine hands deye,
In this matter there is no more to seye,
And Pelleus darynge in the cave,
But ye of grace list his life save,
All other help platly is for naught.
This Pelleus anon forth brought.
Crooked and old unwieldy eke to se,
And tofore Pyrrhus fell down on his kne,
Besechinge him with a pyteous face,
At his request take him to his grace.
And that he would in his manly heart,
Goodly behold the deadly woe and smerte,
Of Atastus and the mortal pain,
That he tho had for his sons twain.
Which lay dead tofore him on the grene,
Slain with your swerd yt is so sharp and kene
Which he ne may recure in no wise.
The sorrow of which ought enough suffyse.
Though ye on him do no more vengeance.
All this well peysed justly in balaunce,
Since he is holy submytted to your might,
Takes now him to mercy anon right,
And let your sword his age not consume,
This my request as I dare presume.
ANd then Pirrhus shortly for to said,
When he had put up his sword again
Seeing mercy might him most avail,
Without words or any rehersayle,
First of all tofore them euerychone,
The kings made accorden into one.
By his wisdom concludynge up in deed,
That each of them should his right possede,
In Thesalye parted into twain.
That neither had matter to complain,
Eueryche to reygne in his dew see,
And while they were together all three,
Out of presence of any other man,
Atastus first thus his tale began.
Syres quod he to you is not unknow,
How through my age I am now brought so low.
And through natures kindly mocion,
Am wexed feeble of wit and of reason.
Being unwieldy of my lymmes all.
So many years are upon me fall.
And can uneath any thing discern,
To feeble in sothe a kingedome to govern.
Of life nor death taking now no head,
Since that my sons slain be and dead.
And sole left now withouten heir,
Of worldly lust fully in dispeyre.
The time passed of my felycytye.
Fortunes turn with mutabylytye,
Has taught me plainly I dare it well express,
In worldly joy there is no sykernesse,
Nor very trust no while to abide.
But I will now for my self provide,
And in all haste by prudent purueaunce,
Me clear discharge from all governance,
Again my sort me list not malign.
But scepter and crown freely I resign,
Of Thesalye the lordship and the land,
Of my fre will hole into thy hand.
There shall no man reclayme nor say nay.
Interrupte nor make no delay,
Touching this thing by no conclusyon,
For I the put full in possession.
And hereupon of all that ever he abide
Making full faith his hand in his he laid.
Queen Thetides sitting there present,
And Pelleus of the same intent,
Unto Pirrhus for his purpartye,
Resygned eke his right of Thesalye.
Fully affermynge that of yore ago,
His full desire and his joy also,
Was ever in one his neuewe to succeed.
As ryghtfull heir his kingdom to possede,
And utterly without repentance,
All that belongs unto my lygeaunce,
Scepter and sword crown and dyademe,
So as a king life and death to deem,
Into thy hand without longer date,
This same hour holy to translate.
And when the knot of this conuencion,
Was fully brought to this concluson.
Performed up hole the unity,
For evermore atwene these kings three.
Atastus knights disseuered enuyrowne,
Out of the forest be descended down.
And by bidding platly of their lord,
They were echone sworn to this accord,
And attones this lusty company,
To Thesalye fast began them hye.
And Pirrhus folk lyinge on the sea,
Be sailed forth straight to the City.
And Atastus does sytte a parliament,
Where openly he gave commandment.
That all his lieges of high or low estate,
Without strife or any more debate,
Specially of gentle blood yborne,
The same day to Pirrhus to be sworn.
Like their degrees in the royal hall.
To persevere his true lieges all.
During their life for ernest or for game.
And Pelleus commanded has the same,
For his party without any fraud,
And thus with joy and with solemn laud
Pirrhus was of every manner age,
Gladly accepted to his heritage.
And on a day fortunate and good,
With glad aspectes when the heaven stood,
Well according to such manner thing,
Worthy Pirrhus was ycrowned king,
Of Thesalye the rich regyon.
It were but vain to make mention,
Of their revel nor their great arraye,
Nor of the feast made the same day,
Eke in the story I find it not in sothe.
I will pass over as mine auctour does,
Save in his book as it is specefyed,
That the kingdom was fer magnefyed,
Of Thesalye by puyssaunce and might,
Of this Pyrrhus whylom so good a knight,
Where I him leave in his royal see.
Tournynge again to king Ydumee,
Which in this while ygraue was under stone.
And after him his son Meeryone,
The story says was crowned king of Crete,
That but awhyle reygninge in equity,
Dyed also it would be none other,
And than in have Leorica his brother,
As rightful heir by succession,
Was crowned king of that regyon.
In which time Atastus out of dread,
By thassent of Pyrrhus as I read,
Full busy was to make in specyal,
A rich toumbe passyngly royal,
Where buried were with full huge prese.
Menalyppus and Polystenes,
That both two were in the forest slawe,
Thorugh Pirrhus sword by full cruel law.
Of them can I none other process make,
But even there fully my tale I take,
Of them both and also eke yfere,
Of Atastus their own father dear.
Of whom sothly for all his locks hoar,
In Troy book read I can no more.
But now must I again to Pirrhus wend
To write of him the sorye woeful end,
Which when he sat highest in his see,
Made full blind with vain prosperyte,
Governing tho the land of Thesalye.
There him betydde to fall in fantasye,
And to set his love on Hermyon the queen,
Horestes wife reygnynge in Methene.
For whom he brent hot as any fire.
And in fulfyllyng of his foul desire,
His purpose hole thus he brought about,
Her rauyshyng while her lord was out,
Tho led her home and held her as his wife,
Seminge to him it was a blysfull life,
And full relese of his pains smerte.
Of which Horestes bare full heavy heart,
And cast him plainly avenged for to be,
When he thereto has opportunyte.
And for that time though he sustained wrong
He was to feeble and Pyrrhus was to strong,
Which held also in storye it is told,
Andromecha with him in his household.
Hectors wife by whom whylom she had,
A little child which with her she ladde,
The sege complete and destructiowne,
When she was brought out of Troy town.
Laomedonte I fend was his name,
Encreasyng after to full worthy fame.
And by this Pyrrhus she had a son also*
Achylleydos so calls him Guydo,
And these women for all their great estate
Atwene them self among were at debate.
And Hermyone with ire full hot,
In complaining thus to her father wrote,
That her fere for all her high degree,
Andronomecha was cherished better tha^ she,
Of king Pyrrhus besechynge Menelay,
Him to enhaste in all that ever he may,
And come him self, anon that it were do,
To slay this woman and her child also.
That naught he abode but fastgan him hye,
In all heat his toward Thesalye,
To be avenged with his sword of stele,
On her that herein fauleth never adele,
But maugre him in all his cruelte,
She was reskewed amyd of the Cite.
It is a thing which has not be herd,
To a woman a king to draw his sword.
I will no more in this matter dwell,
In manner shamed it to write or tell.
But this was done while Pyrrhus of courage
To Delos was gone was on his pilgrimage
Having with him but a litell route,
To Apollo there knele and to loute,
For the soul to pray of him Achylle,
And his vows also to fulfylle,
And him to thank with high affection,
Of good exployte he had at Troy town,
And for the wreche also that was take,
At the Cite for his fathers sake.
But all this thing here yspecified.
King Horestes warely has espied,
And to Delos haste the full right,
Ledinge with him many a lusty knight.
And unawarely there with Pirrhus met,
And vengeably he upon him set.
That finally in that strange land,
Horestes slew him with his own hand,
I find in sothe he made no diffence,
So sudden was the mortal vyolence,
Of his envy he could not asterte,
For or that he his sword might aduerte,
He was on him enuyron all beset,
Thilke time it might be no bet,
For there was another socour nor declyne.
Thus was Pyrrhus brought to his fine,
Late crowned king of Thesalye,
Lo here the guerdon of auoutrye,
Lo how the mede and reward is full rife,
To misuse an other man's wife,
It is no dread follow shall vengeance,
Sudden death or unware myschaunce,
Which every man greatly ought charge,
And in Delos in a temple large,
King Pyrrhus was locked under stone.
And Horestes forth his way is gone,
And by force gat his wife again,
There was no wight durst him tho wtsayne,
And to Methene proudly is repeyred,
And Thesalye piteously dispeyed,
Destitute as they that can no read,
When they wist their worthy king was dead
And heir was none by succession,
To govern that noble regyon,
Save Achilleydos that but litell aforne,
In Pirrhus absence was in Greece borne,
Fully of age not a quarter clean.
The youth of whom sothly was to grene,
Who list consydre and to tender of might,
Full many day to rejoice his right,
And to govern with Scepter in his hand,
The large bounds of so great a land.
And yet this child likly and right fair,
In very sothe was borne to be heir,
After Pirrhus this the troth plain,
There was no man that list it withsaine.
But I find when he came to age,
He resygned hole his heritage,
To his brother freely and his right,
Lamedowne a wonder manly knight,
That was descended of Troyanishe blood,
Down fro the stock of him that was so good,
Flower of knighthod diffence of Frygya,
That him begat on Andromecha,
Ordained now who so grutche or frown,
Of Thesalye for to bear the crown.
And when he was made lord of that land,
And all was freely resygned to his hand.
He has commanded no man dare replye,
Through the kingdom of all Theaslye,
That all that were in captyuitye,
Or prisoners of Troy the City,
For love or hate exceptyon was none,
That all should at their large gone.
By full assent of Achylleydos,
And such as were eke in prison close,
Without ransom shall delivered be.
And rejoice the full lyberte,
By custom used both in borough and town
Of the lyeges of that great regyon.
And thus the folk yt came thralle fro Troy,
Restored be sodaynely to joy,
By Lamedowne and ymade free.
And he eke reygneth in his royal sea,
Full myghtly as I have made mind,
In Troy book no more of him I find.
Nor of Pyrrhus nor of his kynrede,
Fro henseforth I can no process read.
But incydentes that bear no substance,
Which were but vain to put in remembrance
Except mine auctour I note to what intent,
Here impeth in me a littell incydent,
Ywrought and done of full yore agone.
Touching the death of king Menon.
Which by envy of cruel Achylles,
Was slain in soth among Myrmydones.
Only for he proudely began pursewe,
Upon Achylles Troylus to reskue.
Whom king Pryam made buried be,
Beside Troylus in Troy the cite,
In a temple ybylte of marbell old.
And to what fine this tale is told,
In this Chapitle I shall rehearse anon.
THe noble queen of this king Menon,
After the time long and many day,
That she was dead and graven under claye
At the toumbe heavenly began appear.
Albe set with bright sterres clear.
Whose symylytude for to reken all,
Was like a thing that were immortal.
That no man might utterly sustene,
To behold of look she was so shene,
Down descendynge fro the fyrmament.
Full many man being there present,
Clade in a mantell full celestyall.
And of her port passyngly royal,
With sweetness fresh as any rose,
Made in all haste the tomb to unclose,
Of her lord and takes out the bones.
And in a chest made of gold and stones.
She couched them as fast as ever she may.
Dispeyred and went anon her way.
And tofore that nor after in certain,
In that place she was never said,
Some afferminge as by lyklynesse,
She was other angel or goddess.
The soul or fate of the same king,
I can not deem in such heavenly thing.
Nor therein hold none opinyon,
For it transcendeth shortly my reason,
And me list not in such matter diffyne,
But resort right as any line,
To Vlixes and a while dwell,
Of his end the surplus for to tell,
And how that he might not escape,
The parodye that was for him shape,
For Parchas have his last term set,
And Attropos mesured out and met,
His lives threde on the rock sponne,
Diffende thy self Vlixes if thou konne.
Show thy manhood and not be aferde,
And be welfare of thy sons sword.
For I shall now like as I am wont,
Sharp my pen both rude and blonte,
To descriue the fine of thy soioure,
Upon the bounds set of my labor,
For almost weary weak and faint enough,
Be the beasts and oxen of my plough.
The long day again the hill to wend,
But almost now at the lands end.
Of Troy book fyche I will a stake,
Save I must spend a few lines blake,
The last chapter shortly to translate.
Of all this work and ympen in the date,
Of that day death set on him areste,
Full execute by him he loved best.
Low on my knees now must I loute.
To this god that makes men to route,
And causes folks to have glad swenenes,
Both on morrow and on lusty euenes,
When Morphe us with slepy wande,
Which that he holds always in his hand,
Has marked them again the night,
To make men both merry and light.
And some while to have gladness.
And suddenly to fall in heaviness,
Like as to them he gives euydence,
By sundry signs in his appearance,
Unto that lord now must I mekely preye,
At this time my style to conueye.
Of Vlyxes the dream to discryue,
The last of all he had by his live.
Declarynge him by tokens full notable,
And by signs very demonstrable.
As he slepte again the pale moan,
His fatal day that should follow soon.
For it fell thus as he abedde lay,
After mydnyght tofore the morrow graye.
Him thought he saw appear a creature,
To his sight celestyall of figure.
None erthly thing but verily deuyne,
Of port and chere wonder femynyne.
And as him sempte in his fantasye,
Like a thing sent out of fayrye,
For the beauty of her goodly face,
Recomforted plainly all the place.
Most surmountynge and most sovereign.
And the clerenesse of her eyes twain.
All suddenly or men might aduerte,
Perce would even to the heart,
Deffence none might be devised.
And Vlyxes with her look supprysed,
Began her behold always more and more,
And in his sleep for to syghe sore,
Persynge aye with full busy pain,
Her to enbrace in his arms twain.
But aye the more that he began pursue,
She agaynewarde began him to eschew.
And aye the more he preysed her to se,
Aye the more from him she began to flee.
So contrayre to him was fortune.
And when she saw he was importune.
She asked him shortly what he would.
And he to her the platte troth told.
Certes quod he my lives Emperysse,
Where that ye be woman or goddess,
I can not deem nor judge half a right.
I am so derked and blinded in my sight.
But I dare well affirm in this place,
My life, my death stand hoolely in your grace
More of mercy requyrynge than of right,
To rewe on me which am your own knight,
And of your pity and compassyon,
Goodly to se to my salvation,
For my desire but I may fulfill,
This same night to have of you my will,
To my recure I can no remedy,
For lack of routhe but nedely I must dye,
Now have I all atwixe hope and dread,
My self declared to your womanhead.
And after that she kept her close a while,
And tho full sadly began on him to smyle,
And as it put is in remembrance,
Said unto him with sobre countenance.
Sothly quod she this thine affection,
Would fully turn to the confusion,
As of us both so it is perellous,
So inly mortal and contagyous,
That utterly there gain may no read,
But one of us must anon be dead.
This is the fine of the hateful chance,
That follow should after our pleasaunce.
And as Vlixes began to nighen nere,
Beholdinge aye on her the heavenly cheer,
Where as she stood up right on the grdunde,
He saw her hold a spear long and round,
The head thereof all of borned stele,
Forged new and ground wonder well,
And thereupon in his auisiowne,
He saw a baner blasynge up and down,
The field thereof all of color ynde,
Full of fyshes beaten as I find.
And in some books like as it is told,
In the mids a large crown of gold,
And or that she turn began her face,
Lykly anon to part out of the place,
She spoke to him and said in words plain,
This is full token of partynge of us twain,
For evermore and efte for sour ne sweet,
After this day never again to mete.
And disaperinge anon her leave she took.
And after that he suddenly awoke,
And began to musen in his fantasye,
What manner thing this dreme might sygnefy,
But where it mente other evil or good,
The secretnesse he tho not understood,
For it surmounted sothly his reason,
Therefore he sent throughout his region,
For such as were subtle exposytoures,
Of fate or sort or crafty dyuinours,
For all the clerks subeict to his crown,
To assemble in one his sweuen to expowne.
And when they knew by informacyon,
The manner hole of his auision,
They been concluded according as in one.
The time aprocheth and shall come anon,
That one that is the next of his kinrede,
With a spear should make his heart blede
Let se where he his fate began remewe,
Since it is hard destynye teschewe,
As say tho folk in their opinion,
That work and trust on constellacion.
And Vlixes musing on this tale,
Changes color and began to wexeen pale.
Wonder dreadful and full of fantasyes,
Began in him self to seek out remedies,
Away to void thing that will not be.
He stareth broad but he may not se,
His inward look was with a cloud yblent.
But weninge he for to be prudent,
Made call to him his son Thelamon,
And to be take and shet up in prison,
He supposing fully in his wit,
From all mischief thereby to go quite,
He not aduerteth nor ne took none head,
To the sharpness of his spears head,
Nor to the fishes in the baner beat,
Nor of the sea wherein they swim and flete
Nor of the queen that called is Circes
That signs brought of were and not of peace,
Nor of the crown token of dignyte,
Of one that hold shall his royal see,
Waltryng amid the wawes both fell and woo
Among the fyshes in the large flood,
And he shall make the full division,
Tofore remembered in the auision,
Again his will of very ignorance,
And execute the fatal puruyaunce,
Up of the dream with his spear of stele,
Which Vlixes consydreth never a dele,
Nor to no wight has suspection,
But to his son called Thelamon,
That closed is and shet up in a tower.
And Vlixes with cost and great labor,
Fro day to day does his business,
For him self to make a forteresse,
Bilte on a rock of lime and square stones,
Deep ditched about for the nones,
That no man may enter on no side.
Where as he casts all his life to abide.
With certain men chosen in special,
Night and day to watch upon the wall.
That no manner wight should have none entree,
But it so fall that he be aye secree,
And known of old and to counsel sworn.
NOw as ye story rehearsed has to forne,
The old fool this dotarde Vlixes,
A son had begot on her Cyrces,
Fresh and lusty young and coragious,
And he was called Thelagonyus:
Borne in the sea among the floddes rage.
That was also to reken his age,
Five and twenty years and there about.
But of his father he was aye in doubt,
What man he was or who it might be,
Being thereof in no securytie.
Till on a day he desirous to know,
To his mother fell on knees low.
Beseching her goodly and not spare,
Of his father to him the truth declare.
What that he was or where he should dwell,
He her besought that she would him tell,
But sothly she long and many days,
Of high prudence put him in delays,
Till that she saw she might have no rest,
So importune he was in his request.
And when she knew there was none other bote,
Fro point to point she told him crop and rote,
Of Vlixes and where that he was king.
And he anon made no taryinge,
But took leave it may none other be,
And plainly said he would his father se.
Whereof the queen began in her heart cold,
But when she saw she might him not wtholde
She him besought with chere debonayre,
That he would soon again to her repair.
And forth he sayleth onwarde on his way.
Without abode the self same day,
By many port and many fer country,
Till he was brought there as he would be.
To Achaya a land of great renown,
And he began search through out the regyon,
After the place and paleys pryncypall,
Where as the king held his see royal.
And he so long in the country rode,
Till he was taught where the king abode.
There Vlixes was shytte up in mewe,
To which place in haste he began pursewe,
A great party releued of his sorrow.
And on a monday erely by the morrow,
Unto the bridge the ryghteway he took,
And found a porter deynous of his look,
And lowely first he began him for to pray,
That he voutsafe him goodly to conueye,
Into the court and make no taryinge,
For he a message he had to the king.
But proudely he denied the gate,
And shortly said that he came to late,
To enter there in any manner wise.
And eke ungoodly began him to despise,
Froward of speech and malycyous.
But in all haste this Thelagonyus,
As he that was in heart not a ferde,
The proud porter hente by the berde,
And with his fyste rofe his chawe bone,
That he fell dead muet as a stone.
And other eke that him tho withstode.
He made proudely lepe into the flode.
And when mo came to maken resistance,
He hente a sword by manly vyolence,
And furyously in his yrous tene,
The story says he slew of them fyftene,
Him self almost wounded to death,
And began for weary sothly fail breath.
And Vlixes what for noise and sown,
To the bridge is descendyd down.
Fynding his men at enter of his gate,
Dead and slain by full mortal hate.
And he full yrous hente anon adarte,
Of adventure standinge tho aparte,
And cruelly cast at Thelagon.
But yet the stroke as in conclusyon,
Domaged not for it glode aside.
And he for haste no longer would abide,
Hent up the darte without more arest,
And smote the king low under the breast,
Through the ribs shortly for to say,
That of the wound he must needs deye.
Having as tho no opinion,
That he was king nor suspection,
Nor that he had his own father slawe.
Which fast began to his end draw.
His wound was so deadly and so kene,
That he might him self not sustene,
But pale and wan to the ground began glide.
His men about upon every side,
That busy were to help him and releue.
But his sore began so ache and grieve,
That he well felt that he must be dead.
But abrayding as he lift up his head,
Having as yet both perfect mind and reason,
Remember began of his auysyon.
And how it was told him out of dread,
That one that was next of his kinrede,
Descended down from his own line,
His sweuen shall parfourme and to the fine,
Accomplish it with a darte of stele,
And for he could naught conceyuen well,
What that he was. nor who that it should be,
He badde anon unto his meyne,
Without harm or any vyolence,
To do him set anon unto his presence.
The young man which at the gate stood,
That has that day shed so much blood.
And when he was before Vlixes brought,
Of him he has inquired out and sought,
First of his kyn and next of his country.
Certes quod he I was borne in the sea,
Among fyshes myd the wawes grene,
And said also his mother was a queen,
Called Circes of whom the name is kouthe,
Both east and west and eke right fer by south
And told also his father was a king,
That him begat at his home coming.
Fro Troy town toward this country.
And as my mother Circes told it me,
Serteinly that he Vlixes hyghte.
Of whom desirous for to have a syghte,
I entered am this mighty regyon.
And have pursewed unto this dungeon.
Only in hope my father to have seyne.
But I se well my labor is in vain,
And sith in sothe lost is my travail,
And that it may in no side avail,
It were folly longer for to dwell,
Lo here is all that I can you tell.
Of my kynred ask of me no more,
With that Vlixes began to syghe sore.
For lack of blood as he that was full pale,
And said anon when he herd his tale,
Now wot I well my woeful destynye,
Fulfilled is it may none other be,
Now wot I well that it is to late,
To grutche or strive again my piteous fate
For my son as clerks whilom told.
Has made an end of my days old,
Thereon exspectant with pains full grievous
And with that word Thelagonius,
When so he wist again natures law,
That he alas had his father slawe,
Which in ye land long had borne his crown,
Without abode fell anon in swowne,
His clothes rent his yelowe heir to torn
Alas quod he that ever was I borne,
For cursed is my woeful destynye,
And my fortune which I may not fle,
Cursed my sort cursed min adventure,
And I refuse of every creature,
Forwarryed eke my disposycyon,
And cursed is my constellacyon,
Cursed also and full unfortunate,
The hour in which my father me begat.
So would god without longer read,
To acquit him anon that I were dead,
To lay my life for his death to borowe.
And when the king saw his great sorrow,
And wist he was his son of Circes borne,
By many signs rehearsed heretoforne,
He unto him anon forgave his death.
As tho he might for lack and want of breath,
So importable was his passion.
And efte his son called Thelamon,
Which has in prison so many day be shet,
To his presence in all haste was fet.
Which when he saw his father in such point
Wpon his death standing in disioynt.
And knew also and the truth has found,
By whom he had his last deadly wound,
A sword he hente and mortally yrous,
Would tho have run on Thelagonius,
Of high despyte avenged for to be.
But Vlixes of fatherly pytye,
Made his men hold and restrain,
And amyd of all his grievous pain,
By his prudence and that was done anon,
He made his sons for to be all one,
And gave in charge unto Thelamon,
Of enterenesse and affection,
And of hole heart feigned never adele,
All his life loved his brother well,
To part with him treasour gold and good,
As to the next borne of all his blood.
And tho in sothe it was no longer tarried,
That Vlixes full royally was carried,
Of all Achaya to the chyefe cite.
Where after that he lived days three,
Without more and tho gave up the ghost,
I can not say plainly to what cost.
After this life that his soul is gone.
But in a tumbe of metal and of stone,
The body was closed and yshet.
And after that there made was no let,
That Thelamon with great solempnytye,
Ycrowned was in his fathers see.
Sword and Scepter delivered to his hand,
Of all Achaya a rich and worthy land,
Right habundaunt of treasour and of gold
And Thelagon with him there abode,
A year complete well cheryshed in his sight,
And of his brother took order of a knygt.
And for him list no longer there abide,
The king for him wisely began provide,
That he with gold and of treasure plente,
Repeyred is home to his country.
And his mother of age wexen sad,
Of his repeyre passyngly was glad,
As she that saw by her sorcerye,
He escaped was many ieopardye,
Many peril and many great dystresse.
And after that she fell into sycknesse,
And her debt yield as unto nature,
The which escape may no manner creature.
In all this world that is here living.
After whose death her son was crowned king
Of Aulydos the meruaylous country,
As I have told enclosed with a sea,
Among rocks where many ships drown
And sixtye year there he bare his crown.
This manly man this Thelagonins.
And his brother Thelamonius,
Reigned also in his regyon,
Seuentye winter as made is mencyon.
And after that they made a royal end,
And both two to Iubiter they wend,
To reygne there among the sterres bright.
But now the lantern and the clear light
Is wasted out of Frygyus Darete:
Whylom of Troy writer and Poet.
Guide have I none further for to pass,
For even here in this self place,
He fytched has the bounds of his style.
At the syege he present all the while,
And aye in one with them did abide.
Dites the Greek on the the other side
And both two as in their writing,
Ne varye not but in a little thing.
Touching matter as in special.
That is notable or hystoryall,
I do no force of incydentes small,
Of which in sothe is but little tale.
Save this Dites makes mencyon,
Of the nombre slain tofore the town,
Lasting the syege afferminge out of dread,
Eyghte hundred thousand and six weren dead
On Greeks side up right in the fyelde.
And as Dares also there beheld,
On Troy party in the werre kene.
Six hundred thousand seuentye and syxtene,
Were slain there in Guydo ye may se,
With them that came in help to the City,
Fro many cost and many regyowne,
In diffence and rescues of the town.
And full ten year so as I can cast,
And six months the mighty syege did last.
Or it was get Dares write him self.
And ouermore complete days twelve.
Or Greeks had full possessyon,
By false engyne of the Greek Synon,
Like as tofore rehearsed was but late.
I have no more of latin to translate.
After Dytes, Dares, nor Guydo.
And me to add any more thereto,
Than mine Auctours specyfye and said,
The occupacyon sothly were in vain,
And like a manner of presumpcyon,
The time complete of this translatyon,
By just reckenynge and accountes clear,
Was a thousand and four hundred year
And twentye nere I know it out of dread,
After that christ received our manhead.
Of her that was emperesse and queen,
Of heaven and hell and a maid clean.
The eyghte year by just computacyon,
Sewynge next the coronacyon,
Of him that is most gracyous in workynge:
Henry the fyfthe the noble worthy king,
And protector of brutes albion.
And called is through his high renown,
Through his prowess and his chyualrye,
Also far as passes any cloud or sky.
Of Normandye the mighty conqueror,
For through his knighthod and his high labor
Maugre all tho that list him to withsayne,
He conquered has his heritage again.
And by his mighty prudent governance,
Recured eke his title unto France.
That who so list look and do unfold,
The pee de Grew of these cronicles old,
And sercheth books ywryt long toforne,
He shall find that he is justly borne,
To reygne in France by lineall dyscente.
And onwarde now he is ordained regent,
Of thylke land during his fathers life,
Of his goodness to voyden werre and strife.
He to rejoice without more delay,
Septre and crown after the kings day.
As it is clearly in conclusion,
Enrolled up in the conuencyon,
And than I hope the time fortunat,
Of the old world called Aureat,
Resort shall by influence of grace,
That cruel Mars shall no more manace,
With his lokes furious and wodde,
By false aspectes for to shede blood,
Atwene the folks of these realms twain.
Which every wight justly ought complain.
But as I trust in mine opynion,
This worthy king of wisdom and reason,
And of knighthode shall so do his pain,
To make one that long has betwayne.
I mean as thus that England and France,
May be all one withouten varyaunce.
Out of hertes old rancour to enchace,
By influence of his mighty grace,
That called is of clerks douteles,
The soueraygne lord and the prince of peace.
So that I hope his grace now shall reygne,
So set a peace atwene these realms twain
For in his power sothly stands all,
And allyaunce of the blood royal,
That is knet up by bond of marriage,
Of werre shall void away the rage.
To make peace with bright bemes shine.
And one that is called Katheryne.
And named is right good and fair also,
Shall Be a mean atwyxt both two.
Of grace emprynted in her womanhede,
That to complain we shall have no need.
And as I hope her gracyous aryuayle,
Into this land shall so much avail,
That joy honor and prosperytye.
Without trouble of all aduersytye,
Repeyre shall and all hertye pleasaunce,
Plentye, welfare, and fulsome habundaunce,
Peace and quiet both to nigh and far,
Without strife debate or any werre.
Myschiefe, pouerte, need* nor indigence,
With full ceassinge of death and pestylence.
Sothly I hope all this ye shall seen,
Come into land with that noble queen.
That we shall say of heart and feyne naught
Blessed be she that all this has us brought.
And he yt has through might of his working,
Of his knighthod concluded all this thing,
And such meruayles i^ arms done and wrought,
And his purpose fully about brought,
Of high wisdom set in his inward sight,
Inioyinge all that longs to his right,
And highest sit of worthynesse in glory,
With the Scepter of conquest and victory.
I pray god only for bis best,
When he has al set in peace and rest.
And is full put in clear possessyon,
Of all that longs to his subjection.
To send him home with triumph and honor,
As great as ever had any conqueror.
After long in joy and in quiet,
To rule and reygne in his royal sete,
Thus shall I aye there is no more to say,
Day and night for his exployte pray.
Of faithful heart and of hole entente.
That whilom gave me in commandment
Not yore ago in his fathers time,
The syege of Troy on my manner to rhyme,
Most for his sake to speak in special,
Although that I be boystous and rural,
He gave me charge this storye to translate,
Rude of conning called John Lydgate,
Monk of Burye by profession,
Using an habit of perfection.
Albe my life accords not thereto.
I feyne not I wot well it is so.
It needs not witness for to call,
Record I take of my brethren all,
That will not fail at so great a need.
And all that shall this noble storye read,
I beseech of supporte and of grace,
Where I offend in any manner place,
Or where soever that they find shall an error
Of gentylnesse to shown their favor,
And benyngly for to do their pain,
Hit to correct rather then dysdayne.
For well wot I yt much thing there is wrong
Falsely metryd both of short and long.
And if they should have of all disdain,
It is no dread my labor were in vain.
Let ignorance and rudeness me excuse,
For if that ye platly all refuse,
For certain fautes which ye there shall find
I doubt not my thancke is set behind,
For in the verse though there be ignorance,
Yet in the story ye find may pleasaunce,
Touching substance of yt mine auctour writ.
And though so be that any word miss sit,
Amendeth it with chere debonayre.
For an error to hyndre and appayre,
That is not said of purpose or malice,
It is no worship to him that is wise.
And no wight gladly demeth so soon a lack,
Specially behind at the back,
As he in soth that can no skylle at all.
He goes full hoole that never had a fall.
And I not find of new nor of old,
For to deem that is always so bold,
As he that is yblent with uncunning,
For blind bayarde cast peril of nothing,
Till that he stumblyng fall amydde the lake.
And none so redye for to undertake,
Than he in sothe nor bolder to say werse,
That can no skylle on prose nor yet on verse.
And of all such that lysten not be still,
I little forse where they say good or ill.
For unto them my book is not direct,
But to all such as list have in effect,
On simple folk full compassyon.
That goodly can by their correction,
Amend a thing and hyndre never adele,
Of custom aye ready to say well.
FOr he that was ground of well saying,
In all his life hyndred no making,
My master Chaucer yt found full many spot
Him list not pynche nor grutche at every blot
Nor meue him self to perturbe his rest,
I have herd told but said always the best.
Sufferynge goodly of his gentilnesse,
Full many thing embraced with rudeness.
And if I shall shortly him discriue.
Was never none to this day alive,
To reken all both of young and old,
That worthy was his ynkehorne for to hold
And in this land if there any be,
In borough or town vyllage or Cite,
That connyng has his tracys for to sewe,
Where he go broad or he be shet in mewe,
To him I make a full dyreccyon,
Of this book to have inspeccion.
Besechinge them with their prudent look,
To race and scrape through out al my book.
Void and add where them seineth need.
And though so be that they not ne read,
In all this book no Rethorikes new,
Yet this I hope that they shall find al true,
The storye plain chiefly in substance.
And who so list to se the varyaunce,
Of worldly thing wrought by days old,
In this book he may full well behold,
Change of fortune in her course mutable.
Selde or not faithful other stable.
Lords, Princes from her royalte,
Suddenly brought in aduersyte.
And kings eke plounged in pouerte,
And for their dread daringe in deserte.
Unware slaughter compassed of envy,
Murdre conspyred by conspyracye,
Awayte layinge falshede and treason,
And of kingedome sudden reuersyon.
Rauyshinge of women for delight
Root of the werre and mortal despyte.
False mayntenaunce of auoutrye,
Many worthy causynge for to dye.
Sin aye concludinge who so takes head,
Vengeance unware for his final mede.
TO declare that in all worldly lust,
Who look aryght is but litell trust,
As in this book example ye may find.
If that you list enprinte it in your mind,
How all passes and halt there no soioure,
Wastinge away as does a somer flower,
Rich and pore of every manner age.
For here our life is but a pilgramage,
Meynt with labor and with much woe,
That if men would taken head thereto,
And eke tofore prudently aduerte.
Litell joy he should have in his heart,
To set their trust in any worldly thing.
For there is another prince lord nor king.
By example of Troy as ye may see,
That in this life may have full surete.
Therefore to him that starfe upon the roode,
Suffrynge death for our alder good.
Lift up your hearts and think on him among
For be ye never so mighty not so gronge,
Without him all that may not avail.
For he can give victory in battle,
And hold a fyelde shortly to conclude,
With a few again great multitude.
And by his grace he makes princes strong,
And worthy kings for to reygne long.
And these Tyrants sodeynely oppress,
Throw the^ down for all their great richesse,
And in his hand power he reserueth,
Each to acquyte like as he deserves.
To whom I pray with all devotion,
With all mine heart and hole affection,
That he list grant long contynuaunce,
Prosperytye and good perseueraunce,
Health welfare victory and honor,
Unto that noble mighty conqueror.
Henry the fyfthe tofore especyfyed,
So that his name may be magnefyed,
Here in this life up to the sterres clear.
And afterward above the nynth sphere,
When he is dead for to have a place.
This pray I god for to send him grace,
At whose bidding as I told late.
First I began the syege to translate,
And now I have holy in his honor,
Full executed the fine of my labor,
Unto all that shall this storye se,
With humble heart and all humilyte.
This little book lowely I betake,
It to supporte and thus an end I make.
Of the most noble excellent Prince king Henry the fyfthe.
MOst worthy Prince of knighthode soures and well,
Whose high renown through the world does shine,
And that all other in manhood do excelle,
Egall of meryt to the worthyes nine,
And borne also by right descent of line,
As very heir by title to attain,
To bear ye crown of worthy realms twain
And also fer as Phoebus in his sphere,
Fro East to West throws out his beams bright,
And as Lucyna with a shrouded chere*
Goes compass round with her pale light,
Thou art yreckened for the best knight,
To be registered worthy as of name,
In highest place set of the house of fame.
To hold a palm of knighthod in thy hand,
For worthiness and for high victory,
As thou that art drade on sea and land,
And evermore with land honor and glory,
For just conquest to be put in memory,
With a crown made of laurer grene,
Upon thy head tofore that famous queen.
Whilom ordained only for conquerours,
Stable of heart with long contynuaunce
And gave not up till they were victoures
Emprises take for no sudden chance,
Whose name ay floureth with new remembrance
And fades not of years yore agone,
Among which thou may be set for one.
For through the world in many regyon,
Reported is with fame that flies wide,
That naturally thy condition,
On thing begone is knightly to abide,
And for the time manly set aside,
Rest and ease with cost thereon be spente,
Til thou have won the fine of thin entente.
Most circumspect and passinge auisee,
And al thy works conveyed with high prudence,
Sad and demure like to Iosuee,
Again whose sword there gayneth no resyste^ce,
And have also of heavenly influence,
With Salamon wisely to discern,
Only by grace thy people to govern.
Mercy eke meant with thy magnificence,
On all oppressed for to have pity,
And of rebels by manly violence,
Abate thou can the great cruelte,
And so with David have kingly pity.
And high prowess with Sesar Iulyus,
That in his time was most victorious.
And manly hold in thy hands two,
Who can behold by clear inspection,
The sword of knighthod, thy Scepter also,
The tone to bring to subiectyon,
Hertes made proud by false rebellyon,
And with the scepter to rule at the best,
Thy true people that can live in rest.
Now you yt have virtue, manhood, and grace
Attemperaunce fredome and bounte,
Lowly I pray to the with dreadful face,
Disdain the not benignely for to se,
Upon this book rudely made by me,
To fine only to argue thine highness,
And rewe of mercy upon my simplesse.
And in thy noble kingly aduertenee,
Consydre the my soueraygne lord most dear
Of thine innate famous sapyence,
That christ Jesus received with good cheer,
The two minutes give of heart entere,
By the widow which of will and thought,
Gave all her good and kept her self right naught.
By which example so that it not offend,
Through mine vnconning to thy high noblesse
Let your good will my litell gift amend,
And of thy mercy and renowned goodness,
Take no disdain of my bareyne rudeness,
And in making al though I have no muse,
Let true meninge the surplus all excuse.
More then good heart has no manner wight,
For to present either to god or man,
And for my part to the as it is right,
That give I hoole as fer forth as I can,
Aye to persevere fro time that I began,
With will and thought for thine estate to pray
Which to conserve thus finally I say,
First of almighty god ye wrath to queme,
With all that may be to his plesaunce,
And to thy crown and to thy diadem,
Grace and good eure with long continuau^ce,
And of thy lyeges faithful obeysaunce,
And the virtue that man may specifye,
I pray god grant unto thy regallye.
Explicit liber quintus et vltimus.
Lenuoye.
GO litell book and put the in the grace,
Of him that is ye most of excellence,
And be not hardye aye where to show thy face,
Without supporte of his magnificence,
And who so ever in the shall find offense,
Be not to bold for no presumpcion,
Thy self tenarme aye in patience,
And the submit to their correction.
Verba translatoris ad librum suum.
ANd for ye art enlimmed with no flowers,
Of Rethorike but all with white and black,
Therefore thou must nedely abide the shoures
Of them that list to set on the alack,
And when thou art most likly go to wrack,
Against them thine error not diffende,
But humbly tho withdraw the and go abacke.
Requiring them that they thy amiss amend.
FINIS.
Here begins the table.
How the king of Thesalye named Pelleus lost all his men by dyuyne
punishment who after by his prayers obtained others. Ca. i. How Eson the
king for that he was old and might no longer welde the gouernayle caused to
crown his brother Pelleus. Ca. ii. How Pelleus fearing to be deposed by his
brothers son Jason, a worthy and valiant young knight, counsayled him to
undertake the peryllous and almost invincible conquest of the golden flese at
Colchos, who by his persuasion undertook the same Ca. iii. How Jason in his
expedicion toward Colchos, casually with his fellowship, arrived in the
territoryes of Troy, meaning only there for a while to refreshe and rest
them. Ca. iiii. How Lamedon king of Troy sent to Jason commaundinge him and
his felowshyppe forthwyth to depart the confynes of his cou^treyth and of
their answer sent again to the kynge^ Ca. v. How Jason through the only help
of Medea Oetes daughter, the king of Colchos enamored of him he achieued the
conquest of the golden flese. Ca. vi. How Jason after this conquest with Medea
and his felowshyppe returned again into Thesalye. Ca. vii. How Jason,
Hercules, and all the princes of Greece, assembled to aduenge the vncurtesye
done to them by Lamendon in this expedycyon toward Colchos. Ca. viii. Of the
battle betwixt the Grecians and the Troyans wherein the Trojans were
dyscomfyted, their king slain, and after their City taken, rased, and
destroyed. Ca. ix. The Translatour complains the misfortune of the Troyans,
in the loss of their Cite lively describinge the tykle estate of Fortunes
governance, beginning in the same chappiter his secounde book, persewynge the
matter of the said historye. Ca. x. How Pryam son to Lamedon and succedinge
his father, builded the City again. Ca. xi. How king Pria^ send Anthenor into
Greece to have restored again his sister Exion. Ca. xii. How Priam the king sent
Paris Deiphobus and others the worthyes of Troy into Greece, to aduenge the
rauishinge of his sister Exion, and how they before their return rauyshed the
fair Heleine wife to Menelaus and brought her to Troy. Ca. xiii. How Paris
was received in Troy at his return, and of his marriage to Helcyne. Capitulo.
xiiii. How the Greeks assembled to be aduenged of the Troyans for the
rauyshynge of Heleyne. Ca. xv. The descripcion of Pryam, his sons and
daughters and of the aryual of ye Greeks tofore the temple of Diane the
goddess. Ca. xvi. How Achilles and Patroclus were sent to Delos to receive
answer of god Apollo how they should speed against the Troyans. Ca. xvii How
the Greeks nauye retourning from Athenes were distressed by tempest, and how
they took a castle of the Troyans called Saranaba. Ca. xviii. How Agamenon
assembled counsel of the nobles of Greece, and determined, and sent Vlixes and
Diomede in embassade to king Priam. Ca. xix. How Agamenon sent Achilles and
Thelephus into the Island of Messa for vytayles, and how they slew the king
and after ordained Thelephus the king there. Ca. xx. How the Greeks landed
tofore Troy where they were stoutly fought with all. Capitulo. xxi. Of the
first battayl wherein Hector showed him self in valyauncye tofore all other.
Capitulo. xxii. How the Greeks through their suite obtained of king Priam a
trewse for eight wekes and of their battayles after the trewse ended. Capitulo.
xxiii. How the Troyans took king Thoas prisoner and led him captive to Troy.
Ca. xxiiii. How duringe a trewse of.iii. months Hector walked into the Greeks
host, and of the talk had betwixt Achilles and him. Ca. xxv. Of their
battayles after that trewse, the descripsyon of the Palleys of ylyon, of a
great pestylence in the Greeks hooste, whereby they were enforced to seek for
trewse, which upon their suyte they obtained for thirtye days. Capitulo. xxvi.
How Andromecha was by a dream forwarned of the death of her husband Hector,
if he the day following entered the fyelde, whereof she admonyshed him, and he
thereto having no respect was the next day slain of Achilles. Capitulo. xxvii.
The complaynte of Lydgate for the death of Hector. Ca. xxviii. How the greeks
deposinge Agamenon ordained Pallamydes the general of their army. Capitulo.
xxix. How king Priam in p^rsonne issued into battle, for thaduenge of
Hectors death, where he did right valyauntly. Ca. xxx. How Achylles slew the
worthy Troylus vnknightly, and after trayled his body through the fyelde tied
to his horse. Ca. xxxi. How Paris slew Achilles and Archylogus Duke Nestors
son, in the temple of Apollo. Ca. xxxii. How Paris and Thelamon Ayax, slew
each other in the fyelde. Ca. xxxiii. How Pantasylla queen of Amazonis coming
in aid of the Troyans, was slain by Pirrhus Achilles son. Ca. xxxiiii. How
the Greeks made an horse of brass, wherein was men of arms, and under color
of peace brought it into Troy, by the which it was utterly destroyed for
ever. Ca. xxxv. How the Greeks returned into Greece after the destruction, and
how they were peryshed almost all in the sea, and after they that escaped dyed
mischeuously. Ca. xxxvi. How the translatour writes the stock of Pirrhus by
line all discente, and how his father hight Pelleus, and his graundemother
called Thetydes. xxxviii.
The end of the table.
Imprinted at London, in Fletestrete at the sign of the Princes arms, by
Thomas Marshe.

Anno. do. M.D.L.V.


