The Seal of the Churches safety; OR A Sermon preached at NORWICH, the fifth
of November, 1616.

Wherein is opened the sealed assurance of the safety of the CHVRCH, in all
times, and estates, meet for all Christians to know, and acknowledge, to the
glory of God, and their own comfort in life and death.

By N. COLT, one of the Preachers appointed by public authority for the
commonplace there.

2. TIM. 2.19. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this Seal, The
Lord knows, etc.

PSALM. 3.8. Salvation belongs to the Lord, and his blessing is upon his
People.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND RELIGIOUS Magistrates, Christian Societies, and
other Inhabitants of the City of NORWICH, sauing-health in JESUS CHRIST.
RIght Worshipful and right dear to me in the Lord, J ingenuously
acknowledge, that when J did observe the public testimony that God gave to
the word of his Grace, in the Sermon following, euidenced not only by your
religious attention thereunto, with gracious aspect, and long continued patience
in hearing me, for the space almost of two hours; but also by the general,
and thankful recognition of the same, by many, very many, of sundry sorts,
in your City, I did (as was meet) hereat much rejoice in spirit before the
Lord, gave him the glory, and blessed you, in praying for you.

The next day going forth into the streets of your City, to see and salute
some of my friends, I found (upon discourse) that many were desirous to enjoy
the service of my Pen upon this subject, for their further use: wherewith when
J had acquainted some of eminent place, and amongst others, that learned, and
grave Divine Master Doctor Suckling, Deane of Norwich, who having been
himself a hearer of me, did (I believe) even out of his feeling, and
conscience, assure me, that herein J might do good service to God, and to his
people.

Upon these and other Christian incourageme^ts I said in my heart, Surely this
thing seems to come of the Lord, whose J am, and whom I serve in the Gospel
of his Son, who also best knows what to do with me, and my service. So J
did (and indeed durst not but) consent, at least to try what herein the Lord
would be pleased to do by me, for you. Whereupon J returning home, did
surueigh my written Meditations, and Notes, and thereby recovered some losses
of memory, recollected my spirits, and put on hard for God and his people: and
by the help of his holy grace finished thus this little Frame, and Jmpression
of the public Seal of the Churches safety. And when this weak conception of
my barren breast was brought to light, by the hand of a public professed
Midwife, J mean, the Printer, remembering well, that as J stood for Father, and
therefore took upon me to give it a Name, suitable to the nature of the Matter
subject, so likewise that you were to me herein in stead of publik Witnesses; J
hereupon eft-soones resolved, that it was no less reasonable then religious
for me, when I had done with it what J would, and could, to return it home
again unto you; that so you might take it as your own, possess it, patronize
it, and employ it in your service, as you should think fit. Welcome then in
gracious love (Thou loving and truly religious City of Norwich) this written
Monument, and real Evidence of my true love, respect, and thankfulness to
thee, and thine, in Jesus Christ: and let this be (as God has appointed it)
some weak means to propagate thy Memory, and Honor unto Posterity.

And now, my holy Brethren, Heb. 3.1.
partakers of the heavenly vocation, give me leave upon this occasion, to
speak a good word unto you, from the Lord our good God, in Jesus Christ.
Seeing the Lord of Heaven and Earth has in special mercy seated your free and
faithful City within the pale of this English Paradise, and in the same does
still betrust and honor you with the unspeakable treasure of his heavenly
Truth, and holy Ordinances, and that in the hand of many able, and faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, and set as blessings to your
City, even as the celestial Light and Salt of the same: seeing also that you
do happily enjoy, and sway the Sword of civil Government, and under the same
are blessed with Health, Peace, Plenty, and other comfortable conditions of
life, and estate: And finally, seeing the Lord Jehovah, the great Patron and
Protector of this our English Israel, has also made you, and your City
glorious, by great deliverances (both in general, and in special) from extreme
dangers of utter desolation; and namely, in that your singular preservation
from the rage and ruins of Kets Camp, (and whiles you live upon earth,
propagate the memory thereof unto your posterity, by a religious observation
of the time, matter, and mercy of GOD toward you therein.) Also in your, and
our late admirable freedom from the fiery effects of that hellish, Popish
powder treason: Let all these gracious and ample evidences of Gods favor, and
fatherly providence to you, and yours, affect, enlarge, and settle your
Christian souls so deeply in the true faith, fear, and love of God, as may
cause you to abound more and more in every good word, and work appertayning
unto you; and therein give God the glory due to his Name, send in daily unto
him Tributs of duty, and Presents of affection, both in private, and public.
And finally, living and dying, give his holy Ministers, and faithful People,
that live with you, just cause daily to bless you in praying for you: which
verily, upon trial, will prove not the weakest way to build up your Houses,
your Honor, and Happiness, both in Earth and Heaven.

But lest I should seem ouer-bold, or busy with you (my good Brethren and
Fathers) who otherwise do abou^d with good Monitors, and do happily carry the
best about you in your own breasts, I will here seasonably suspend my officious
Pen, and conclude with prayer to God on your behalf; That it would please his
holy Majesty abundantly to bless unto you, and yours, all the means and
helps of holiness (and this amongst the rest) which you do enjoy, until that
good work of his Grace, which is begun in you, shall be perfected for the
praise of his glorious rich Grace in Jesus Christ, In whom J shall willingly
rest

Yours all, in all Offices of pious love, and service, in my place and measure:
N. COLT.
LONDON the third of JUNE. 1617.
The SEAL of the CHVRCHES safety, etc.
2. PET. 2.9. The Lord has known to deliver the godly out of temptation: and
to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished.


WHen this solemn task of sacred duty was lately put upon me by the hand of
public Authority, (which I have reason much to respect) though the lets both
public and private which did wrestle with me in the Work, were neither few,
nor weak; yet perceiving that my calling hereunto was not uncomfortable, I
resolved with Christian confidence herein to cast my self wholly upon the
help of Heaven, both for Theme, Method, and Matter, that in some measure
might be suitable to the occasion, and to this solemn Assembly.

Wherein notwithstanding, I do humbly crave of all sorts a friendly, both
construction, and acceptance of that plain provision of holy Truth, which by
Gods assistance, I shall deliver unto you out of this sacred and sweet Oracle;
within the limits whereof lie two grand Conclusions: One of admirable and
^ndlesse comfort to the Godly; The parts and Resolution of the Text.
^he other of no less horror and ^onfusion to all the world of the wicked.
The former of these is delivered in form of a Promise: ^he latter of a
Threatening. In both we are to consider the Persons and the Thing. In the former
^he Person promising [the Lord] and the parties to whom the promise is made
[the Godly] Then the thing promised, [which is Deliuerance] which is amplified
and made lightsome. First, by the cause thereof [the knowledge of God,] [the
Lord knoweth] and secondly, by the kind of deliverance [out of tentation.] So
then we have in the former passage, First, the Author of this benefit, the
Lord. Secondly, the Efficient cause and ground thereof, his knowledge, [The
Lord knows.] Thirdly, the benefit it self, [Deliuerance.] Fourthly, the
Object, or parties upon whom the benefit is conferred [the godly.] And lastly,
the kind of the benefit bestowed [deliuerance out of tentation.] The resolution
of the other part of this Sentence agrees with this in effect; And thus much
of the Method plainly and briefly.

Now, although I know that the Learned amongst you, cannot necessarily expect
any observations touching matter of Inference, Reference, Connection, or
Dependence that should lie between this Period and the Premises, seeing in the
original there is neither Relative, Illatiue, nor Copulative particle to be
found: yet because indeed it is so, I will say that this Sentence is the
Conclusion of a former Induction, and so both in Nature, and Art, does depend
upon the Premises. Which thing, further to manifest, let us make some short
Survey of that which went before in this Chap. where you shall find that the
holy Apostle having in the end of the former Chapter set forth the certainetie,
and dignity of the Doctrine of of the Gospel, both from the Author thereof,
and from the agreement that it has with the Writings of the Prophets, does
upon this occasion, in the beginning of this Chapter tell the Church (as Christ
himself did, Matthew. 24. and Paul, 1. Tim. 4.) That in these last times there
should arise many False-Prophets, and False-Teachers, that should bring in
(...).
damnable Heresies, (in effect) to the denying of the Lord that bought them;
and (yet) that many should follow their damnable ways: by whom the way of
Truth should be ill-spoken of, etc. And that they through cursed covetousness
and base Multos fore eorum sectatores. (...).
flattery should make Quam vera and viua est haec Romani Cleri descriptio:
Beza.
merchandise of Souls. For all which their wickedness (says Saint Peter) they
shall bring upon themselves (...).
swift destruction, which destruction he does not only denounce against them
by the Spirit of Prophecy, as it were by divine Divination; but also proves
it by Theological demonstration: namely, by an Induction of sundry particulars
of Gods Justice inflicted upon, both Angels, and Men, which formerly had sinned
against the Lord. For (says the Apostle) if God did not spare the Angels which
sinned, nor the old World, ^or Sodom and Gomorrha, ney^her will he spare
these, etc. Indeed this Consequence is wanting ^n the Greek, but by a Ellipsis
consequent. (...).
Figure frequent in Holy Scripture, is to be understood necessarily, and
supplied, as it is in the margent. (...).


Now, besides this Induction of particulars, the Apostle for further proof of
their undoubted punishment, does use two strong Arguments to euince the same; A
pari.
identitie of Divine Justice, which is ever the same, when the case is alike. A
maiori.
greater to the less, if we respect the excellency of Angels above men. This
done; the Apostle to these instances of Divine Justice, adds (as a Corallary
of comfort to Gods Elect,) two famous Examples of special mercy from God,
showed in the preservation of Noah and Lot, verses 5.6.7.8. From all which
Monuments of Divine Justice, and Mercy, Saint Peter infers this Conclusion,
and Divine Aphorism, The Lord knows to deliver the godly, etc. and to
reserve the wicked to, etc. And thus much of the Series orationis and
argumentorum.
thread of speech, consequence of matter, and dependence of this sacred
Conclusion, inferred upon that which went before in this Chapter.

Now let us come to make some use of the Apostles order, and kind of
confirmation. It is by an inartificiall Syllogism commonly called Inductio est
argumentatio a pluribus particularibus ad universal, quasi a partibus ad totum
progressio, etc.
Induction, or Enumeration of Particulars to enforce a general truth of that
kind: as for example, if a man by this kind of reasoning would prove
Justification by faith against a Papist; let him do it by an Induction of
Particulars, and say; Heb. 11.
Abel was justified by Faith, so was Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
etc. Neither can you find the Nec in caeteris contrarium, est videre: ergo, etc.
contrary in any of the Saints of God, Therefore, whosoever is justified, is
justified by Faith.

One Instance more, against the confident sinner his vain hope of Salvation.
As if you would prove, that without true repentance he cannot be saved; argue
thus, by an Induction of particulars, and say; that neither David, nor Peter,
nor Zacheus, nor Mary Magdalen, nor Paul, nor the Incestuous Corinthian,
without true repentance could be saved, neither is the contrary to be found in
the Book of God: therefore without true repentance no man can be saved.

Lo, this is a sure and sanctified kind of reasoning, in cases of Religion;
and is both Logical and Theological, I mean, both Natural, and Spiritual,
Humane, and Divine; fit both for Learned, and Unlearned to use for their
Instruction, Conviction, Confirmation, Consolation, etc. And for this cause
also among other ends, (as I believe) it has pleased God in his singular
wisdom and mercy to leau^ upon Record in his Holy Word so many examples of
both good and bad; and of their different estates and ends.

And so let us now proceed from the Apostle his Order and Inference, modestly
to surueigh and search his Evidence, touching the Safe Conduct and Protection
of all the godly, in the midst of all straits, dangers, trials, temptations,
evils, and enemies, until such time as they be safely arrived in the Kingdom
of Heaven.

The warrant and Evidence that the Apostle here shows for it, is this, [That
the Lord does know how to deliver his, etc.] Out of which words I purpose
(though sparingly, as I pass through them) to give you in the first place,
some Grammatical and Punctual Observations; (yet not to show my self; that
vanity were too light for the gravity of a Divine, that knows himself and
his service to be subject to a strict Trial before Gods Tribunal, but) to
show you in part what hidden Mysteries of Divinity lie folded up, not only in
complete Sentences, but also in the single words of Sacred Writ. In the next
place you shall have such Positions, and Observations, both for Doctrine, Duty
and Comfort, as I can collect fitly, out of this heavenly Oracle.

I find in the Book of GOD, that the word (Lord) when it is applied unto God
indefinitely, is to be taken two-wayes; that is to say, sometimes (...).
Essentially, and sometimes (...).
Possessiuely. For the former, Acts 2.39. The promise is made to you (says the
Apostle Peter to the Jews) and to your children, and to all that are a far
off, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call. For the latter, read
Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee (or as the Greek word is, I confess unto thee) O
Father, (...).
Lord of Heaven and Earth, etc. Possessiuely taken. So likewise, the Greek
word (...), [Lord] may (I suppose) admit a twofold deriuation, videlicet, it
may come either of the Verb (...), or the Nowne (...), the former signifying
to be the first (...), Ens aeternum.
Essence, the other the first Ens Entium, (...).
Author; and so may parallel that essential name of God, Iehouah] who is an
infinite and unsearchable Selfe-being Essence, eternal, everlasting, and
unchangeable, giving being and beginning to all things, etc. Or else it may
come of (...), and so should intimate the possessing and governing of all
things, as absolute Lord, Owner, and Commander of them: and so it answers to
the Hebrew word Bagnal, Hos. 2. (...), of-himselfe-Lord, simply and absolutely,
as he alone that has absolute and universal power, in, and over all things,
causes, and persons whatsoever, wheresoever.

And this of the deriuation, and sense of the first word (Lord) taken either
essentially or possessiuely: here you may safely take it in both senses,
without restraint to either.

The doctrine, and duties to be derived from hence, I defer, until I have
spoken of the Etymology of the next word, and then will I prosecute them
together jointly and severally. It follows in the Text, The Lord knows,
etc.] The greek word is (...), of (...)] which answers to the hebrew word
Iadang] (...)
which (as Scholars know) does signify to be much, and long acquainted with
the thing which we know; as here now to import thus much, Longo vsu exercitatus
and in liberandis pijs, and in puniendis sceleratis, Beza.
That the Lord has been long time exercised and accustomed with the both
delivering and preserving of the godly; and with punishing the wicked. And in
this very sense, and in the like subject does the holy Prophet, Psalm 1. v. 6.
use the same word; where having showed the different conditions, estate, and
end of the good and bad, he concludes with this intimation: for the Lord
knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked, etc. Ki-iodeang
Jehovah derec tsaddikim vederecreschagnim tobedh.]

The greek tongue seems to distinguish the three kinds of common knowledge,
sensual, rational, and artificial, I mean, of Sense, of Reason, and of Art, by
three several words, (...): but (...), of (...), outstrips them all, and
adds unto the three former a fourth kind of knowledge, namely,
experimental. In which kind it may be, that the holy Angels themselves
increase in knowledge, experimentally.

But howsoever the rules go with Creatures, and with their knowledge; I am
sure that it goes far otherwise with the Creator, whose knowledge is (as
himself) infinite, and unsearchable. Insomuch as, me thinks, I hear the holy
Apostle here proclayming openly, that there is nothing so dark, deep, or
difficult, so large and manifold, which has been, is, or can be hid from the
ancient, perfect, and plenarie knowledge of the Lord God, with whom we have to
do, etc. (...), Heb. 4.
Moreover, finding the verb here used, to be put in the tense and time past
(for punie Scholars know, that it is (...)) and therefore should be read [The
Lord has known] it shows that this knowledge of GOD our Lord is from
everlasting, to everlasting; no time past, present, or to come, ca^ determine
his knowledge, but it far far exceeds all term of time.

Now from all these punctual impressions of this word of truth, let me
collect, and give unto you some weak definition of the knowledge of God, thus:
The knowledge of God is that, by which the Lord our God in one eternal, and
ineffable act of infinite understanding, does distinctly and perfectly know all
things, persons, causes, times and occurrences, which have been, are, or shall
be more and less, first and last, together with all their substances,
quantities, qualities, inclinations, motions, actions, and ends; and this, not
by certain degrees, and passages, nor by observations, and notions abstracted,
and taken from the things themselves (as Men and Angels may know things:) Nil
Creatoris aut lateat cognitionem, aut effugiat potestatem. Aug.
but essentially, of, in, and from himself, absolutely, simply, and all at
once.

To which his absolute divine knowledge of all things is joined his infinite
Act of will, whereby God wills them freely, justly, eternally, and
unchangeably; and according to the same does effectually, precisely,
punctually, and fully perform the same his knowledge and will in all things
evermore: and consequently and by name in these two main parts of his most
holy Will, and decree of preserving and delivering his faithful-ones, the
godly; and of reserving the wicked to the day of judgment, to be punished, as
here in our Text is proclaimed.

And if here we may be bold to take in that ancient and orthodoxe principle in
divinity, That all the essential attributes of God (whereof his knowledge is
one) do agree, Attributa Dei essentialia, propter (...), singulis diuinitatis
Personis competunt.
and equally belong to all the persons of the holy Trinity; then it must
needs follow that this is truly testified of God the Father, of God the Son,
and of God the holy Ghost, that they equally, and jointly, severally,
infallibly and eternally do know (with which knowledge is joined Will, Power,
and Effect) how to deliver the godly out of, etc. Oh sweet, oh precious, oh
saving knowledge of the glorious Godhead in Trinity and Unity thus
concurring, thus co-working for the Elects welfare! Now then to this holy
God, and sovereign Lord, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one and the same God
in nature, and number, God over all, blessed for ever, be all all honor,
glory, faith, love, fear, obedience, and praise yielded by us, by ours, and
by all his redeemed, eternally. Amen, Amen, Amen.

To this truth do the holy Prophets and Apostles bear witness, Read Genesis
6.5. Psalm. 104. throughout, and Psalm. 145. etc. But most pregnant for this
purpose is that place Act. 15. (...), etc.
v. 18. where the Apostle James avouches, that all the works of God are
known to him from the beginning. And as known, so likewise are they ordered.
For says our Apostle, 1. Cor. 12.6. It is he that works all in all things,
Tripliciter operatur Deus, (...), Suidas.
[(...).] The anomie, disorder, and evil of the action God permits; the
action it self God orders. In good creatures God works his will not only
by them, but also in them; as in David, etc. In the rest, not in them, yet by
them: as in Judas, etc.

Let us now at length come to make some use (by way of position and
observation) both of the absolute sovereignty of our God, as he is Lord; and
also of his infinite knowledge, and providence, which (as Solomon says) does
equally reach unto all things, (...).
even to every hair of every head, and to every bird of every feather, Matthew.
10. and cap. 6.

And since the Apostle 2. Tim. 3.16. affirms, that the right use of all holy
truth is to teach, to improve, to correct, and instruct in righteousnesse] we
will have some eye unto the same in our application.

And first, forasmuch as the Lord Jehovah, who, properly to speak, is Lord
only, does of right (as you have heard) challenge to himself full, absolute,
and universal Power in, and over all things, persons, etc. let us all learn
always, and in every estate, thus to acknowledge him to be our Lord and our
God; yea, let the greatest Lords, and highest Powers upon earth acknowledge,
that their places, and power are of and from this Lord, and being derived from
him, are dependant upon him, limited by him, and subject unto him; and
consequently, that they must be countable unto him in a most strict account.
For says King Solomon: Sap. cap. 6.3.
The rule is given you of the Lord, and your Power by the most High, which will
try your works, and search out your imaginations, etc. Turn not therefore
your power and places of eminency into carnal Pomp, or private gain, much
less into personal revenge and cruel oppression; but with holy David sing
Mercy and Judgment to the Lord, etc. Psalm. 101.
For you exercise but a Ministry of Justice, and Mercy, under his holy
Majesty; and not any absolute, dissolute, lawless Authority, which is little
better then plain tyranny.

Secondly, seeing this high and holy Lord of heaven and earth, gives this
subordinate Power to men; let us, and all, learn to obey them in the Lord that
do command and rule over us in the Lord, Romans 13.1.2.3. etc.
and that for Conscience sake.

Thirdly, let us all from hence learn, that we are not our own, nor any thing
that we have, is absolutely ours, but the Lords; and therefore, that our
selves, and all that we have, ought to beat his command in all things, times
and estates, and so to make all serve for his honor and glory, cheerfully,
conscionably, constantly.

Fourthly, since we are all (...).
fellow-seruants under one and the same Sovereign Lord and Master, howsoever
otherwise we differ in place, and parts, office, and administration; yet let
no man lift up his heart above that which is meet, but in love learn to serve,
help, and honor one another in the Lord, as becomes fellow-seruants, that
are equally interessed in the Title and honor of the heavenly Inheritance.
Romans 8.17. (...).


Lastly, let us (with these heads of duty) consider our dignity, and safety
under the Shield, and saving Power of this our Sovereign Lord and God, and
comfort our selves in the same, under all the baseness of our outward estate,
and contempt of the world: also under the enmity and hostility of Satan and
of sinners, of Pope, or Papist: and sing we a sweet and sacred Requiem, and
Al-hayle to our blessed King, Queen, Prince, State, our selves and ours, so
long as GOD is our Lord, and we continue his faithful servants in Jesus
Christ. Care and fear be removed from us: and let heavenly comfort and
confidence accompany us, until we have finished our course in the faith and
service of the Lord our God, even of this Lord that knows how to deliver all
his from evil, and to bring them to neuer-ending Honor.

And thus may we profit by the knowledge and faith of this point, that God is
the Lord, our Lord, absolute in Power, glorious in praises, doing wonders;
wonders (I say) for his servants safety, as appears in us this day. Oh how
blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Jehovah, even the people whom he
has chosen for his Inheritance, Psa. 33. So much of the first word in our
Text. Now let us come to make some use of the next head of doctrine, touching
the knowledge of this Lord, [The Lord knows.] The Atheist believes not the
truth of this Text; but says, Is there any such knowledge in the Almighty?
Others hold the Paynims principle, that tho God knows all, yet say, Non vacat
Ioui, etc. The Lord has no leisure to attend upon every trifle; which one thus
well answers, That as God vouchsafed to create the least and basest things:
Sicut non dedecuit Deum infima creare, sic nec creata curare.
so he disdaineth not to regard, and order the same.

The common sort of Christians will be brought to yield (perhaps) that the
Lord understands and knows all, and potentially is able to do what he
will: but hardly can be brought to confess a particular and practike
knowledge in God, which extends it self to all and every least creature, and
thing whatsoever under heaven, in heaven. Yet must even this also be believed,
or else this Truth of doctrine (which is the ground of our hope and safety) is
violated. Finally, the weak Christian, which yet is not wholly void of faith
in God, not duly pondering this point of holy truth, seeing the prosperity of
the wicked, and the affliction of the good, does thereupon conceive amiss of
the Lord his government and knowledge of things here below; and so also
becomes impatient, and heartlesse, to his own great hurt, and the offense of
Heaven. All these must learn to know and believe (if they will be saved) that
in God our Lord, assuredly there is an eternal, absolute, and infallible
knowledge of all things whatsoever; together with wisdom, will, and power to
rule, order, and dispose of them accordingly, until every thing be brought to
that period and end which he has appointed for his own glory, the salvation
of the Elect, and ruin of the Reprobate rout. For the holy Word of ^he Lord
does here witness the same, and his holy works do confirm it abundantly.

Now, the meditation of all that herein has been said, and truly taught out
of these two words joined together, The Lord knoweth] referred to both the
parts of this Prophecy, as the same ought to be, might (me thinks) strike a
strange terror into the soul of any sinner, (which is not too too forlone,
and hardened in sin) when he shall come to himself, and consider that he
has sinned against a Lord,

First, of infinite knowledge, which perfectly knows the number and nature of
all his sins whatsoever.

Secondly, of infinite Justice, and therefore cannot let escape the least
particular sin which he was ever guilty of, originally, or personally;
unless he find mercy in the Mediator, upon his true repentance, and
faithful conversion from the power of Satan, to the living Lord, and from the
disobedience of the wicked, to the wisdom of the just, etc.

Thirdly, of infinite power also, and authority to cast both soul and body
into Hellfire, perpetually, unrecoverably.

And lastly, of infinite Eternity, to give the impenitent sinner eternity in
that unspeakable misery.

Oh, consider this, all that forget God, together with his unspeakable
knowledge, power and justice! Make up your peace with GOD in time; in time (I
say) lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you out of his
hand; that knows how to reserve (not preserve) the wicked to Judgment, to be
punished eternally.

Moreover, let me tell you (as I verily believe) that the ignorance, unbelief,
or oblivion of this holy Truth, that GOD knows absolutely all things, even
all secrets of all men's minds, and manners; and that he has absolute power
in and over all, as the Lord of Lords; the ignorance, I say, and unbelief of
this truth is the maine cause, and root of all Atheism, Profaneness,
Hypocrisy, Neutralitie, and (to come nearer the point in hand) of all
sinful fear, and despair in dangers and distress; also of carnal
confidence, sinful security, and shifting by corrupt courses, to help our
selves in time of need: also of all base, gross and weak conceits of God, and
of his government: and finally of all impatiencie, murmuring, etc. under
affliction.

Whereas on the contrary, the sound and sanctified knowledge of GODS infinite
power and wisdom to perform whatsoever he will, and has revealed in his
Word, will help to afford all good Christians unspeakable animation,
affiance, love, awe, peace, patience, constancy, and comfort to cast all their
cares, and burden upon the Lord (as he has commanded) and so to rest in
peace and sacred security, etc.

Finally, (that I may grow to an end in the application of this first part of
the Text,) seeing the Lord brings his judgments to light every morning, as
his holy Word does witness (in his knowledge and power performing the same)
let us learn henceforth to make due and daily observation thereof; that we
may say, as Thusidides did in another case; I have experience of this and that
Truth of God, (...).
fulfilled either in mercy or justice: and so join experimental knowledge
and faith with literal and spiritual. How many Christians continue weak in
faith and patience! etc. because they be wanting this way to God in duty (for
God has so done his maruailous works, that they ought to be had in
remembrance) and to themselves in wisdom.

Neglect not then this help of holiness, if you would grow up faster in all
holy fear, faith, love, and obedience, etc. Learn also this lesson of all the
wise-hearted Patriarchs, Prophets, and Princes of the Lord his people; 1. Sam.
17.37.
specially of holy David, Psalm. 48.7. etc.
in his blessed Book of Psalms.

And so let us proceed in the Text to the next word [Deliuer] The Lord knows
to deliver.] This is one singular effect of the foresaid Cause, [Deliuerance to
the godly.] The knowledge of God is neither idle, nor unfruitful; but
operative, and effectual: and that unto these two ends principally, so far
forth as it concerns Man: namely, to save the godly, and to wrecke the
wicked. And of these, because the salvation of the just is of special
consequence for the glory of Gods saving power, and Fatherly Providence,
therefore it is here set in the first place, and has the preeminence. And a
singular President (me thinks) it is of good Government, and of the right use
of all that knowledge, and power wherewith the Lord has furnished us, or any
of us, whether we be Magistrates, Ministers, or Masters of Families. In the
extent of mercy and justice, First, to be guided by knowledge, even by Divine
knowledge and understanding of Gods will: Secondly, to limit it by the power and
place which we hold in charge: Thirdly, specially, and above the rest, to do
good to the good, to preserve and deliver the Just, so saving them that should
be saved in the first place. Let Noah be first shipped in safety in GOD'S Ark, before the floods of Justice ouerflow the World. And let Lot be gone from
Sodom (y^ Angels of the Lord) before yo^ fire the place of his Repose.

Consider what I have said and the Lord give you understanding in all things to
do his will. And thus much briefly o^ the connection of the effect with the
cause, and of the Apostles order in putting the safety of the Saints in the
first place, and passage of Gods most holy Government. Again, further observe
here with me, that the Lord our God takes the ground of his doing good to his
servants, even from his own eternal, and unchangeable knowledge, will, and
goodness; which works free^y of it self, and from it self, all the effects
of mercy, and salua^ion promised to his Saints.

Let then our help also, and service which we yield to the people of God in
our places, not be base, enforced, mercinarie, or any way corrupt at the root;
but ^ngenuous, free, and faithful; that so we may (in our measure) become
merciful and just, as our heavenly Father is to us.

The Text follows, [The Lord knows to deliver.]

The word here used, does properly signify to take by force, (...), h. e.
Eripere. (...).
and to deliver with strong hand: as if the Apostle should tell all the godly,
that otherwise all evils and enemies, dangers and distresses would hold them,
even with might and main in durance, and in bondage, videlicet, if the Lord
should not step forth with force to rescue, and deliver them out of all: as of
old he delivered his beloved Israel.

By this then we are advertised of many things, worthy on consideration. As
first, to se^ what is the natural properti^ and practice of evil things, and
persons, yea, and of their father the Devil, as Christ our LORD speaks, John
8. namely, to incline to hurt, and to hold under the bondage of affliction,
distress, and death, all the godly, even the good and faithful servants of
the Lord; and hereunto will bend all their strength of wit, will, power, etc.
Insomuch as the Lord our good GOD is feign to arm himself with power, even
with a strong hand and stretched out arm (oftentimes) to deliver them;
according to that which is written in the Psalm, 37. Psalm. 37.
The Salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord, who is also their strength
in the ^ime of trouble.

Secondly, and consequently, being hereby admonished to apprehend on the one
side our perpetual danger, and on the other side our ignorance to discern,
and weakness to decline the same, we must learn to walk the more wisely,
and circumspectly, to stand upon our Guard, to keep Sentinel, and continual
watch, to arm our selves, as the holy Word forewarneth in the fifth and sixth
Chapters of the Epistle to the Ephesians: And finally, in humility, faith,
feeling, and true thankfulness to profess, and say with the Psalmist, All
our help, hope, comfort, and salvation stands in the name, knowledge,
mercy, power, and goodness of the Lord our God, the God of our strength, hope
and happiness; which has made, and does rule both heaven and earth. Lastly,
we are herein taught, that there is no strength, power, or wisdom against the
Lord, or against his Servants safety. My Father is stronger then all, and no
man can ^ake out of his hand, says our blessed Savior, John 10. And ^he
Apostle says, That the weak^esse of God is stronger then men:] ^ea then all
men and Devils. Care and fear away then with Gods Elect. (...).] For the Lord,
even our Lord, knows ^ow with force to crush our ^oes, that otherwise would
cruel^y crucify us and al our comforts, and that, no less outragiously ^hen
the Jews did Jesus our Lord; ^r then the Jesuits and Papists ^f the Romish
List would have ^one our dear and dread So^eraigne, etc. as you shall ^eare
more at large anon in the ^ast place, and passage of our Sermon.

It follows in the Text [The Lord has known to deliver the godly.] The
state of the case in hand (you see) concerns them that are godly; all them:
none else. Impiety has no part in Gods protection here promised: the ungodly
person is sequestered from this salvation. The word here used is (...), which
comes of (...), colere, which does signify both to have one in high
estimation and honor, and also to affect and love in special manner and
measure. Of this root and primitive (...)* comes (...), and the nownes
(...), in English one truly religious, another irreligious, a third
superstitious. And to these three sorts you may reduce all that live in the
visible Church: but the Accent is set upon the head of the godly. For the Lord
has chosen to himself the Man that is godly, Psalm. 4.

But you will ask me, Who be they whom the Apostle calls godly? I answer;
and mark it well: The godly are they that rightly know the true God, and do
duly worship him in Jesus Christ. Or take it thus, Whosoever truly knows, or
endeavors to know, love, fear and obey the true God, in the faith of Christ,
is indeed godly in the account of Heaven, whose part is in this, and in all
the promises of grace and salvation recorded in holy writ. And seeing this
point is of so great importance, give me ^eaue yet further to lay it open unto
you, that you may the better discern of the thing, and of your estate thereby.

To know God aright (which is the ground of true godlynes) is to know and
acknowledge him as he has revealed himself unto us in his holy word, and in
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, in this knowledge to cleave unto God in the faith and love of his
holy Majesty, as to our only Lord God in Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, in the life of this knowledge, faith, and love to serve, obey, and
honor the Lord by doing his will, according to the measure of Grace that we
have received, humbly, sincerely, cheerfully, prudently and constantly.

2. Pet. 1.4. (...).
Look upon the man, or woman, that is indeed partaker of the godly Nature (not
Essence) more plainly to say, that is renewed by the spirit of grace, and
stands in the state of grace, justified and sanctified in Jesus Christ (for
this is the party that the Apostle intends to be pious) look (I say) upon
his, or her disposition, affections, and meditations, as they do manifest
themselves, (for they can not lie long hid where indeed they are:) mark also
their speeches, prayers, actions, sufferings, trials, comforts, and triumphs in
life, and in death, and you shall find them all more, or less seasoned with
faith, piety and the fear of God, with zeal of his glory, humility,
repentance, patience, hope, and joy in the holy Ghost. Even thus shall you find
the godly qualified, and sanctified in heart and life, resolutely set to walk
with God; as others are dissolutely disposed to walk like themselves, with the
world, 1. John 2.16.
In the lust of the eye, in the lusts of the flesh, or in the pride of life:
That is, in the love and desires of worldly Profit, Pleasure, or Preferment,
some be sotted with this, some with that carnal delight: not any sinner
(lightly) with all; but all with some one of these; which is enough without
radical Repentance, to sequester them for ever from the hope, and help of
this and all other blessings promised to the godly.

Thus then you see (in part) how precious, and profitable a thing true piety
is: by which all things must be squared, our doctrine and doings; our, and your
speeches, pleasures, and very apparel must be such as becomes true
godliness, 1. Tim. 2.10. there called (...): which the Apostle says, is
profitable for all things, times, estates, and purposes; as that which has the
promises of this life, and of that which is to 1. Tim. 4.8. (...).
come.

Come we now then to speak comfortably to all that are truly religious and
godly, though it be but in the beginnings and infancy of the true fear of
God: Behold how the holy Ghost in the writings of the Sanctuary, (which are
our Evidence for our heavenly inheritance,) does grace you with Titles of
holiness, and of honor. You are styled The children of light, of wisdom, of
obedience, and of the Kingdom; a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar
People, anointed, adopted, and sealed to the day of Redemption; the servants,
friends, and children of the everliving God; heirs, and fellow heirs with
Christ, heirs of Grace, of life, of glory, of heaven: holy, just, merciful,
good, and godly, etc.

Does Heaven thus heap Honor upon you? and do you yet droope, and hang down
the head under the contempt of the World? you are most happy and honorable in
the sight of God, and his Angels; and yet you cannot see into it, through the
filthy fogs of the worlds vaporous words. Let me tell you in love, that you are
much to^ blame thus to wrong your selves But I will leave you a while to your
second and wiser cogitations, and will turn me (as you^ Advocate) to plead
your caus^ a little with the men of thi^ world, and plainly tell them, that if
they will not in time learn of God in his word how to think and speak
lovingly, and respectively of his Sons and Daughters, but will needs go on
still to ouer-cast their brightness with clouds of scorn, and to blemish their
beauty with terms of reproach: there is a day coming (and it makes haste
upon them) When the Lord will speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure, Psalm. 2.

I read in the book of Ester, cap. 8. that when the Medes and Persians did
see how the Lord God did deliver and bless his people Israel, many thereupon
became Jews, turned Jews, as the phrase is now, turned Protestant. O happy
turn and change! So could I wish that Papists, Atheists, and all other evil
disposed persons would, upon the knowledge of the great honor and happiness of
the Saints and true Servants of God, be moved thereby to turn Saints; that is,
to become godly and holy men, and women; without which, they cannot be saved.
For all salvation is intayled by the covenant of grace in Christ, to the
Saints, and to their holy Seed, Who have obtained like precious faith with us,
(...).
through the righteousness of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as it is, 2.
Pet. 1.1.

To proceed now (in the last place) to the kind of deliverance, which, in this
heavenly Oracle is promised to all the godly: it is (says the Text) from
temptation. The word in the Greek is (...) of (...) as the hebrew word is
Massa, of Nasah. Now we find that in holy Scripture Temptations are of two
sorts, Two sorts of Temptations, viz. Of Sin, Sorrow.

and so the word (...), Temptation] has a twofold construction. For first,
there be temptations of sin and sinners; from which we pray (in the Lords
prayer) and God has promised to deliver his Elect in Christ; namely, from the
curse, and power of them, in that degree, and measure, which God knows meet
for his glory. Gradibus quibus, etc.
Secondly, there be Temptations of sorrow, trouble, affliction, danger, and
distress, which God sends unto his Saints, either as trials, or
chastisements, or both. In this latter sense the word Temptation is to be taken
in this place. For so shall the Conclusion parallel the Premises, that is,
This general promise of deliverance out of Temptation, shall be suitable to the
foregoing Examples and Instances of Gods good providence, in saving Noah, and
Lot, in the times of their temptation, that is, of their danger and distress,
wherein the world of the wicked perished, as is before in this chapter related
by the Apostle.

And in this sense also you may find the word Temptation often used in the
holy Scripture. As in the Epistle of S. James, Iam. 1.2.
Count it (...) joy, my Brethren (says the Apostle) when ye fall into
manifold Temptations; not of sin, but o^ troubles, afflictions and dangers
for well-doing, etc.

Likewise in this sense does Christ himself use the word Temptation, when he
promised to the Minister of the Church o^ Philadelphia, Revel. 3.1^.
deliverance from the hour of Temptation, that should come upon the world]
that is, says D. Fulke [e maximis periculis, and acerbiss. calamitatibus,]
From the greatest perils, and most bitter calamities, that shall come, etc. Now
then, the thing is evident, that the LORD our GOD does here promise to all the
godly that depend upon him in the faith of this truth, that he will sustain,
save, help, and deliver them out of their temptations, troubles, and dangers
of the greatest distress; and that according to his infinite wisdom, power,
and goodness.

But it may be here objected, that this promise seems not to have been
performed accordingly, unto the godly, at all times.

I answer: Assuredly it has been, is, and ever shall be performed, in the
full extent, and true sense thereof: I mean, that God will always either
prevent, and repel the evils, and dangers which are imminent, and hang over
the heads of the faithful; or else will preserve them under the same; and
finally, either in life temporally, or by death eternally will deliver them out
of al; as here is promised. And hereof we have a cloud, yea a little world of
witnesses, besides Noah and Lot. Let Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, etc. stand
forth with their stories, and tell us how the Lord did deliver them. Yea, let
Daniel in the Lions Den; Jeremy in the Dungeon, the three Children of God in
the fiery furnace, and Jonas in the belly of the Whale deliver us in the
Records of their preservation, for our further confirmation. Holy David, and
the ^esidue of thy Royal race, keep ^ot silence in this case.

And to come nearer home, Queen Elizabeth.
Thou blessed Lady of famous memory, be not wanting to ho^or this word of
Truth, with mine own singular experience: ^ Anno 88. 92. 94. 97. and in Anno
1601. The particulars I ^orbeare to mention further, since ^hey are upon record,
and noto^ously known in every place of his Christian Continent.

In the last course (though not ^ith the least and worst evidence ^f divine
deliverance) Let our ^ost dear and dread Soueraign lord King James, with his
royal ^pouse, our noble Prince, Peers and whole State come in, and act their
parts, and show openly what great deliverances the Lord of heaven and earth
has wrought out for them, and for us al inclusiuely; whereof we may, we must
rejoice: and whereof I, in my place, and course, according to the trust that is
reposed in me, and according to the task that is imposed upon me, do humbly
crave liberty of time to make now some particular, and perspicuous Relation of
that late (not least) wonderful Deliverance of our gracious King, Queen,
Prince, State, Church, and Commonwealth, from that most fearful and hellish
Conspiracy, now commonly called the Powder Treason: which is the special
cause of our meeting here together in the presence of God in this house of
Prayer, this fifth of November; to the end indeed, that, according to our
bounden duty, we might jointly celebrate in this sacred Solemnity, the
blessed Memory of Gods unspeakable Mercy, gloriously showed herein upon us
all, and upon our Posterities, present, and to come.

And because in every set speech some order and method would be observed, for
the better help ^oth of apprehension, and memory, I purpose to reduce the
^eclaration of this strange stra^ageme, unto certain general ^eads, and
circumstances of the ^reatest importance. As namely, ^o speak,

First, of the Conspirators, and of their quality.

Secondly, of the matter it self, of their Conspiracy.

Thirdly, of their pretended color, or ground of the same.

Fourthly, of the means which they used to perform it.

And lastly, of the happy discovery, and destruction both of the Project and
Persons engaged in this horrible Treason.

By this declaration we may be helped more clearly to see, and sensibly to
feel the weight and worth of this great Work of deliverance, wherewith the
Lord that knows how to deliver his out of temptation, danger, and distress,
has blessed our King, and Country, in his most faithful mercy. The names of
the Lay-Conspirators were these which follow: 1. Winter, 2. Grant, and 3.
Fawkes, 4. Percie, 5. Catesby, and 6. Wright, 7. Digby, 8. Rockwood, and 9.
Bates, 10. Winter Iun. 11. Keys, and 12. Tresham.
Men drunken with the dregs of the Romish grape, and deeply dyed in the
bloud-red-wine of the Whores Cup, inspired with her cursed spirit, and grounded
upon her pernicious Principles. But to leave these awhile; let us in the second
course give in the names of the Clergie-Conspirators. And a wonder it were (I
trow) in any mischievous complot of either destruction, or public disturbance
of any Christian State, therein to find Popish Priests, and Jesuits to be
mere spectators, and (...) maine Actors. I find of this sort no less then
three engaged in this one truculent intended Tr^gedie, viz. Tesmond, Gerrard,
and Perfidiosiss. iste Iesuita, homo totus exproditione compositus.
Garnet, that most perfidious Jesuit, a man wholly composed of traiterous
deadly Drugs. To whom the Church and Co^monweale of England may justly say
(giving him here his breed, and bringing up) as sometimes Clytemnestra
Agamemnons wife said to her wicked son Orestes, when he drew out his sword to
run her through: (...).

(...).


Whether bendest thou thy sword (thou Monster of mankind) against the Womb
that did bear thee, or the Paps that gave thee suck?

And let us all with due detestation declayme against him, as long since One
did against such another Caytife: Oh wretched Man, more savage then any
brute-beast! all abhor thee; for thou would have destroyed all. But let us
leave their persons to the Lord, who has sent them to their appointed place.

And come we now to their Project, even to the matter it self of their intended
Treason; which (for order sake) I will reduce unto three heads.

Whereof the first was, Primae impressionis flagitium.
most cruelly to have murdered the sacred Person of our most dear and dread
Sovereign, and of his royal Spouse, Posteritie-male, together with his
Highness Peers, and State, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, Knights,
Burgesses, and whole Body of the Parliament House; all at one bloody blow, and
merciless Massacre. Oh horrible Dessignement, far exceeding all proportions
of precedent Immanitie!

The next head, and strain of this treason was, Parce Ciuium sanguini.
utterly to have ruinated the flourishing Commonwealth of this Christian
Kingdom, by raising seditions and rebellions in every part thereof and that
under color of defending thereby their Catholic Cause, and Persons. Apage!

And lastly, (which yet with them was not the least) this cursed Project
pitched at this point, even utterly to have subverted the state of true
Christian Religion established amongst us by public authority: and in place
thereof, to have set up their Popish impieties, with the cruel tyranny, and
cursed Hierarchy of the Roman Antichrist.

So that in this horrible intended Desolation, there should have been neque
Rex, neque Lex, neque Religio, neque Resp. in tuto relicta. Neither King nor
Kingdom, Religion nor Laws left inviolable. And thus much of the several
parts of this prodigious Complot.

Now let us see what fair color the Devil could cast upon this foul Case,
and with what pretext his Clients could countenance this hellish Project.
Verily even this, Totius iniustitiae nulla capitalior pestis, quam eorum qui,
etc.
That our blessed Orthodoxe Christian King, his Queen, State, People, and all
(except Romish Catholics) are all damnable Heretics, and Apostataes; and
consequently do all stand de iure at least, if not de facto, really
excommunicate, and accursed: and therefore that it is not only lawful,
Nequitiae classes candida vela ferunt.
but laudable, yea meritorious, to destroy us all as one Man. Read for this
purpose Symanca de Excommunic. and Creswels Philopater.

Secondly, of their fiery Champions.

From their Motives, let us proceed to speak of their means, by which they
would have effected this most barbarous Murder: namely, by devouring
Gunpowder; wherewith they intended to have blown up the Parliament House at
the then next full and royal Session there. To which purpose they had hired a
Vault, or Celler, which was under the Parliament House, and in the same had
bestowed (as it is recorded) six Hogsheads, and twenty Barrels full of
Gunpowder, with bars of iron, pieces of timber, and great massy stones laid
thereupon; all which they covered with billets and hostrie faggots not a few.
All this in a readiness against the fifth of November, 1605. now full eleven
years since, this very day of the Month, and of the Week, Tuesday, when all
should at the appointed hour have been fired by Guy Fawkes (that forlorn
boutefeux) and his accomplices: that so not only that ancient and honorable house
of Parliament might have been utterly ruinated, but also the sacred person (
oh quam horret animus hoc vel refer! Peccatum sine nomine adaequato.
how does my heart abhor to mention it!) of our most gracious King, Queen,
Prince, Peers, etc. should thereby have been blown up, and split in pieces,
legs, arms, head, heart, bowels, and bones tortured, shiuered, and carried up
as high (if it had been possible) as the Moon; to the extreme horror not
only of men and brute beasts, but also of the feathered Fowls, and very
Meteors; and certe quid hic amplius dicam, nescio. Rebus sic stantibus:

Let us lift up our amazed minds to the consideration of the highest mercy in
this proiected misery, and see how Heaven and heavenly Providence prevailed
and triumphed gloriously over Hell and Hellish Proiects. For even now
ouernight, when this horrible murder should have been acted the next morning,
though the very Quintessence of the wit of men and Devils, sublimed to the
highest Sphere, could not possibly work more precisely by religious bond of
Oath and Sacrament, nor more punctually in reason and policy, for the
preventing of discovery in this case; yet behold, behold, and wonder how no
less easily, then graciously, the Lord our God (against whom no wisdom, nor
counsel can prevail, and that knows every work of the Mind) did defeat
and scatter their counsels, and wicked imaginations, and brought their
enterprises to naught; even eluding them in the very Theoricke of trust, by one
of their own accomplices, which caused all the rest to fail in the point of
practice.

Lend me your ears a little with singular attention, and you shall hear me
truly relate unto you, how divine Providence in due time (even when there was
but a step between us and death,) stepped forth, and with a gracious hand
turned the wheel, yea the streams of destruction another way, the right way,
by bringing to light a few hours before the intended Massacre, a dark and
doubtful Letter, written by one of the Conspirators, and sent (by way of
Caution) to the Lord MOVNTEAGLE, ouernight, to forewarne him not to come at the
Parliament House on the morrow: for (said that Letter) A most terrible Blow
will then and there be given to all that shall be assembled, etc. This letter
being with good expedition sent to some of his Majesty's Honorable Privy
Council, was by them eftsoons conveyed to his Highness hand, who perusing
and pondering the same, did (no doubt by a divine instinct) presently discover
the Plot; pointed at the very place, and gave command that privy search should
there be made: which being performed accordingly, the whole Stratageme was
discovered, and the parties therein engaged were brought to light, to Trial,
to Judgment, and Death. Psalm. 31. and 32.
Oh then love ye the Lord, all his Saints: for the Lord preserves them that
are faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud-doer. Great plagues remain
for the ungodly; but whosoever trusts in the Lord, mercy shall embrace them
on every side. Wherefore also let our souls rejoice in this his great
Salvation, and sing praise unto his holy Name, because he has dealt so
lovingly with us. Blessed be the Lord our God for ever, and ever. So be it,
Amen.

And now to conclude this Discourse to you (right Reverend, and Religious
Auditors) in this Grand Cause of our conjoined comfort, give me leave, before
I leave this sacred Cell, to parallel, and suit some remarkable Occurrences
coincident to this subject, some with better, some with like correspondence
both of speech and spirit.

I find in reading the public Records of this Case, that Garnet, that
Arch-Traytor, a little before the appointed day of our death (by their
Calendar) did cry out, and pray to this effect: Auferte gentem istam perfidam,
de finibus credentium:] Take away this perfidious Nation, (meaning us English
Protestants) from the borders of true Believers, (intending Romish Catholics:)
vt lauds inde Deo debitas alacriter persoluamus:] that we (Catholics) may
joyfully render due praises to God for the same.

And again he prayed, saying, Non pacem petimus, Superi, Dedit Deus hi^ quoque
funem.
date Gentibus iras: We (said he) pray not for peace, O Heavens, but for
punishment, to this English Nation.

Let us with sober and sacred zeal, answer his bitter and braine-sicke
bellowings, and cry to our GOD, the GOD of peace, and say, Nulla salus bello,
pacem te petimus omnes: We humbly crave of al hands continuance of our peace
and safety from thee, O Lord, that can easily reform, or suppress the
causers of our trouble, and disturbers of our public peace, and State.

And to give correspondence also to a second and better Occurrence; Let this
loving and religious City of Norwich cry out, and say, as that euer-faithful
and famous City of London did, in the day of this their and our deliverance:
Adhuc salua est Ciuitas nostra, adhuc salua Patria, adhuc salua Religio; Rex
nempe noster IACOBVS adhuc saluus est. Hallelu-iah, Legnolam, Legnolam: Our
City is yet in safety, our Country, Religion and King, blessed be God.

And finally, let us all with one accord ((...)) proclaim with the Psalmist in
another case, and say: This is the day that the Lord has made (a day of
deliverance, of salvation, and of rejoicing:) Let us therefore be glad and
rejoice therein with holy joy, all the days of our life: yea let us tell our
children, and childrens children what great things the Lord himself has done
for us, whereof we may, we must rejoice.

And let our Gracious King confess, Psalm. 18.
and say with holy David, (Eodem and animo and nomine.) The Lord lives, and
blessed be my strong Helper, and praised be the God of my Salvation; even the
God that sees that I be avenged. For this cause will I give thanks unto the
Lord among my People, and sing unto his Name: For great deliverances gives he
unto the King, and will still show mercy unto his Anointed, even unto JAMES
his Servant, and to his Seed for ever.

And let all the Reverend and holy Clergy of England make up the Quire, and
with the holy Tribe of Leui, Psalm. 134. bless both King, Queen, Prince,
State, Church, Commonwealth, all in one, and say; The Lord Jehovah that has
formed the Heavens, and the Earth, bless thee out of Sion.
Iebarecca Jehovah mittzijon gnoscheh schamaijm vaarets. Amen, Amen, Amen.

So be it, even so be it, Amen.



FINIS.

