A REPLY TO DR. MORTONS GENERAL DEFENSE OF THREE NOCENT CEREMONIES. viz.

The Surplice, Cross in Baptism, and kneeling at the receiving of the
sacramental elements of Bread and Wine.

Printed in year 1622.

THE PREFACE.
SIR,
HOwsoever there be many unknown motives which lead men in these days unto
conformity, yet those which are openly professed, may be referred either unto
M. Sprints way, who confesses the ceremonies to be imposed contrary unto the
rules of Gods word, and yet contendeth that they are to be used in case of
deprivation: Or else to D. Mortons way, who avoucheth the said cer^monies to be
agreeable unto the rules of Gods word, and therefore such as ought to be
observed simply. Now he that considers well of the ma^ter, shall find that
there is no ground for the conscience to rest on in either of these ways. As
for M. Sprint, (to speak nothing of his mis-alledging very many authors) he
has but three main arguments: and to all three he has given sufficient answer
himself. His first argument is taken from the doctrine and practice of the
Apostles about the Jewish ceremonies. Now all the force of this reason does
depend upon that paritie or equality which is supposed to be betwixt our
ceremonies and the Jewish, our ministers warrant and the Apostles: so that if
this paritie fails, the whole argument falls. Yet M. Sprint himself
confesses, page 250. 256. that those Jewish ceremonies were not every way so
evil as ours are: neither does or dare he say, that ministers now have such
particular warrant for conformity, as the Apostles had for applying themselves
a little while unto some of the Jewish ceremonies.

His second reason is, that a lesser duty must yield unto a greater. Now this
case by his own confession p. 30. does not hold so, as that a man should do a
thing formally, simply, and in nature evil, for any good. Now he knows, as
appears p. 45. that the ceremonies in controversy are esteemed such by most
of these that now oppose them. So that this reason can be of no force with them.

His third reason is, because refusal of conformity in case of deprivation,
tends to condemn in a manner all true Churches which have taught and
practiced otherwise. He means by condemning, accusing of error. Now M.
Sprint himself does thus condemn all or the most of the Churches which he
alleges to have practiced such ceremonies. For in confessing our ceremonies
to be inconvenient, scandalous, evil, such as the urging of them cannot be
justified, and yet affirming that almost all Churches have appointed and used
such, even out of the case of deprivation or such like necessity, does he not
plainly accuse all those Churches of error? These things considered, I thought
is needless to spend much time in examining M. Sprints book any further. But
according to your desire, I will show you mine opinion in brief concerning the
chief passages which are in Thomas Chesters, or as he was wont to be called,
Doctor Mortons Defense of three ceremonies, commonly used in our Churches,
which I do the more willingly undertake, because diverse things are therein
handled of singular use in divinity, whereof I profess my self a Student,
though in the ministry I cannot find a settled station. But before I come to
the Defense it self, first, I would feign understand the reason why three
Ceremonies are only defended, seeing there be many threes of those things
which stay many godly men from subscription and conformity, as is to be seen
even in that abridgement which this Defender does chiefly oppose? Is it because
our best Prelates have only a care to persuade if it may be, those that are in
the ministry, to that conformity which is most of all noted, not regarding in
the mean time, what becomes of so many godly learned young men, who not only
for these, but for diverse other corruptions also, are forced to turn away from
the ministry, whereunto their education, gifts and hearts did carry them,
while many lewd fellows, the chief spots and blots of our congregations, do
possess their places.

I would know also what the reason should be, that the innocence only of
these ceremonies is defended? Is this all that is required in ceremonies
forcibly obtruded upon ministers and people, even to the silencing,
excommunicating, and uttter undoing of many hundreds? Is this all, I say, that
is required, that such ceremonies be in some sense innocent, or not hurtful?
surely not scripture only, and sound reason, but common sense will look for
some good necessary use in such ceremonies, and not innocence alone.

And then what is the sense (trow you) in which these ceremonies may be called
Innocent? when Calvin (whom the Defender calls an honorable witness) would
devise a charitable title for them, he styles them tolerabiles incptiae, viz.
tolerable fooleries, or fopperies, Epist. 200. and 206. When he speaks more
out of judgment, he not only calls them frivoulous and unprofitable, but
says plainly that their proper name is hurtful, noxious, or nocent, clean
contrary to this Defendants language. Surely one of these writers, not
differing only, but flatly opposing and contradicting the other, must needs be
far wide.

Innocent indeed these ceremonies may be called in regard of their materials,
and the fashions also which they have in their natural being: for the cloth of
a Surpless and the fashion of it is innocent, and so are all the idols of
Papists and Heathens very innocent: so that this is no praise. But if we look
at the use whereunto they have been applied, and wherein they have been a long
time employed, I may truly say by the devil, not only among the Papists, but
even in our Churches, to the breeding of dissension and distraction among
brethron, to quenching of many, and many a burning shining light, to the
grieving and unsetling of so many good souls, and to the advancing of the
Kingdom of darkeness: If these things I say be considered, then it is more
then manifest, that this licking them over with a fair word will make them no
more innocent indeed then Pilats hands were when they were washed. The fashion
of a Surplice natural or artificial in another use, as if a Porter or Baker
wear such a garment is indifferent.

If it shall be said, that notwithstanding these accidental abuses, yet the
ceremonies are innocent in their own nature and use: I answer, first, they
having no necessary use otherways, and these being the ordinary effects which
have followed on them, there is no rule of Logic much less of zeal that will
allow the Defendant simply to call them innocent. 2 It is a shame for our
Prelates to talk of the ceremonies innocence, when they cannot defend their
own innocence in obtruding and urging of them. They are wont to say, the
practice and manner of urging we will not defend, but the lawfulness or
innocence of the things themselves. Indeed for a private man to stand upon
such terms is tolerable: but for the Prelates, whose hands are chief in this
trespass, to cover their own guiltiness under figleaved innocence of three
ceremonies, is too too gross. If Thomas or D. Morton in times past had pleaded
for the ceremonies innocence, it might have been well interpreted: but for
Thomas Chester, Thomas Lichfild, or any that bear^th a Cathedral name, to
write of the innocence of three ceremonies, passing by three hundred foul
nocencies which are plainly to be seen in the Prelates urging and managing of
these ceremonies, this is somewhat like as if Samson when he had sent Foxes
with firebrarnds in their tails among the corn, should then have written unto
the owners of that corn a long letter concerning the innocence of Foxes and
Firebrarnds.

Thirdly and lastly, it is sufficiently proved, and shall (by Gods grace) be
further maintained against this Defendant, that these three ceremonies are not
innocent or lawful in their ^se.

This I had to say concerning the Title. Now before I come to the book it
self, some few things are to be questioned in the Epistles, which are three,
according to the number of the ceremonies defended. In the first Epistle to the
Marquis, ^ I would willingly learn, what that Church is, which is the mother of
the Non-conformists? it must of necessity be either the faithful
Congregations which are in England, collectiuely considered: or else the
Hierarchy, consisting of Archbishops, Bishops and their Officers. If the
^ormer ^^here understood, then this Defense is begun with a Slander. For
neither is the Nonconformist an adversary impugning those Congregations, nor
do they defame their religious worship, nor infringe their wholesome liberty,
nor contemn their just authority: but of all these things are the Prelates
manifestly guilty. For they in their Lordly humors, do scorn and defame the
most religious people as Puritanes: they hinder the people from hearing of
Sermons in another parish, though they have none, or worse then none at home:
they are enemies to that preaching whereby the godly people find themselves
most edified: they inslaue both Minister and people, not only to themselves,
but even to their Chancellors, Commissaries, officials, and such like officers
of their own making, to whom not Christ only, but all the Primitive Church
says plainly, Depart from me I know you not: they deny any authority at
all to be either in the Congregations, or in their Ministers, except it be a
little of courtesy from the Ordinary. These things are so well known, that
they need no proof.

If by the Church here be meant the Hierarhie, then we profess plainly we
acknowledge no such mother. She is a Step-dams, usurping this title and
authority, without all warrant from God our Father. She is a creature of man's
making, and may more lawfully be removed when it pleases man, then ever she
was by him crected.

Secondly, I marvel with what conscience this man can spend a great part of
his Epistle in stirring up a Courtier unto the opposing of. Non-conformists? As
if this were a great point of admirable wisdom and zeal, as he calls it:
and the Courtiers such, as stood in most need of instigations to the zeal of
Formalitie, being otherwise for substance such as they should be.

Thirdly, what agreement is there in this Argument, to conjure a man by the
obligation of his Baptism, to stand for the defense of certain ceremonies?
was he baptized into the faith of the cermonies? or is he bound to maintain
every ceremony which men have brought into that Church where he was baptized?
If he were conjured by his Bishoping to such things as these, there would be
more reason in the consequence.

Fourthlie, what need is there that great men should be called to aid and
assist the Prelates against Non-conformists? have they not power enough in their
own hands? can they not at their own pleasure suspend, deprive, excommunicate,
and what almost they please? Do they not tread these poor men under their
feet? Is it because that the Prelates cannot yet sufficiently prevail against
the^ in the consciences of men, and therefore call for further help in vain? Or
is the meaning, that such men should be helped unto great Bishoprics, as are
most Zealous against Non-conformists? If this be the matter, I dare say the
Petition shall be granted, and yet the Petitioner, except he make great
progress in this eagerness, will hardly get beyond Lichfild, at least not to
Canterbury.

In the second Epistle to the Non-conformists, many things are jumbled
together, which afterward must be examined, but here cannot. For this Epistle
takes the whole book for unanswerable, and therefore should rather have been
set at the end then at the beginning: one^ie one ridiculous piece of Rhetoric
is to be touched, wherein (forsooth) the Non-conformists above all their other
faults wherewith they are usuallie charged and loaded, are now as it were
lovinglie entreated to acknowledge themselves guilty of superstition. The
reason is rendered, because there is a negative superstition, the formal cause
whereof is the forbearing and forbidding of things lawful as unholy and
profane: and the Non-conformists have such negative opinions, as kneel not,
cross not, wear not, etc.

All this is nothing else but a trick of prevention usual with crafty men,
who choose to lay that upon their adversaries which they know more properly to
belong unto themselves. But I would that this Defendant, or rather Accusant,
had given us some plain reason of his new opinion, there is no definition of
superstition, properly so called, that will father this conclusion. The
Schoolmen do with one consent place superstition in a kind of excess of
Religions worship, Thom. 2. 2. q. 92. art. 1, from whom in this point our
Divines do not dissent. Now though this excess do seem sometims to consist in
a negation, yet (...) excess or error in negation, is never called by any
author that ever writ (I dare say) superstition, when he means to speak
properly, except that very negation, abstinence or forbearing be held as a
special worship. Now in the Non-conformists there is no such thing to be found:
they do not abstain from these Ceremonies, but as they do from other
unlawful corruptions. Suppose they err, yet every erroneous denial of
things lawful is not superstition.

The Defendant therefore here being overhastie to charge his adversaries,
considered not well what weapon he choose. But if he had well remembered what is
said of superstition, not only by our Divines, but even by some of the Papists
themselves, he would have forborne to make mention of this word. For our
Divines, let honorable Calvin speak, Just. l. 1 c. 12. s. 1 Inde mihi videtur
dicta superstitio, quod modo and praescripta ratione non contenta supervacuam
rerum congeriem accumulet. Papists thus. Superstitio est (says Azorius Inst.
mor. l. 9 c. 11) cum quis Deo cultu^ tribuit inanem and vanum, scil.
commentitia and futili aliqua caeremonia eum venerando, vel cum quis Deum
honorat falsis vanis, and frivolis ceremoniis, id est, As Swarez does in a
manner interpret it, quando honor Dei in iis rebus ponitur, quibus revera non
colitur, ut in caeremoni^s superfluis, and ad salutem animae nihil
conferentibus. If this touch not the Defendant, I would desire him to peruse
what Mr. Parker has written concerning the superstition of the Cross, and
give some answer to the same, before he threaten any more such kindness as this
is upon the Nonconformists.

Another thing also is by a figure of praetermition ins^nuated in this Epistle,
not unworthie consideration, viz. that many Parliaments and Convocations have
established these rites. To this I answer, 1 the Prelates in such matters as
these, have no respect unto the authority of Parliaments. For they frame
Canons, urge and excute them without the consent of any Parliament, nay flatly
against them. For so we read in the Records of that worthy Parliament which
was ann: 1610. Among the Canons late made by the Clergy of England in their
Convocation, it was thought that some of their Can^ns did extend to charge the
bodies, lands, and goods of the subjects of the Realm, further then was
lawful and meet. We therefore made a good law to make void such Canons as do
charge the bodies, lands, and goods of the subjects, unless that the same
canons were confirmed by Parliament. 2 The Defendant cannot bring forth one
Act of Parliament now in force, that does allow of Subscriptions and
Conformity to be urged as now it is by the Prelates. This appears by the
judgment of the foresaid Parliament in those words of their petition, where
they complain, That diverse painful and learned Pastors that have long
traveled in the work of the Ministry, with good fruit and blessing of their
labors, who were ever ready to perform the legal Subscription, appointed
by the Statute of 13 Eliz. which only concerns the Confession of the true
Christian Faith, and doctrine of the Sacraments, yet for not conforming in some
points of Ceremonies, and refusing the Subscription directed by the late
Canons, have been removed from their Ecclesiastical livings, being their
freehold, and debarred from all means of maintenance, to the great grief of
sundry well-affected Subjects. 3 It is well known that the Prelates themselves
in their proceedings about these matters, do so far violate the Statutes of
Parliament, that they are by law subject unto a Praemunire.

Now as for Convocations, not to dispute here what manner of Synods they be, 1
It is well known that they consist now of a Faction, and that in memory of
man, they never concluded any thing for the common good of the Church more then
by others was better done to their hands: but much evil has come from among
them, and more would but that many times their commission serves not but only
to give Subsidies, and then to tell the clock. 2 They are servile to those on
whom they depend, and tirannicall over the poor that are subject unto them: 3
there are very few that have place in them which are not gross offenders
against the most ancient Canons. As for example, it was observed that in that
Convocation which established and revived these corruptions, of 300 or 400,
there were not above twice three, which were not, or had not been gross
Non-residents or Pluralists. D. Morton himself, in a Latin Sermon had before
a Convocation some 8 years since, described well the most part of them (though
he did not speak distinctlie of the number) to be unsavorie salt. For he gave
us three notes whereby corrupt Ministers in England might be discerned. 1 That
they studied chiefly and stuffed their Sermons with Friars and Jesuits: 2 that
they sought occasions to disgrace Calvin: and 3 that if any neighbor Minister
be more diligent and conscionable then they, they brand him straight with the
name of Puritan. These notes are well known to agree unto most of our
convocated Prelates. 4 The authority of this Convocation either against or
without consent of Parliament, is not to be regarded, much less against the
Scriptures.

In the Epistle to the Reader, this only I would inquire of, what is the
reason, that seeing he choose to himself for Chief Opposites, the
Lincolneshire Ministers, he does not deal with all their Arguments, nor the
twentieth part of their Allegations, but only with such as he thought fittest
for his purpose? Of this I will not say all. But this I may not omit, that
considering he knew how much has been said against the Ceremonies by them and
others, especially by M. Parker, which he never attempted to answer, neither
he, nor others for him, had any cause to triumph in this book, as in a
complete Defense.

A Reply to Doctor MORTONS GENERAL DEFENSE OF THREE Nocent Ceremonies.
CAP. I.
SECT. II.
WHATSOEVER is objected in this Section for the All-sufficiencie or perfect
fullness of the Scripture, I will take for granted, because nothing is denied
by the Defendant. It is granted therefore at the first entrance, that the
Scripture condemns whatsoever is done, not only against the vvarrant and
direction of the Word, but also that which is done beside it.

SECT. III.
BUT that which before the Defendant durst not deny, now he comes to oppose
in the proofs of it: Which is a strange course, in him especially that
professes a distinct logical proceeding.

In the propounding of our confirmation, I note two things once here in the
beginning for all following occasions to be marked, 1 this Defendant does us
wrong in distributing our confirmations into those which are taken from
Scriptures, and those that are from the Fathers, and those that are from
Protestant Divines: as if these were in our estimation of the same kind.
Whereas we profess that we ascribe no force unto any testimony of man, as if
it were a proof, but only bring such allegations in as illustrations in
regard of our adversaries perverse prejudice. 2 He vvrongeth us likewise in
that difference which he insinuates betwixt the Fathers and our Divines,
calling their testimonies Judgments, and the other only Confessions: we
acknowledge no such imparitie. If this were nothing but idle rhetoric in the
Defendant, it may be passed by.

In the answer brought to Heb. 3 2, we have this distinction given us: some
points concerning religion are doctrinall, and some merely ceremonial. The
former are sufficiently revealed in Scripture: but the latter are left to the
liberty of the Church. But 1 why is that denied here by a distinction, which
passed without denial or distinction in the former section? 2 what kind of
distinction is this, which does not distinguish of any term which is in the
objection? 3 the Defendant should have done well to have explained and
confirmed his distinction. For doctrinall opposed to ceremonial in the formal
signification of these words, I never heard of before that I remember: and
sure I am no sound reason will allow. Ceremonial is opposed to Moral, and
sometime to substantial; but to doctrinall it cannot properly, because there
is ceremonial doctrine as well as moral or substantial. 4 To which of
these points will the Def refer the Hierarchy of Bishops? or are they no
points of Religion? For the negative part of this answer, that ceremonial
points of Religion are not revealed in the Scripture, but left to the liberty
of the Church: it is too too nakedly set down for to bear any color of truth
with it. For 1 was this true before the coming of Christ? then all the
ceremonial law is Apocriphall. 2 is this true universally (as it is here set
down) in the new Testament? then water in baptism, and bread and wine in the
Lords Supper, are no ceremonial points of Religion. 3 the caution that is
given Deuteronomy. 4. 2 and such like, did they not conteyne in them ceremonial
points of Religion? then it was lawful for the Jews, to add, detract, and
alter the ceremonies according to their pleasure; and does not that law bind
us as well as the Jews? then we do the Papists wrong, in putting them to so
much trouble as we do in finding out shifts to avoid the dint which such
places give them.

But to leave this misshapen distinction: An answer is given at length to the
place alleged out of Heb. 3. 2 concerning the comparison betwixt Christ and
Moses: sect. 4 5.

SECT. IIII.
IN this Section comparison is made betwixt Christ and Moses in real
faithfulness, as he calls it. But this suffices not to loose the knot. For
Moses was faithful in all the house of God, and Christ was not inferior,
but in all parts of his office Prophetical concerning all points of Religion,
was no doubt as faithful as Moses.

SECT. V.
HEre the Defendant can find nothing to bring out of Scripure for Christ's
faithfulness in rituall ordinances, but as Moses appointed ceremonies, so
Christ removed them. Is not this a proper explication of Scripture, to
interpret a similitude by a dissimilitude? The Scripture makes Christ like
unto Moses: this Defendant expounds the likeness to be in this, that Christ
pulled down that which Moses had set up.

Out of M. Calvin, Instit. lib. 4. c. 10. S. 30. he takes upon him to decide
this question. But he should have dealt more plainly, and according to the
scope of his author, if he had cited Bellarmine de pont. l. 4. c. 17. where the
same words are according to his meaning. For in that place of Calvin there is
nothing at all which without gross aequivocation will serve the Defendants
purpose: For Calvin's meaning was nothing less then to teach that Christ had
given liberty unto men for to prescribe at their discretion mystical signs
in the Church: but only to dispose of such circumstances as in their kind are
necessary, but in particular determination do vary. He instanceth in the
next section in the circumstance of time, what hour the congregation should
meet: in the place, how large, or in what fashion the Church should be built:
in mere order, what Psalms should be sung at one time, and what another time.
These and such like circumstances of order and comeliness, equally necessary
in civil and religious actions are understood by Calvin: not significant
ceremonies, proper unto religious worship, such as ours are now in
controversy. This allegation therefore borrows all the show it has from the
ambiguous meaning of the word ceremonies.

The same deceit is in the known case which the Defendant adjoyneth to Calvin's
words. For if by Rites he means such circumstances of order and decency, as
were before mentioned, then I grant all he says: but if by Rites he means
ceremonies properly of religious nature, use, and signification, such as the
cross in baptism, and surplice are known to be, then there is no reason in
his speech. For 1. there is no necessity that in any nation the Churches
should have any religious ceremony of spiritual signification, beside those
which Christ has appointed to all: and if the Defendant can show any such
necessity, then I would desire him also to show by what rules, and for what
cause these religious ceremonies imposed upon us in England, are fitter for us,
or tend more to our edification, then other ceremonies would, or then they
would in any other nation under heaven. Except both these positions be proved,
the words of this section are all but wind: and proved I am sure they never
were nor will be.

SECT. VI. VII.
THe second place of Scripture handled by the defendant, is 2. Sam. 7. 7. Where
I cannot but marvel why so resolute a disputer would pass by in silence, Deu.
4. 2. and 12. 32. Prove. 30. 6. Lev. 10. 12. all which places are alleged by
the Lincolnshire ministers (against whom he professes principally to write)
and choose this place which they bring in after the former. Was there not a
cause? But to take him as we find him, he professes plainly, that it was
lawful for David without special vvarrant to build a house unto God: and in
this he is so peremptory, that he condemns the contrary opinion of notable
precipitancie, and presumes to make this example a ground of confutation
against his adversaries, disputing as he pedantically speaks first by
extortion, and then by retortion out of this place. But if his extortion be
mere torting and torturing of the text, we need not fear his retortion.

Now that the purpose of David was partly condemned, appears plainly, 1.
because it was prohibited, as here the Defendant in his answer expressly
grants. 2. Because as honorable M. Calvi^ well observes on Act. 7. 46. It
was not lawful for man to choose a place for Gods Name and Ark, but it was to
be placed in that place which God himself should show, as Moses does often
admonish. Neither durst David himself bring the Ark into the threshing floor
of Arauna, until the Lord by an Angel from heaven had witnessed unto him that
that was the place chosen by himself, 2. Sam. 24. 11. 3. Because it cannot be
absolutely excused from some mixture of rashness with zeal, that he should
resolve absolutely to build an house unto God, before he knew either what
manner of house God would have built, or when, or by whom: seeing without the
especial direction and assistance of Gods spirit, nothing of this kind could
be well done. How could David have built a house, except the Lord had filled
with the spirit of wisdom Bezaliel and Aboliab, or some such?

The Arguments brought by the Defendant for the contrary opinion are nothing
worth. 1. Nathan (says he) had allowed the purpose of David, v. 3. But
judicious Iunius answers (in his notes upon that place) that so Samuel out of
humane infirmity, said that Eliab was the man whom God would have king, 1.
Sam. 16. 7. 2. God calls Da^id his servant, which he never does in reproof.
Which is not true, though the reproof be for a thing simply evil: as is
plainly to be seen Isa. 1. 3, ^er. 2. 13. and in many such places, where my
people is as much as my servant. But the very word Servant also is twice thus
used in one verse, Isa. 42. 19. much less when the affection is good in the
general, and blemished only by some circumstance. For then why may not a good
title be given as an allowance of that which is good, and yet the evil be at
the same time reproved? so many learned divines do interpret that of the
Midwiues, Exodus 1. 19. 20. 21. Moses was reproved and brought to his grave for
a sin, and yet when his death is recorded, it is said that Moses the servant
of the Lord died, Deuteronomy. vlt. The Churches are sharply reproved Rev. 2. and 3.
and yet are styled by the name of Churches, and golden Candlestickes: and their
ministers who are chiefly reproved are called Stars. 3. there is another
reason rendered by Solomon of this restraint. 1. Reg. 5. 3. 4. But the Defendant
should mark that one reason does not exclude another. In this place of Samuel
two reasons are rendered, as Tremelius and Iunius note, the second of which is
taken (as he says) from the example of David's ancestors, who never undertook
any such thing, because they knew the calling of God was to be exspected. 4.
God himself commended this purpose of David. 1. King. 8. 17. As if the same
affection may not in diverse respects be both commended and condemned. But this
evasion of Mr. Hy. 1 pass over, says the Defender, as childish and absurd.
And why so I pray? 1. Because God himself did interpret this affection for a
deed. 2. He did note this deed as special, saying in both respects, thou
did well, that it was in thy heart. In which words if there be any
consequence, or good sense, then not only Mr. Hy. his evasion, but logic it
self is childish and absurd.

SECT. VIII. IX. X. XI.
IN these passages two places of Scripture are objected, under the name of Mr.
Hy: but I verily think Mr. Hy has some vvrong done him in the matter.
Howsoever, I will not undertake to maintain that these places are fitly
alleged and urged: though by proportion the force of the argument used in
those places ( who required these things at your hands) is strong against our
ceremonies. We will not imitate D. Carry now Bishop of Exeter, that proved the
Surplice by the armor of light, Romans 13. 12. nor them that prove kneeling at
the communion, and at the word Jesus, out of the bowing of the knee of all
creatures, Phil. 2. 10. nor those that fetch the cross out of the letter Tau.
Eze. 9. 4. Neither need the Defender please himself in this, that by some
places of Scripture the ceremonies are not condemned: it is enough if they were
condemned but by one only testimony of Scripture, or by one sound argument
drawn out of Scripture, though no more could be brought. But what kind of
dealing is this, for him that professes a confutation principally of the
Lincoln shire Ministers, to pass by diverse texts of Scripture alleged by
them, and to bring forth other of an uncertain author, never publicly
propounded in any of our writings?

SECT. XII.
THe last place of Scripture handled in this Argument, is Yer. 7. 31. the force
of which, as it pertains to the purpose in hand, is in the last words, which
I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. The reason lies thus (to
take honorable Calvin's interpretation upon the place) seeing God under this
title only condemns that which the Jews did, because he had not commanded
it them: therefore no other reason need be sought for the confutation of
superstition, then that they are not by commandment from God. Now the
Defendant answers, that this was a thing forbidden, and in that sense was
said not to be commanded. What is this to the purpose? therein lies the
strength of our argument: that not to command in things that pertain to
worship, is all one with forbidding. But you collect (says he) that this was
not against, but only besides the word. It is not our collection but his own
vain conceit. Our argument is drawn from the form of speech here used. See
Mr. Cartwright in his Reply p. 48. fully clearing this point. When I read this
objection first (says he) I wondered that in disting^ishing besides the word
and against it, you simbolized so well with Bell^rmine, in his distinction of
mortal and venial sin. He was as it seems, in a wondering humor. But 1.
why does he not wonder not only at our late Divines, but at Chrysostom also,
as symbolizing with Bellarmine, when he in Gal. 1. 8. does so distinguish
betwixt teaching contrary to the Gospel, and beside the Gospel? Why does he
not wondringly also accuse Iunius for symbolizing with Bellarmine, while he
refuteth Bellarmine by this distinction, contr. 3. l. 4. c. 17. an. 10? it were
easy, if needful, to produce other honorable partners in this fault: but we
need no other then perswaders to subscription, who have drawn diverse into
this net, by telling them, that though the things they stand upon be beside the
word, yet they are not contrary thereunto, and that only is affirmed by
subscribers. 2. We are not the authors of this distinction, but they which
thereby excuse humane inventions in Gods worship. We are constrained to follow
and ferret them in their own holes. See Mr Cartwr. Repl. p 36. 3 yet if need
were, there might be showed though not a real, yet a rational distinction
betwixt these two. 4. The Defendants answer does expressly herein symbolize with
Bellarnine de Pout. l 4. c. 19.

For the other allegations of Scripture quoted in the Abridgement for
confirmation of the same truth with the former, the Defendant refers us to
Chap. 2. Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. where only one of them is touched.

SECT. XIII.
TO many testimonies alleged out of the Fathers, answer is given, 1. That they
speak not of things only beside the Scripture, but of things contrary: which
answer is again repeated under the form of a distinction betwixt Scriptura
negans, and negata. 2. They speak not of ceremonies, but of doctrines.

To which the reply is easy: 1. our meaning is mistaken, I fear, wilfully,
when we are made authors of an opposite distinction betwixt beside and
against in this case. It suffices us that beside in points of religion, be
all one with against. 2 Though those general sayings be applied to doctrines
in most of the places alleged, yet that hinders not, but* the truth of them
may be taken so generally, as to include also religious ceremonies. A
particular or proper conclusion may be drawn from a general proposition, and
yet the proposition remain general still in the largest extent that it is
capable of.

SECT. XIIII.
TO the testimony of Tertullian de Cor. c. 2. That is prohibited which is not
permitted, two things are likewise answered, 1. that it makes not against our
ceremonies, for they are permitted: which is nothing else but a mere shift.
For Tertullians meaning must needs be of other permission then the Defendant
can challenge to our ceremonies, though he beg the question: otherwise there
should be no sense in his words. 2. he says, We may blush to speak of
Tertullian in this case: because he professes traditions in the same book.
To which I answer: that then all our writers may blush who allege many things
out of the fathers which they in other places gainesay. 2. We blush not to
make use of truth where we find it, though error follow it at the heels;
rather let our Idolizers of the Fathers blush, when they see their shame. Yet
of this answer we shall have occasion to make use hereafter.

SECT. XV.
IN this Section answer is made to some allegations brought out of Protestant
Writers (not unto all which the Abridgement cites for the perfection of the
Scriptures) where 1. the Defendant answers for himself, that his meaning was
not of matters merely ceremonial. And so, say I, the meaning of our argument
was not of such mere ceremonies as the Defendant here describes in the end
of this Section, if he mean by mere ceremonies mere order and decency: but
our ceremonies are of another nature, because they have doctrine or teaching in
them, and therefore are doctrinall, as he pleases to speak, or mixed, 2.
confessing that in one place he speaks of ceremonies, he limiteth his speech
to such ceremonies as are made essential parts of a sacrament, as Milk in
stead of Wine: sopping in of bread into the cup, and wringing in of the grape;
these ceremonies he accounts doctrinall. But here I would feign hear a
good reason, why sopping of the bread into the cup is more doctrinall, or more
against the word, then the cross in baptism. Bread and Wine were ordained by
Christ to a holy use in the Church: so is not the cross: sopping has some
agreement with reason: crossing has none; sopping was used by Christ himself
the same night, and at the same table where the sacrament was appointed:
crossing was never used by Christ or his Apostles. In sopping there is no new
material sign appointed, but a new fashion only of using the old: in
crossing a new sign is obtruded. So that sopping seems to be better then
crossing. If opinion of necessary use does put a difference: our men can easily
conclude in the Convocation house, that it is not the opinion of the Church of
England, and then all will be well. If sopping seem to be a part of the
sacrament: crossing when it is done in the very act of sprinkling, (as many
times it is) makes as much show of bearing a part in baptism. But what if out
of the Lords Supper, a little before, or a little after, while the prayers are
making which belong to the Supper, there should be appointed such a sopping to
be used of all that communicate for mystical signification, I would know of
the Defendant whether this were allowable or no by his doctrinall distinction?
If not, why should he show more favor to the cross?

In excusing of B. Jewel, and D. Whitakers, nothing is said by the Defendant,
which has not formerly been confuted.

Now it might be here expected, that the Defendant should have said something
concerning those general rules which God has set down in his word for the
direction of the Church in rites and orders Ecclesiastical, mentioned by the
Lincolne-shire Ministers in this argument, p. 44. But neither here, nor in any
other place of this book, does the Defendant so much as endeavor to show that
our ceremonies are needful and profitable for the edification of the people,
by the more comely and orderly performance of that service which he has
expressly prescribed in his word. This is a main matter urged in the
Abridgement, without which the ceremonies cannot be innocent in their use: and
all that the Defendant has hitherto endeavored to answer is in the Abridgement
brought in to other end then to prove that no ceremonies are to be brought into
the Church without those conditions: and yet for all this, our ceremonies in
this chief point are left destitute of all defense. If therefore all were
granted which the Defendants argumonts or answers in this book maintain, yet
the ceremonies will be found nocent, and to be rejected, if it be but for their
unprofitablenesse, according to that of Basil, (...).

SECT. XVI.
THE Defendant here undertaketh to prove, that God in the scriptures has
granted a general license or authority to all Churches, to ordain any
ceremonies that may be fit for the better serving of God. But what if this were
granted? what is it to the purpose? what makes it for our ceremonies in
controversy, except he can show that they are fit for the better serving of
God? Now this he no where undertaketh to prove, nor dare, I think, profess so
much in writing, without many unwarrantable limitations.

The only scripture he brings is, 1. Cor. 14. 26. 40. concerning order and
decency, a place much profaned by the patrons of our ceremonies, as shall be
showed. This place is used (says he) by Fathers and all Divines, for one and
the same conclusion. It is much used, I grant, and as much abused. But 1. it is
not used by all Divines, to prove the institution of such ceremonies as ours
lawful. For they are much mistaken which think our ceremonies to be mere
matters of order: and as for decency, they have been often proved to be far
from it: which of it self to every indifferent eye is more then apparent. 2.
it is not used to this purpose by any that have authority sufficient to
persuade us that it will bear such a conclusion, except they will show us by
what Logic they form their consequence, which the Defendant is not able to do
for them. 3. This scripture being rightly understood, does not only not
justify such ceremonies as ours, but plainly condemns them. For the
manifesting of which assertion, because it may seem strange to those ears that
are accustomed to other sounds, I will here distinctly set down an argument
drawn out of these words, against such ceremonies as ours are.

All that is left unto the Churches liberty in things pertaining unto Gods
worship, is to order them in comely manner. This is manifestly collected out of
the place in question: so the Defendant seems to grant, so P. Martyr
understands it, as is to be seen in his commentary upon 1 Samuel 14. which
judgment of his is cited and approved by D. Whitaker de Pont p. 841. and 844.
confirmed also by Iunius against Bell. cont. 3. l. 4. c. 16. n. 86. 87. etc.
17. n. 9. 10. 12. 13. where he shows that Christ is the only lawgiver that
appoints things in his Church: and that he has appointed all that are
requisite: and that the Church makes no laws (properly so called) to appoint
any new things to be used, but only canons, orders, directions, ordering in
seemly manner those things which Christ has appointed: and that if she adds
any thing of her own, she does decline. The reason is, because unto her is
committed no authority of appointing new things, but a ministry to observe
and do such things which Christ has appointed. vide etiam Iun. de transl.
imper. l. 1. c. 2. n. 26. 27. 31. This is also confirmed by sound reason, both
in respect of the wisdom required in all lawmakers, and perfectly found in
Christ, and also in regard of the nature of such institutions. For the former
reason teaches, (as Aristotle shows Rhet. 1. 3.) that all which possibly
may, should be appointed in the law by the giver of it, and nothing left unto
the ministerial judges, but that which must needs be left, as matters of fact,
etc. Now in the worship of God, all but particular circumstances of order, may
easily be appointed (as in very deed they were) by our lawgiver Christ. As
for the nature of such institutions, that does also require so much: for
whatsoever is above civilitie therein, if it be not a circumstance of order,
it is worship, and therefore invented by man, unlawful will worship. For
whatsoever is used or acted by him that worshippeth God, in that act, it must
needs be either grounded on civil humane considerations, and therefore
civilitie: or an act and means of worship, and therefore worship: or the
ordering and manner of disposing those acts and means, and therefore lawful,
if lawfully and fitly applied: or else, at the least, idle and vain, and
therefore to be avoided, according to that of Basil, (...): A fifth cannot be
given. By all this it may appear, that the authority of the Church is not to
appoint what she will, no not of things in their own nature indifferent, and
say they be in order, or for order: but only to order those things which God
has appointed.

Thus far the proposition, or first part of my syllogism: the assumption
follows.

But to appoint and use the ceremonies as we do, is not to order in comely
manner any thing pertaining to Gods worship. The reason is, because order
requires not the institution or usage of any new thing, but only the right
placing and disposing of things which are formerly instituted. This appears
1. by the notation which is given of the word it self, which both in greek and
latin is taken from the ranking of soldiers in certain bounds and limits of
time and place. Diceba^t enim militibus tribuni, hactenus tibi licet, hic
consistes, eo progrediere, huc revertere, (...), inde ordo Scalig. and 2 by the
definitions which are given thereof, by Philosophers and Divines. Tull. off.
lib. 1 eadem vis videtur ordinis and collocationis. Ordinem definiunt
compositionem rerum aptis and accommodatis locis. Locum autem actionis,
opportunitatem dicunt esse temporis. Aug. de civit. lib. 15 cap. 13 order is
the disposition which fit places to things equal and unequal, id est, when
things are handsomely ranked, some to go before, and some to follow, as P.
Martyr expounds it, loc. com. cl. 4 c. 5.

3 The same also is confirmed by our Divines, who usually giving instances of
order, do infist in time, place, and such like circumstances, making a
difference betwixt mystical ceremonies and order, many times condemning the
one, and allowing the other: as the divines of France and the low Countries, in
their observations on the Harmony of Confessions Sect. 17 Beza Ep. 8. Iun. in
Bell. append. tract. de cultu imaginum c. 7 n. 12 13 14.

4 By the context of the Chapter, viz. 1 Cor. 14. it plainly appears, that
order is opposed to that confusion spoken of v. 33, and therefore imports
nothing but that peaceable proceeding whereby they that should speak, speak
one by one, and the rest attend, etc. v. 30 31. So Basil expounds it, showing
order to consist in sorting of persons, some to this, and some to that
according to their office, and in determining of time and place, (...): p. 459.
(...). and p. 530. (...).

Lastly, neither Luke 1 8, neither in any place of Scripture does the word
order import any more then has been said.

As for comeliness, that is nothing but the seemlinesse of order. For as P.
Martyr says in 1 Cor. 11: it is such a tempering of actions as vvherby they
may more fitly atteine their end. Otherwhere it may contain that natural or
civil handsomeness, which is spoken of chapter 11 13, as it does chapter 12 23, and
so includes all that which is grounded on civility, as a fair cloth and cup
for the communion, a fair and firm vessel for baptism: but not the
appointing of new mystical ceremonies, for then such ceremonies were here
commanded to all Churches, which the Def. I think will not say: and then the
Apostolic Assemblies should have worshipped God uncomelily.

Thus we have both proposition and assumption of our Argument against the
ceremonies confirmed out of this place, which the Defendant choose as the only
place that could be brought for them. Now I hope we may add the Conclusion.

Therefore to appoint and use the ceremonies as we do, is not left to the
liberty of the Church, i. e. it is unlawful.

SECT. XVII.
COncerning the Fathers we are told out of Zanchius, that they had always
some universal ceremonies, as certain feast days, not appointed by God. To
this we answer, 1 If this always be taken in the largest extent, to signify
from the beginning, we cannot believe the truth of this Assertion: neither can
the Defend. prove it. Who can think, that presently upon the Apostles
departure, their disciples should presume to be vviser then their Masters? 2
the first beginning of these feasts, was not by canonical imposition to bind
men unto new ceremonies, but a voluntary accommodation in respect of the
infirmity of some in the Church, or coming toward it. This appears by the
variety which was betwixt one Church and another in observing of them; and by
the testimony of Socrates, alleged and allowed by this Defend. himself,
Apol. p. 2 lib. 2 c. 9. 3 The mischief that came in by these observations, in
that they so soon overshadowed, obscured, and justled out of doors the
simplicity of the Gospel, and many ordinances of Christ, do sufficiently
show, that the fathers in these things had neither direction nor blessing from
God.

But that which the ancient Churches of Christ did always maintain may not be
deemed to derogate from the authority of holy Writ. If always include the
Apostolical times, I grant. If otherwise, then let the Def. take to himself
that which he unreasonably cast upon us before, of symbolizing with Bellarmine
con. l 4. c. 9. The same answer which our Divines give there, will serve here.
Whereunto may be added that which M. Parker has in his book of the Cross, p.
2 chapter 9 s. 6 and de Polit. Eccles. l. 2.

SECT. XVIII.
FOr Protestant Divines, Bellarmines confession is alleged, who says, That
Protestants grant that the Apostles did ordain certain Rites and Orders,
belonging to the Church, which are not set down in Scripture, cont. 1. lib. 4.
cap. 3. To which I answer, 1 Rites and Orders may be ordained, though such
ceremonies as ours be unlawful. And Bellarmines meaning could not be of such
Rites as our Ceremonies are, except he spoke against his conscience, for he
confesses, de cult: sanct. l. 3 cap. 7, that some of our Divines, as Brentius
by name condemn such as unlawful. 2 Bellarmine craftily brings in this
confession of our diviues, that he may make them contradict themselves, as
appears in the same place. His Confession therefore in this place is not so
indifferent, as the Def. would have it: 3 our Argument is not from the
Scriptures negatiuely against the authority of the Apostles, which was all one
with that of the Scriptures, and therefore understood in our Proposition, but
against the ordinary authority of the Church. Except therefore the Def. can
prove either that our ceremonies were the rites brought in by the Apostles, or
that our Convocation house has the same authority which the Apostles had,
this confession of Bellarmine is nothing to the purpose.

SECT. XIX.
HEre the Protestants themselves are brought in confessing as much as
Bellarmine said of them. But the first witness Chemnitius says nothing, but
that some Ecclesiastical rites, though they have no commandment or testimony
in Scripture are not to be rejected: which in the sense now often expounded, I
willingly grant. Yet the Def. should not in stead of Testimony of Scripture,
have put warrant of Scripture: For testimony neither in usual acception, nor
yet in Chemnitius his own meaning, is so large as warrant.

The place of Calvin has been answered before. Iunius is plainly of the same
mind, and so to be interpreted, so also Zanchius, Daneus and Whitaker: But
because Iunius is styled here by the Def. with his deserved title of
Judicious, it will not be amiss to show his judgment fully about such
additions as our ceremonies are. To name therefore one place for all at this
time, because there he speaks professedly his judgment, and binds it with
a solemn oath, for the sincerity and impartialnesse of his conscience in that
behalf: The place I mean is in his Ecclestasticus, lib. 3 cap. 5. toward the
end. Where first he distinguishes betwixt things necessary, and others not
necessary in the administration of the Church: and concerning even the latter
sort, he modestly, but thoroughly shows how little liberty is left unto men.
If any man (says he) either by Civil or Ecclesiastical authority will add
things not necessary nor agreeable to order, we would not pertinaciously
contend with him, but desire only that he would seriously consider of three
things. 1 By what authority or example he is led to think that the holy Church
of God, and the simplicity of the mysteries of Christ (whose voice only is
heard by his sheep, Iunius here speaks to our Defen. who page 3. calls his
ceremonies The garments of Religion.
according to the commandment of the Father, Ioh. 10 27) must be clad with
humane traditions, which Christ does reject ^ 2 To what end he judges that his
things should be added unto those that are divine? For if the end be
conformity with others, it were more equity, that other Churches should
conform to those which come nearest to the word of God, as Cyprians counsel
is, then that these should conform to the other. If the end be comeliness,
what is more comely then the simplicity of Christ? what is more simple then
that comeliness? If there be no other reason beside will, then that of
Tertullian is to be thought of, the will of God is the chief necessity, and
that the Church of God is not tied unto man's wills in things divine. The 3
thing to be thought on it, what event always has followed upon humane
Traditions, as daily experience does show.

This was the judgment of Judicious Iunius, vvherby it is manifest that he
favored not our ceremonies, nor would have pleaded for them as the Def. under
color of his name.

Because Zanchius also is brought in with his deserved Title of a profound
Divine, speaking nothing to the purpose in hand, I will set down his judgment
concerning this point, out of that Epistle to famous Qu. Elizabeth, where he
treats expressly of ceremonies, and of our ceremonies. Est autem Ecclesia
sicut in doctrina, sic etiam in ceremoniis ad Ecclesiae Apostlicae regulam
informanda. The Church must be ordered by the rule of the Apostolical Church,
as well in ceremonies as in doctrine. What can be said more contrary to the
Def. his distinction?

SECT. XX.
AT length we are come to Reason. But if this reason were sound and certain,
I see no cause why it should not have had the upper hand of humane testimonies.

1 The first reason is grounded on the Defendants fantasy merely. For it
supposes that we hold some points of Religion to be only besides the Word,
and no way against it: which not only I have confuted before as a cavil,
but M. Cartwright long since in his Reply, p. 56: the very words also of this
argument which the Def. here opposes do show that we hold such things
condemned by the Scriptures, and therefore against the general rule of them,
though only beside their particular prescription.

2 The second reason concludes nothing which we will not grant, in the sense
formerly expressed, viz. that by those some ceremonies be meant circumstances
of mere order, and by man^ invention, be understood man's particular
determination. Otherwise the assumption is palpably false. Beside the
proposition also is untrue, if (...) a thing indifferent, be taken in such a
general sense as some time it is found used in by Divines. Vide Sopingii
Apologet. respons. ad lib. anonym. p. 166.

3 The third and last reason is taken from the difference of ceremonies which
may and must be in the Churches of Christ. The answer is, that this difference
ought to be only in determination of particular circumstances of order, for
time, place, etc.

SECT. XXI.
THis sect. is of al other most ridiculous. For, first it supposes every
circumstance to be of the like nature with the ceremonies in controversy.
Secondly, it supposes all circumstances to be of institution. Thirdly, it
supposes contrary circumstances ceremoniously to be practiced, by the same men
as of institution: for otherwise the cavillation has no show. Now all these
are conceited dreams. But what if we should argue thus? You say these
ceremonies are divine: and yet dare not deny but the rejecting of them in other
Churches is divine. You retain these ceremonies as divine, and yet have
rejected other ceremonies of like nature as divine as these. What divinity is
in such courses?

SECT. XXII.
AFter all this ado about the proposition of the first argument, now we are
told of an assumption out of the Abridgment, and M. Hy. viz. that these
Ceremonies have no warrant from the word of God. For M. Hy. I cannot say much:
But I am sure the Authors of the Abridgement have great vvrong done them.
Whosoever will turn to the place quoted by the Def. in the Abridgement, shall
presently see that the words which our Def. has turned into a Proposition,
are there but part of an illustration belonging to this Proposition, All
ceremonies that swerue from the rules given in the word for the Churches
direction in matters of ceremony, are unlawful. The assumption of which is,
but the ceremonies in question swerue from those Rules. Now all the chief pith
both of proposition and assumption is by the Def. omitted: a by thing is put in
place of the proposition, a new assumption is formed: and yet, all fatherd upon
the Abridgment. But to pass by that, the assumption here set down is
defensable enough.

He tells us that in general and in permissiue appointment, these ceremonies
are from God, and divine. A permissive appointment, I never heard of before,
nor can understand how it will be excused from an implicit contradiction. But
for the explaining of himself, he brings Calvin affirming that some
constitutions of the Church founded in Scripture, may be called divine, because
they are parts of that decency which God has commanded. All which being
granted, and the like saying of Vrsin, makes nothing at all for such
ceremoniess as ours are, except the Def. can prove, that they are constitutions
of mere order and decency, agreeable also to the other rules prescribed: the
contrary whereof has been formerly declared. One rule of direction which he
calls equity, is here only touched, and comes after to be handled, to
which place I reserve it.

Thus much for the maintenance of that Argument which the Def. makes the first.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I.
THIS second Argument is taken from the kind, unto which such ceremonies as
ours are, do in their nature belong, viz. that they are parts of divine
worship, and therefore (being man's inventions) unlawful. Here the Def. comes
out with a wedge as he calls it, distinguishing betwixt proper or essential
parts of Gods worship, and improper or accidental. But first he should have
done well to have considered the nature and measure of the thing which he
would cleave, by the light of a definition. For otherwise he may spend his
wedge, his beetle, and all his labor in vain.

And so indeed he has, as may appear by his explication of this distinction.
By proper and essential parts (says he) we understand such ceremonies, which
are so necessarily required to Gods service, as that the contrary thereof must
needs displease him. By accidental parts (or appurtenances) such as serve
only as accessorie complements, ordained for the more convenient discharge of
the necessary worship of God, i. e. for decorum and edification. For 1 if all
those ceremonies be essential parts of Gods worship, which are such as the
contrarity of them must needs displease God, then certainly all ceremonies
which serve for decorum and edification must needs be essential parts of Gods
worship: because the contrary of decorum and edification must needs displease
God in his worship. 2 What kind of wedging is this, so to distinguish the parts
of Gods worship, as that the accidental only, and not the essential shall
serve for edification? 3 What cleaving or dissolving is this of the parts of
worship, where the accidental parts are rather said to be appurtenances then
parts, and yet granted to be parts? 4 What worship of God is there that is not
essential? If it has no essence of worship in it, surely it is no worship.
5 The accidental parts of worship have not so much communion with the
essential, as the hair of the body (which is but an excrement) has with
the body: this the Def. expressly grants in this Sect. and shall that which
is not so much as an excrement unto the chief worship, be accounted or called
a part of worship.

SECT. III.
FOr the proof of this, that no humane inventions are lawful parts of Gods
worship, the Abridgement alleges Exodus 20 4. Deuteronomy. 12 32 Es. 1 12 Mat. 15 9
Col. 2 23, three of which are only mentioned by the Def. and two of the three
only answered, or rather put of with miserable shifts? By the precepts of men
Es. 29 9 are signified (says he) such humane ordinances as were expressly
contrary to the commandments of God. But 1 if here he takes the word expressly
as opposite unto pregnant consequence, as he does p. 2 then I hope he will
grant that there is the same reason of those humane inventions which are not
expressly contrary. If he takes it largely, as containing such consequence,
then he says nothing to the purpose, because in that sense all Religious
worship invented by man is expressly contrary to the commandments of God. 2
Christ himself Mat. 15 9, does interpret this very place of vvil-worship in
general, where for brevity sake, I refer the Def. unto M. Calvin whom he
calls an honorable Witness in this controversy. He after long discourse
concludes thus, fixum ergo illud maneat, fictitios omnes cultus coram deo
vanos esse: imo, test propheta maledictos and detestabiles, i. e. This must be
held for certain, that all worships invented by man are before God, vain,
accursed and detestable. By adding and diminishing Deuteronomy. 12 32 is not meant
(says the Def.) addition of preservation, but addition of corruption. Where 1
the phrase is strange, by adding and diminishing is meant addition. 2 This
gloss is clean contrary to the text, for the Lord charge that we do not
add to the word, that so we may keep or preserve it Deu. 4 2 even as we keep
or preserve carefully that which is committed to our trust 1 Timothy 6 20: now the
Def. relleth us that some addition is the means of keeping or preservation.
Card. Cajetan himself interprets the place far more judiciously and
religiously, inhibetur additio etiam pretextu custodiendi mandata Dei, even of
additions that are pretended for preservation of Gods law, com. in Deu. 10. 3
He should have done well to have manifested unto us the addition of
preservation by some example: for that which he talks of the coyner
pertains only to corruption, of which no man doubts. 4 I would know if
there be not also a diminution of preservation, as well as an addition? in the
text they are joined together. 5 This pretense was the old shoeing-horne to
draw on superstition into the Church, as Calvin notes on Mat. 15 2,
Legislatores ipsi non jacta^ant se novum quicqua^ tradere, sed tantum addere
cavendi formulas, quae media essent adminicula ad servandam Dei legem, i. e.
the old Masters of ceremonies pretended that they meant only to bring in
additions of preservation. 6 This is Bell. answer to Calvin concerning this
very point and place, de effect. sacr. l. 2 c. 32 prohibet dominus additionem
corrumpentem, i. e. as the Def. translateth, an addition of corruption is
forbidden. This I hope is another manner of symbolizing with Bellar. then that
which the Def. formerly objected to Non-conformists.

SECT. IIII.
HEre are two testimonies brought to confute the Non-conf. his interpretation
of Scripture, whereby he would infer that all kind of will worship is
unlawful. For that is here the question and nothing else. The first Witness
is Danaeus, where the consequence lies thus, if Danaeus in one place does
apply these Scriptures to grosser will worship then our is, then he does not
allow that they condemn all kind of will worship; but the first is true: ergo.
is not this a fair kind of reasoning: just as the Papist Gregorius de
Valentia reasons, abominable idolatry is condemned, 1 Pet. 4. 3, therefore not
all idolatry.

The other Witness is Zanchius in Col. 2 23, where beside that the like
consequence is made as before, I would desire any indifferent man to consider
these words of Zanchie found in that very place. One kind of will worship is
if any new worship, whereby God is worshipped be invented and brought into the
Church. For God will only be worshipped, and only with that worship which he
himself has appointed, Deuteronomy. 6 Mat. 15, also those in 1 These. 1 9. By an idol
in general is meant whatsoever in Religion is brought in without the word of
God. He that looks upon these words of Zanchie, will scarce tell what to
think of this Def* his audacious alleging of this Author, and the vain
triu^ph which he groundeth upon him. He thought it seems that few or none
would ever take the pains to examine what he said.

In the fifth Section, there is nothing on either side but a dumb show. It shall
pass for me therefore in silence.

SECT. VI.
Here come the judgment of Protestants to be examined concerning this
question, Whether all parts of Divine worship invented by man be not to be
condemned? Where first the Defendant brings forth his wedge again,
distinguishing betwixt essential, and accidental worship as before: but in
other phrases; for now he tells us, that essential worship is that wherein
i^ placed (...) opinion of Justice, sanctity, efficacy, or divine necessity
and accidental is any ri^e, which serves for the more consonant and
convenient discharge of that essential worship. But these are but words. For
1. worship does not vary according to men's opinion: but consists in the
nature of the action it self. Otherwise a man may go to Mass, conceiving a
private opinion to himself, that he does it not for justice, sanctity,
efficacy, or divine necessity, but for some other cause. Or at the least a
convocation house may appoint us the grossest of all the ceremonies in Popery,
and set another opinion upon it* 2. Sanctity cannot be separated wholy from
such ceremonies which are proper unto religion. i. appropriated unto religious
persons, actions, and purposes only, in the solemn worship of God. For they
must either be holy, or civil, or profane. But civil they are not; for then
the bare omission of them would argue rudeness and incivilitie: nor profane,
I hope, in the Def. opinion: therefore they must needs be holy. 3. There is no
judicious Divine that uses to call circumstances of mere order and decency,
worship. Where did the Def. ever read that a pulpit, or a table, or a fair
cloth, etc. was pronounced or styled worship?

Come we therefore to the examination of witnesses in particular. Calvin's
words are, Instit. l. c. 10. sect 8. all humane constitutions, in which the
worship of God is placed, are ungodly. The Def. says, that 1. Calvin means
not by worship circumstances of order. Which is most true, neither was any
reader so sottish, as ever took that to be his meaning. For what sense could
there be in these words, all humane constitutions, in which the circumstances
of order are placed? 2. He tells us that he means the inward virtue of
worship, which consists in an opinion of holiness and justice. Where first I
will not urge or grate upon the ill sound which these words have, the inward
virtue of worship consists in an opinion. 2. How can an inward virtue be
placed in an outward ceremony? 3. The proper nature of worship is not in
holiness and justice, but in the honoring of God: and all external
ceremonies whose proper use is the honoring of God, are external worship,
as all divinity shows. This is therefore but an idle unlearned evasion, to
talk of holiness, and justice, in opinion, when the question is of worship.
Calvin never thought of such toys. He amplifieth indeed his accusation against
the Papists by such circumstances as those are, according as the Def. shows:
but what Logic can thence conclude, that nothing else is contained in the
general rule? Calvin himself professes the contrary, as directly as if he
had undertaken to confute this defender of ceremonies. For these are his words,
Epist. 259. Si probe and penitus inspicitur, quid homines tantopere solicitet
ad fabricandas ceremonias, reperiemus ex hoc font omnes fluxisse, quia quisque
novum Dei cultum fingere ausus fuerit^ atqui fictitios omnes cultus non modo
repudiat Deus, sed etiam severe abominatur. i. The original of all ceremonies
was, that men would needs forge new worships of God: whereas God does not only
refuse such worships, but also abhors them.

For Chemnitius, the Defendant tells us that he condemns only a ceremony
which is among the Papists made necessary. But he should show two things if
he would answer soundly: 1 that Chemnitius does distinguish, as he does, of
will worship, as some were lawful, and some only unlawful. 2. he should
show us at the least, that there is some worship which is not necessary: for
otherwise C^emnitius in condemning will worship that is imposed as necessary,
does condemn all will worship. Now we in our simple divinity (for so it will
be accounted) conceive thus: All worship of God is that honor, duty, and
reverence which the reasonable creature does owe to the creator: and therefore
cannot understand, how such a^dutie is not necessary to be performed: or how
there can be a worship, which being part of this tribute, may rest in man's
choice whether it shall be paid or no. Perhaps this necessity pertains
only to the worship commanded by God: but in that which man diviseth of
himself, there is more liberty, there being no reason, that voluntary service
should be constreined. If this be the cause, then the worship appointed by
man, is no part of his love toward God, nor any testification of it. For if it
were, surely it should be necessary, seeing it is necessary to love God with
all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our strength.

The third witness is P. Martyr, loc. com. 770. where he says, concerning
things in their own nature indifferent, that special care must be had, lest
any such thing be thought to make toward the worship of God, because divine
worship depends not on man's will, but on Gods counsel. A man would think
that these words are plain enough for the condemning of all vvil-vvorship.
True (says the Def.) he veri^ieth your phrase of speech, but not your sense.
And why so? because (forsooth) he says in the same place, that the Church may
appoint circumstances of order: as if there were any among us that ever denied
this: therefore he condemns not the institution of accidental parts of Gods
worship. Let any man of sense give judgment here: P. Martyr says, it is
lawful to appoint circumstances of order, but unlawful to appoint any
worship. The Def. thus: P. Martyr allows men to appoint circumstances of
order, therefore he allows them to appoint some worship. If this be not as
plain a contradiction as any can be framed, then (according to the proverb)
let him that taught me logic, give me my money again, Reddat minam Diogenes.

In the last place (as those which make a feast use to do) D. Morton sets
down himself. But he may be accused though for sitting down too soon: for in
the Abridgm. I find Melancthon, Bullinger, Bucanus, Perkins and others invited
to this meeting, who now by this hastiness of the Def. can find no place. Yet
let us hear what he says for himself. I do not (says he) condemn all the
ceremonies of Rome, but the multitude and burden of them. To which I answer,
1. the question is not here how many or how few you condemned of the Romish
ceremonies: but by what reason you condemned them. He that condemns one
ceremony because it is a worship of man's devising, condemns all worship
that man devises: and he that condemns a multitude in that name, condemns
one that is such, though it be alone. 2. Because I have heard men often speak
in this manner of the fault that is in a multitude, I would willingly know,
what certain limits and bounds are set by Gods law, for the number of humane
ceremonies, such as now are in controversy. If there may be three, why not
four, five, six, and so forth, as many as it shall please the convocation
house, or him that can when he will turn the convocation upside down?
surely, if once we depart from Gods institution, there will be no place to
rest our foot in, but we must ever follow wind and tide, which in religion is
baseness it self.

SECT. VII.
HEre is promised a confutation of the proposition, viz. of this assertion, all
will worship whatsoever is to be condemned, and to that purpose he brings
forth again his Magna Charta, Let all things be done in order. But I think
that plea is sufficiently confuted. In the next place he produces or rather as
the fellow said once, seduceth 2 vvitnesses, Vrsine and Zanchie. But believe
me, when I looked upon the places which he alleges out of them, I could not
but lift up my heart unto God, and say, O Lord, how can such conceited
confidence fasten on a man that regards either conscience or credit? How dare
mortal men upon such grounds as these, obtrude the conception of their brains
upon thy* Churches? Vrsine (says the Def.) has catechized them well. True: but
our proud Prelates for the most part, do scorn not only that, but all other
catechismes, except for fashion sake, that which begins with What is your
name? and though I do not account this Def. in that number, yet I may safely
say, that he never well considered whom or what he cited out of Vrsine. All
that he brings, is out of the commentary on q. 96. ob. 3. and 5. as it is set
down by Pareus. Now before objections be brought, it is fit and usual that
the Thesis or sentence be set down against which those objections fight; and
no wise man will take up an answer made to an objection, before he
considers the assertion against which that objection is made. See then what
the assertion of Vrsine is: Ipsae ceremoniae (Ecclesiasticae sc. quae ab
hominibus praecipiuntur) non modo cultus Dei non sunt: sedetiam conscientias
non obligant, etc. the very same thing which we here maintain, viz. that no
lawful ceremonies appointed by man, are the worship of God. Except therefore
Ecclesiastical ceremonies be therefore the worship of God, because they be
not the worship of God, the Def. had no reason to allege this place of Vrsin
in this question: and so just it is in the words here alleged out of the
answer to the third objection, those things which serve accidentally to the
glory of God, are not the worship of God. And to the 4. obj. By these examples
will worship is not established. And to the 5. obj. Indifferent things (being
done of faith) please God otherwise then the worship of God properly so called.
Is it possible that any thing should be concluded from hence for vvill-worship?
Surely no: and therefore the Def. himself makes his conclusion out of these
premises, that Divine worship properly so called is that which is ordained of
God. Was there any of us that ever doubted of this? is it not the proposition
which this Def. undertook to confute. But in a large sense (says he) humane
ceremonies may be held to he a part of divine worship. This is that which we
have heard averred before in this section. I had thought we should have seen
it proved. But alas it could be no more then affirmed, and that under the
shadow of a sentence whereby it is flatly condemned. Zanchie (says he)
distinguishes the substance of worship from those things which are annexed to
worship. Why so do all the Non-conformists. What then? are ceremonies worship
in a large sense, because they are annexed to worship? then the sign of the
cross is a sacrament because it is annexed to a sacrament.

I wonder (says the Def.) how such points should seem to be so raw to some of
the Non-conformists. What points? those assertions which Vrsine and Zanchy
express? they seem to all of us well digested axioms of Divinity: but the
consequence which the Def. would draw from hence, is evidently so raw, that
none but a very Ostridge can concoct it.

SECT. IX.
TO prove that our ceremonies are imposed and used as worship, this argument
is brought: Those ceremonies which have the kind, nature, and definition of
worship belonging to them, so that they want nothing but a right author to make
them true w^rship, those are in their imposition and use worship, and for want
of a right author, are false wor^ip: but our ceremonies are such. Ergo.

The Def. his answer is, that this learning never saw print, as he thinks,
that the institution of God does not alter the common nature of worship. 1. It
may be that he never saw it in print: but I can witness, that Mr. William
Bradshaw, a man that knew how to frame an argument in logical manner, as well
as any Bishop in England, set this reason down in Print some 14 years since,
in one edition (as I remember) of his treatise concerning indifferent things.
But an answer to that treatise, or to this argument, was never yet seen in
print, though that begging of the question be the chief ground of those
invectiues which are ordinarily used in Sermons and vvritings about these
questions, viz. that they are things indifferent. This argument is also found
in a treatise of the same authors, concerning Divine worship, printed 1604. 2.
Though it had never seen the print before now, yet that does not hinder, but it
may be sound. For all sound reasons are not found in print. 3. There is none of
our Divines that treats of worship in general and particular, but has for
substance this learning, viz. that religious worship is that which is done to
the honor of God: and if it be according to Gods commandment, then it is
true; if not, then it is false. The Def. cannot name one of all that ever
handled the common place of worship, that has ^ot so taught, which if it be
true, then the institution of God does not alter the common nature of worship:
1. it does not make that worship which otherwise being used to some end, and
in the same manner, without Gods institution, were no worship at all.

But Gods institution (says the Def.) does distinguish necessary worship from
indifferent, and essential from accidental. Grant all this: what can be made
of it? Does it therefore alter the common nature of worship, making that
worship, which without it being used in the same manner, and to the same end,
is no worship? here is no consequence at all. Beside, neither scripture, nor
interpreters of Scripture, nor any good reason will allow, that there is any
indifferent worship of God. Neither is it the institution of God (common to all
worship) which makes one more, and another less principal: but the nature of
the thing instituted by him.

But the offering of any colored sheep was indifferent before the Leviticall
law: afterward, the offering of an unspotted lamb, was necessary and
essential in the worship of God. To which objection I answer, 1. This his
opposition of offering any colored sheep before the Leviticall law, to the
offering of an unspotted lamb afterward, is vain and without ground from the
law of God; seeing it does no where appear in the Scriptures, but that it was
as lawful to offer any colored sheep after the law given as well as before.
God requires by Moses, that the offerings of his people should be perfect,
Levit. 1. 3. 10 etc. And this might well be notwithstanding diversity of
color. The party-colored sheep of Iaakob were not imperfect, but of the
perfectest sort, and that by the special direction and blessing of God, Genesis
30. 41. 42. with 31. 11. 12. God complains of those that offered corrupt
sacrifices, torn, lame, and sick, Mal. 1. 13. 14. But for difference of
color, there is little color or show of reason, that God gave any such charge
in his law. And it is the Doctors ignorance of the story, or want of due
consideration that moved him thus to write. Secondly, suppose a lamb without
spot to be forbidden, then I answer, That if any man before the commandment
had offered an unspotted Lamb with the same mind that after it was to be
offered with, as thinking that his sacrifice should in that respect have been
the more acceptable unto God, because it was of a lamb unspotted, then the
offering of such a lamb had been as essential worship before, as it was after,
though it could not be so true and lawful.

Did the Def. never read nor hear, that matter and form do usually make up
the essence of things? and that in institutions which are means to an end, the
respect of that end is also required to the being, but a right efficient not
so? let him consider a little of the grounds of logic, or read our most
logical Divines, such as Sadeel is, and he shall soon perceive the truth. or
else without that labor, let him or any other of common sense tell me, if the
Temple of Jerusalem should have been built with all the appurtenances, and
sacrifices with other observances there used, without any commandment of God,
according as they were by his appointment, had there not been essential false
worship erected unto God? have the Papists and Heathens no essential false
worship, but only accidental? It is a shame to confute such unlearned conceits.

SECT. X.
HEre are many proofs conjoined under the name of M. Hy. and others: the
answers to which are just such as the ceremonies be, merely formal, without
essence or substance of truth.

The first is, ceremonies are imposed to breed an opinion of holiness, as M.
Hooker affirms, p. 61. and therefore are parts of Gods worship. The
consequence is not denied by the Def. not yet the antecedent directly: so that
the whole argument seems to be granted, only the Def. says, that Mr.
Hooker did not asscribe operative holiness either by infusion or inhesion
(which two terms are unreasonably by him dis-ioyned) but only significatiue,
as his words import. To which I answer, 1. that as the nice distinctions which
are now used in the schools of Jesuits, do not help, but that Popish
superstition is as gross as ever it was in practice: so this distinction of
operative, infusion, inhaesion, significatiue, does nothing help, but the
common people in many places inclined to superstition, do attribute as much
holiness to some of these ceremonies, as they do to some holy ordinances of
God. 2. The Patrones of our ceremonies, such as Mr. Hooker was, do attribute
that holiness to the ceremonies which the Fathers did. Now that they
asscribed operative holiness unto some of them, Mr. Parker has made, plain
in his book of the Cross, Part. 1. p. 77. 90 92. etc. 3. Mr. Hooker does not
here speak of reverence signified by the ceremonies, but of reverence to be
signified toward them, as being things holy and worthy reverence. 4 What Mr.
Hooker asscribed unto the cross, is to be seen in M. Parker, p. 91.

The second reason is, because the ceremonies are the constitutions of a sacred
Synod. The force of which argument lies in this, that a holy Assembly of
spiritual Lords and their assistants, if they be truly holy and spiritual
in their authority, and in the exercise of it, will appoint no ceremonies but
holy: and by the the observance of the said ceremonies, have some spiritual
honor redounding unto themselves, because the virtue which is found in any
effect, does redound always unto the praise of the cause. To this the
Defendant gives no real answer: only he does affirm (contrary to the truth)
that our Convocations may be called sacred, as well as the Churches of Christ
Saints by calling. Whereas beside other differences, Churches are of God: our
convocations are of man. Churches are gathered for the holy Worship of God:
convocations (as experience shows) for nothing less.

The third reason is, because the ceremonies are appropriated to the acts of
Religion in Gods service. To this the Defendant answers by denying the
consequence, because the Pulpit cloth, the communion cup, and the place of
meeting are so appropriated, and yet not essentially holy. But herein he
shows, that he does not understand well what it is that he opposes. For
these things whereof he speaks, are only civil, being drawn from the
ordinary civil customs of men, and are of the same use out of the service of
God, that they are in it: and therefore howsoever some special individuals of
this kind may be appropriated unto religious acts, yet the kind is not:
neither have those specialls any other signification in the service of God,
then they have in the service of men. These therefore are not such ceremonies
as now are in question, nor so appropriated to religion.

The fourth confirmation is from Math. 15. where such ceremonies are blamed of
Christ by this reason. To this the Defendant answers, that the act of washing
is not there reproved, but the invention and opinion of an operative sanctity
and holiness attributed unto it. But first, to what purpose does he deny,
that the act of washing simply considered in it self, was unlawful? was
there ever any so durtie, that he would affirm such a foul fancy? Secondly,
the intention and opinion of holiness is that which now our ceremonies are
charged with. Therefore in that there is no difference. Thirdly, that the
Pharisees attributed any more operative holiness unto their washing then many
amongst us do to the cross, cannot be showed out of the Text. There is not
one circumstance there which may not fitly be applied to our ceremonies.
Fourthly, not only Calvin upon the place, says that^ the inventing of such
ceremonies was an idle vanity, even before the high opinion of religion was
added unto it: but Bellarmine himself De effect sacr. lib. 2. cap. 32.
confesses that Christ reproved this ceremony in the Pharisees, because it was
vain and unprofitable.

SECT. XI.
HERE is set down a reason of Mr. Hy. to prove that our Ceremonies in their
use and practice are preferred and honored above principal parts of Gods
worship: because the ablest ministers that are, may not be suffered to exercise
any ministry in England, except they will apply themselves to these
Ceremonies. To this the Defendant answers, that it is dull So^histry: because
by this means only an orderly and discreet Preacher is preferred before one
that is factious and exorbitant.

Now, if ever, he speaks like an Ordinary, like a Bishop, when he sits
in his Pontificalibus, to judge the poor according to the Laws of iniquity.
It seems some galled place of his conscience was touched, when mention was
made of silencing able and godly ministers for trifling ceremonies of man's
invention. How much better were it for such men to enter into their hearts
betimes, and think what answer they can give unto God for such palpable
treachery? But to examine a little the reason that is in this answer; under
the term of Dull Sophistri^: he more then denies the consequence of the
reason: yet if it be rightly understood, all his wit will not avoid the dint of
it. For 1. thus I take the meaning, which is the practice: he that is an able
godly minister, if he will not use these ceremonies, may not be suffered to
have place in the Ministry: but he that will use these ceremonies, though he
may neither comparatively to the other, nor any thing competently by himself,
be either able or godly, shall hold his place in the Ministry. Therefore
these ceremonies are preferred before the maine things of the Law and Gospel.
2 I take it thus: though there cannot be found able and discreet conformable
Ministers enough to supply all the Parishes of England, yet many able and godly
men are shut out of the Ministry because they will not conform to these
ceremonies: therefore conformity to these ceremonies is preferred before the
maine duties of Gods worship. If all the Defendants sharpness of wit can
answer the bluntness of this Argument, which every Plowman that is a good
Christian does usually make against the Prelates proceedings, then I for my part
will be contented to be called dull, for from my childhood hitherto I ever took
it to be unanswerable.

The comparison of the Lord Chancellor will do him no help in this case. For
that Chancellor were unworthy of his own place, who would for his own
pleasure, or for the circumstance of a place, which may easily be changed, put
out of commission a grave wise man, when another like unto him could not be
found. Beside the case is nothing like: for in the circumstance of a place for
commissioners to meet in, there can be no conscience pretended. But here offer
has been made by the Ministers thus wronged, solemnly to confirm by oath,
that nothing but conscience does keep them from conforming.

Now for the sweet terms which it pleases the Def. here to use, I will
desire no more, then that he would bring them back again to his own
conscience, and ask that before God, 1 whether old M. Midsly of Ratsdel, who
after he had labored near 50 year in the Ministry to the conversion of
thousands, was inhumanely silenced by the Bishop of Chester, were a factious
and exorbitant man? and that which I say of him because he belonged to
Chester, I understand of many hundreds which have in like manner been
oppressed. No doubt the evil servant which is spoken of, Mat. 24 49, when he
began to beat his fellow servants better then himself, called them factious
and exorbitant fellows: but he with all that are like him, know better, and
one day shall be constreyned to give other witness. 2 I would know of the
Def. also whether all or the most of them which are in the Ministry be
orderly and discreet men in that religious meaning which belongs to
Ministers? This I am sure of, the voice of all the Country goes clean
otherwise. When M. Midsly, and his son after him were silenced at Ratsdel,
all that country knows what an orderly discreet Preacher came into the place.
When worthy M. Baines was silenced at Cambridge, as a factious exorbitant
man, there was, beside many other unworthy Ministers, one commonly called the
Vicar of hell, who was kept in, as an orderly discreet Preacher. 3 If faction
and exorbitancie may be charged on them that neglect a ceremonious canon upon
conscience, what name shall be found fit for the Prelates, who vvilfully,
without and against conscience continually live in and by the breach of many
substantial, ancient and wholesome Canons? for this see M. Parker of the
cross, part. 2 c. 9 s 4.

SECT. XII.
HEre is alleged the opinion which many people in all parts of the land have
concerning our ceremonies, viz. that the Sacraments are not rightly and
sufficiently administered without them. To this the Def. answers three things,
1 That most people hold the contrary: 2 That the opinion of people in
observing does not prove the judgment of governors in imposing: 3 that it is
most likely that those people which think so are brought into that conceit by
the opposition which it made against the ceremonies. But first, I would feign
know of the Defendant why he passes by in silence, not only the testimony of
Chemnitius cited by the Abridgement for confirmation of this part of the
assumption, but also the passages of Gods word, and many of the best Divines,
which are also alleged there in the proposition, and applied unto this part
of the assumption by the Authors of the Abridgement? surely this is not plain
dealing. Secondly, I answer that the opinion of a few may make that an action
unlawful, which the opinion of many other cannot make lawful, as is to be
seen 1 Cor. 10 28, if any man say unto thee. Thirdly, it does not appear the
most are otherwise minded. For the most being used unto the ceremonies, and not
unto good teaching, may well be thought to have the same opinion of humane
ceremonies which they have of divine. Fourthly, the Def. forgets what was
to be proved in this place: for the question is not only whether ou^
ceremonies be so imposed, but also whether they be so esteemed and observed,
as appears in the Abridgement. Now the opinion of the people proves I hope
in what manner they are esteemed and observed. And while they are so
observed, they that still impose them in those places where they are so
observed, may truly be interpreted so to impose them. In actions of this kind
(says Hooker l. 5 p. 165) we are more to respect what the greatest part of
men is commonly prone to conceive, then what some few men's wits may devize in
construction of their particular meaning. Fifthly, the last conceit is
ridiculous, that the opposing and condemning of ceremonies should make men
think that the Sacraments are not sufficiently administered without them. The
popish people (says he) have no great conceit of our ceremonies. Why is it
then that Gretser, and some other Jesuits call our Prelates Calvino-papistae,
Popish Calvinists? How is it that by these ceremonies we are borne in hand
that the Papists are likely to be drawn unto communion with our Church? Whence
is it that all our Church-papists are great maintainers of the ceremonies? The
rest (says he) which are not of your disciplining are not so many. O miserable
out-facing of God and man^ Who has disciplined for this threescore years
almost all the people of Wales? Who but the Prelates and their creatures have
had the disciplining of all the Cathedral Churches in England, and all the
poor Parishes that depend upon them? Who are the Discipliners of all the
Non-residents and Pluralists forlorn charges? and who of the many ten pound
cures? Do these seem a few in the Def. eyes?

SECT. XIII.
THe omission of ceremonies is here alleged to be more sharply punished, then
many great sins against the law of God, though it be without so and all and
contempt. To this the Def. answers, first by denying the consequence, viz.
that if this be so, then these ceremonies are preferred before the precepts of
God, and unlawful. But 1 why says he nothing to the Churches of Germany, to
Melancton, Martyr, Chemnitius, Bez^, Iunius, Lubbertus, Polanus, Bucanus,
Pilkinton, Perkins, and the whole Clergy of England, brought in as allowing of
this consequence, in the Abridgement? Are not all these worth one answer of the
Defendants? 2 The reason that he gives for punishing more severely the
omission of a ceremony, then heinous sins, is frivolous. For the true peace of
the Church does more depend on the keeping of Gods laws, then of observing
man's inventions: especially of such things which never brought peace with
them to any Church, but as fire from hell have always bred a combustion.
Neither yet can the Defendant justify that which he says of civil
governments, that they lawfully at any time more severely punish that offense
which is every way less, then another which is greater. Howsoever, he that
has but half an eye may see that it is but a sophistical evasion, common to
our Prelates with the Papists. I will not therefore insist in this: if you
please, you may see more of this matter in M. Parker of the Cross, part. 2 c.
1 s. 16 17. He answers in the second place, That it is not omission, but
contempt that is punished, ^s if (...) Counselor should refuse to wear (...)
L^^yers gown. But ^ mere omission has been often punished with suspension. 2
The Convocation house by their Canons have provided and appointed punishments
for mere omissions. If those canons be not in all such points rigorously
executed, it is either some personal good which is found in some Officers, or
else mere shame. For though canons do not blush, yet the executioners have
some forhead left. 3 There may be continued omission, upon other causes beside
contempt, as ignorance, conscience etc. so that while the Def. so peremptorily
charge others for slandering the Church of God, he manifestly slandereth
them, which for any thing I know are as much the Church of God as the Prelates.
Concerning this contempt see more in M. Parker p. 2c. 1 s. 14. As for the
Lawyers gown, it is not long enough to cover the nakedness of this answer; no
though it be stretched to the length of one of our great Prelates long trains
which are carried up after them. For except the Counselor would swear that
he refused on conscience, and that he could show the judgment of the best
Lawyers for his opinion, condemning such a robe as unlawful, the case is not
like: and if the case be so put, I account that Lawyer worthy to be turned over
the bar, that could not defend himself from contempt.

SECT. XIIII.
IN the next place, the same thing is confirmed by the particular indignities,
which peaceable, learned, godly minded men do suffer, for but declaring of
their contrary judgment: as that they are accounted Puritanes, Schismatics,
and by canon excommunicated ipso facto, so as no Council ever censured any
heresy, without liberty of appeal, which is not denied to great malefactors.
Conf. at Hampton. p. 26 (...). 6 and 98. In the repeating of this Argument, I
add that out of the Abridgement, which the Def. for I know not what reason,
omitted. Now in his answer he neither denies antecedent, nor consequence, so
that the judicious Reader may safely take all to be granted. Yet that he might
seem to say somevvhat, 1 he grants that we have reason perhaps to wish,
that some penalties were released. And have we not reason then to think the
Convocation which set these penalties was nothing less then led by the spirit
of God? And if the Def. can thus show his differing judgment from that
Convocation in the penalties, what disorder or exorbitancy is it for another to
show his differing judgment from them and him in ceremonies.

Secondly, closly sliding by the chiefest accusation of Puritanism, which yet
is most ordinary, and most impure, he says for schism, that those which
will not conform unto our ceremonies do teach the principles of Separation.
To which I answer 1 That there was never yet any Prelate that confuted the
opinion of Separatists any otherwise then by ralling words: whereas on the
side, diverse most averse from conformity have foundly confuted them. 2 Our
principles do no more tend to Separation, then Saint John's rule does, who
when Diotrephes played the Dioecesan in the Church, did write unto the
faithful people that they should not follow the evil which was among them,
but the good, 3 loh. 11.

Thirdly, he talks of diverse distractions in the Church, while some will
hear only a conformable Minister, and some only an unconformable. But what
is this to the purpose? For by this reason Conformers may as well be accused of
schism as Notconformers. Again, if all did conform, there would be still the
like distractions for some would only hear preaching Ministers, and some
would never be present but at reading. Some would only hear godly
Preachers: and some would only taste Lettice fit for their lips. Who should
then be the authors of schism?

Fourthly, he tells us that all Churches challenge a subscription to their
orders. But 1 all Churches cannot possibly do this lawfully: because some
Churches do directly contradict other in their decrees. 2 Few Churches require
such a form of Subscription as ours is, though they have not the tenth part of
doubts and difficulties in their forms, which we have in ours. 3 I ask again
that which M Parker has asked without an answer, that a Minister of the
Gospel should be deprived for disusing Popish ceremonies, when was it ever
the judgment of any man which was of note for learning, unless he were
interessed in the quarrel? Calvin, Bucer, B^za, Martyr, Zanchie, and many
other have given their judgment concerning those controversies: but show
either any of them, or among Jewel, Fulke, R^ynold, Whitakers, Perkins, or any
such, that ever allowed of such tyranny. If there were any one among them of
that opinion, we should have heard of him. For our Defendant dares bring in
the name here of B^za himself as making for him: Notwithstanding B^za does
not only condemn our Ceremonies in plain terms, Epist* 8, but also in this
very place which is quoted out of Ep. 24 does cashier our ceremonies in the
first words quoted by the Defendant himself, Constitutions being thu^ made
etc. What understands the Defendant by thus, or ha^ ratione? Surely those
conditions going before, which do as absolutely condemn our ceremonies as any
argument in all the Abridgement.

SECT. XV.
AFter full satisfaction given to our Arguments about the point of the worship
(as the Def. would have the Reader believe) he comes to confute our
Assumption. viz. the ceremonies are not esteemed, imposed, and observed as
parts of Gods worship. But first I would know of him, why he that talks so
much every where of their own Witnesses their own Witnesses, does here first of
all give no answer to our Witnesses, as has been formerly showed: and then
passes by that which is alleged in the Abridg. p. 40 out of his own
Witnesses, D. Covel, and D. Walks? If they be not his Witnesses, they are at
least the ceremonies Witnesses: he should therefore have given some respect.
But we shall have another Champion come after this Def. as it is likely, who
will as little regard him. For justum est quod Spartae prodest, all is good
that makes for the times.

Secondly, whereas he has nothing to bring for confutation of our arg^ment,
but only the judgment of the greater part of the imposers, I say, this is no
way sufficient: For the question here is not only of imposing, but also of
esteeming and observing.

Thirdly, I answer to the places alleged, that it cannot be Logically
concluded either from any one, or from all of them, that they are not imposed
as parts of Gods worship. We do not attribute any holiness or special
worthiness (says the canon) unto the garments. No more (say I) is any special
holiness or worthiness to be attributed unto water: yet in baptism it has a
holy relation to holiness. The cross is not of the substance of the
Sacrament. What then? it may notwithstanding be worship: except the Def. will
acknowledge no worship but in the Sacrament. These ceremonies may be altered
and changed: by whom? By those that appointed them. Show me any Papist that
dares affirm that the Church of Rome has not authority to alter and change
the ceremonies which her self has appointed. But the opposites do
acknowledge this. Abridg. p. 53. 55. just as much as this Def. does in this
place acknowledge the same of the Church of Rome, when he says in this very
page, that Bellarmine with some other Papists seem to disclaim the necessity
of ceremonies, and the placing of holiness in them. So that in all this
Section there is nothing to be found but vain conceited confidence.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I. II.
THE third Argument is, because all humane ceremonies, appropriated to God
service, if they be ordained to teach any spiritual duty by their mystical
signification, are unlawful. Concerning this, we have in the first Section a
flourish of words.

In the second Section, some thing is said of Math. 7 8 10 11. But ^ what was
the reason that this Confuter of the Abridgement, should pass by or put off
the first and second reason or confirmation there alleged, and snatch at one
place of Scripture, vvhi^^ his but a parcel of those confirmations wherewith
the second reason is backed? The first confirmation in the Abridgement is, that
the second commandment forbids us to make to our selves the likeness of any
thing whatsoever for religious use: as it is understood by Bucer, Virel, Fulk,
Andrews and others. The second confirmation is, that Christ is the only
Teacher of his Church, and appointer of all means whereby we should be taught
and admonished of any tholy duties. For illustration of this second reason,
among twenty other allegations, something is brought out of Math. 7. Now the
Def. passes by the maine reasons, and all other allegations that belongs to
them, and makes a stand at this place of Mat. 7, which yet for substance has
once been handled before in the former Chapter. Is not this proper confuting?

Secondly, in this very text, he touches not that wherein only the Abridgment
groundeth their reason. For in the Abridgement, p. 32. there is nothing cited
out of Mark. 7, but the 4 and 7 verses; he answers to the 8 10 and 11 verse.
What should a man say to such dealing?

Thirdly, they say that our Savior by this Argument (among others) condemns
the Jewish purifyings and ^ustifieth himself and his disciples in refusing
that ceremony, because being (the precept of men) it was taught and used as a
doctrine by way of signification, to teach what inward purity should be in
them, and how they ought to be cleansed from the pollutions of the Heathen. For
which interpretation of the place, they allege Chrysostom, Whitakers, the
Church of Wittenberg. Calvin, Virel, Zepperus, Fulk, Rainoldus and others. To
all this the Def. answers nothing, but that with a simple denial, he shows
that there were other causes why our Savior condemned those vvashings: which
is the very same thing which the Abridgement affirms, when they say, by
this Argument among others, our Savior condemned them. So that in all this
Section nothing at all is said to the purpose: save that in the winding up, the
Defendant accuses those of Sadduceisme which depart so far from the
Pharisees: Which accusation, if it does not touch our blessed Savior himself,
I leave to be considered by the Defendant himself. Howsoever, the mentioning
of Phariseisme in this matter is idle, for the Scripture says expressly that
this ceremony was common to all the Jews, Mar. 7. 3.

SECT. III.
THE same kind of dealing which was noted in the former Section, we meet
with also in this. For, whereas in the third confirmation of this argument,
the Abridgement brings in Augustine, the Churches of France and Flanders,
Calvin, Martyr, Beza, Sadeel, Dan^us, Zepperus, Polanus, Jewel, Humfry, etc.
the Defendant calls out Augustine alone by himself, and that with a double
trick. For first, he cites but one place of Augustine which was miscited or
misprinted in the Abridgement, and leaves out the other out of Epist. 5
rightly quoted in the Abridgement: Secondly, he makes this place to conclude
the maine argument, whereas in the Abridgement it illustrateth only the third
confirmation of that Argument. Concerning Augustine he answers, 1 that in the
first place cited there is no such thing, which I grant to be true, but if in
stead of lib. 3. cap. 35 be set lib. 2 cap. 1 then something will be found. 2
That elsewhere (not mentioning the fifth Epist. which the Abridgement quoted)
Augustine says, that all holy signs are called Sacraments: but yet it does
not follow from hence that in his opinion all such signs are Sacraments, but
only in word or phrase of speech. Neither was it brought in (as he might
have marked) to prove any such thing, but only to show that such signs
participate part of the nature of Sacraments: and this as that use of the word
Sacrament does confirm, so that which was derived from thence, and has been
in perpetual use, viz. that such ceremonies are called Sacramentalia,
Sacramentals. But neither Augustine, nor other fathers do disallow such
ceremonies (says the Defendant) and this we do not deny: if by disallowing be
meant constant rejecting of such things. Yet something is to be found in their
general doctrine, from which we may soundly conclude against these inventions
of man.

SECT. IIII.
But in this fourth Section, more legerdemaine is used then ^n many other. For
when the Def. professes to answer the testimonies of Protestant Divines found
in the Abridgement, he produces only four, as if there were no more to be
found: vvheras in the same place of the Abridgement, viz. p. 33. there be many
more joined to these, as before I showed by name: and to them diverse others are
added p. 35. But let us hear what he can say to these four which himself
has chosen to answer. To Calvin he says, that he speaks only of those
mystical ceremonies which are properly sacramental. And this, say I, was the
very point for which this place was alleged, viz. that such significant
signs are properly sacramental. Is not this then good answering? Concerning
Mysticall-morall, I will speak something in the next section. Zepperus says
he) has not a word of mystical signification. The place is lib. 1. cap. 10.
where among diverse rules, he gives this for one, that sacramental signs
must signify holy things to be sealed up in the heart: from whence he
concludes as against Humane traditions, because God will not by them stir up
any grace in the heart of man: so in special by this with some other rules,
he concludes against the sign of the Cross, and other such ceremonies in
Baptism. Is this nothing? Jewel insisteth only in sacramental signs; and
such says the Abridgement, are all that signify spiritual graces. As for
Beza, he grants him in a manner to condemn all symbolicall signs. But to
extenuate his credit herein, he would have the reader believe, that no other
Divine does consent with him herein. But if any man look upon the places quoted
in the Abridgement, p 35. viz, Harm. Confess. part. 2 p. 229. 230. Eiusd. Sect.
17. ad Saxon. Confess. obs. 1. Calv. in Es 20. and in Math. 21. 25. Perkins in
Gal. 3. p. 231. he shall find that Beza is not alone in this point. Beside,
Bellarmine confesses that Brentius is of this mind, De cult. sanct: lib. 3.
cap. 7. and in his 2 book De effect sacr. he joins herein with Brentius,
Calvin and Chemnitius. I will add one whom this Def. calls worthily a
judicious refuter of Bellarmine: i. Iunius. His words (in his animadversions
upon Bell. de cultu sanct. lib. 3. c. 7. an. 12) are these; Quod si ad usum non
potest quisquam instituere, profecto neque ad significationem homo legitime
potest adhibere, etc. 1. Humane ceremonies cannot be lawfully used for
signification without incroching, no not in private, much less in the Church of
God and public administration. There can be no blessing or consecration
Ecclesiastical, without the word and prayer. Here is no word of institution:
and prayer of faith there can be none, where there is no commandment nor
promise of God instituting.

To Iunius add Danaeus, cont. Bell. de Cult. sanct. l. 3. c. 7. It is blasphemy
(...) think, that any outward thing may be made a sign in the Church, unless
it be expressly ordained in the word, and commanded by God himself to be used
unto that end.

SECT. V.
HEre that which in the Abridgement is the third proof of a proposition, and
backed with many allegations, is nakedly brought in that it may be the better
maistered. Symbolyca^^ signification gives unto ceremonies a chief part of
sacraments. For the clearing of this point, the Defendant distinguishes
betwixt moral signs and sacramental. Of sacramental he makes two parts,
one after the manner of a sign, and the other of a seal: then he makes a
differenc^^ betwixt moral and sacramental signs, not only that sacraments
do seal, which moral signs do not, but also that sacramental signs do
represent a collation of grace given by God unto man; whereas moral do only
notify a duty of man which in some moral virtue he owes unto God. Then after
he finds fault with this, that signification should be called the chief
point of a sacrament. Now for the first, I do not marvel that he calls his
distinctions wedges: for this is a most unhappy wedge indeed, which riveth in
sunder the holy sacraments of God, and makes way for humane inventions to
creep into their place. (...) malus con^us.
The sacraments (says he) do signify grace conferred: and moral signs do
signify a duty of man in some moral virtue. But the Scripture teaches us
that the Sacraments do also signify the duty of man toward God. For by the
sacraments the whole covenant is signed and sealed betwixt God and man: so that
not only Gods conferring of grace, but man's duty through grace is there
professed and represented. This the name Sacrament, as it signifies an oath or
obligation, does import, by Bellarmines own confession: de sacram. l. 1. c. 8.
This the name ^ucharist does also show, in the Lords Supper, notifying that
thankfulness we owe unto God. This the words of institution do plainly
testify in the Lords Supper, Do this in remembrance of me. And I think the
Def. when he considers the matter well, will not dare to deny, but that
sanctity (which he says is signified by the Surplice) is signified in
Baptism: and constancy also which he ascribes to the cross. If he do, he
may be easily confuted, by those places where the scripture speaks of it,
especially Romans 6. throughout the chapter.

2 Against that moral signification attributed unto humane inventions, I
propound this argument, in the words of a ^overend man (whom for some reason I
will not name.) To be a teacher of my understanding, and an exciter of my
devotion, are such effects at require virtue inherent or assistent to those
things which should be causes of them but no sign of man's devising has any
such virtue in it, or with it: for then it must come from that word put forth
in the creation, and s^ things natural should have a force communicated to
them of teaching supernatural: or else by Gods after-institution: such we read
not any but of Baptism and the Lords supper only: or by the Churches
impetration. But this cannot be: for prayer obtains those effects of things,
to which they serve by Gods creation and institution: but not any creating or
new conception of things to supernatural uses. For then the Church might ask
that this or that creature might be made a sacrament unto her: in which case
she should pray without all warrant from Gods will.

3 If humane inventions be such moral admonishers in spiritual duties, the
consciences of men without doubt are bound to subject themselves unto their
admonitions; and then unto them from whom they do admonish, or by whom they
are made admonishers: i. to mortal men, such as our convocation consists on. Is
not this good divinity?

4 Whatsoever is ordained in the Church as a teaching sign, that ought often
to be interpreted unto the people in Sermons: for that is the teaching which
must clear and perfect all teaching of signs: and should not they preach
fairly in the name and words of Christ, that should expound unto the people the
signification of a surplice and a cross? Would not this also be much for the
edification of the people, that sometime they must hear of the moral good
which the ceremonies teach: and sometime be admonished of the right meaning of
our convocation house in the appointing of these ceremonies, left they turn
them to moral evil in superstition: and at other times they must be
instructed, how to defend these ceremonies against the opposers of them, lest
otherwise they use them without faith? Surely all the Sermons which many
Parishes hear, would ^caree be sufficient for this doctrine of Ceremonies.

5 I dare appeal to the eonfciences of the best conforming Christians, whether
ever they found themselves truly stirred up to holiness, by the Surplice, or
to constancy by the Cross? one thing I am sure of, that in some one
congregation where these ceremonies have not appeared for 20 or 30 years
together, there has been more holiness and constancy of faith, then in many
Cathedral Churches where they were never omitted.

This point being cleared, there need no great answer be given to the cavil,
of making signification the chief point of a sacrament.

For if the Def. meant to deal plainly, why does he change the words, that
he may find some color for his accusation? The Abridgement says only, that
it is a chief part: he accuses them for saying it is the chief part: betwixt
which two phrases, he knows how great room there is for a wedge. 2. To
prove that signification is one chief part, the Abridgement alleges Genesis 17.
11. Exodus 12. 13. Luke 22. 19. why is no answer given to these places, if the
assertion be false? 3 The Def. himself in his distinction which he brings
here concerning a sacrament, does allow one chief part of a sacraments nature
to be signification ad modum signi. Be^^armine therefore has as good a friend
of him as of the Abridgement.

But (says he arguing herein against himself) if signification be a
principal part of a sacrament, then all the moral signs used in the
Le^iticall worship, should be properly deemed sacraments. Why so? because
things take their denomination from the principal parts. True: but 1. as has
been observed, there is difference betwixt a principal and the principal. 2.
Every thing that has denomination from a principal part, has not properly
the same name with it. A man may in some sense be called spiritual, because
his principal part is a spirit: yet he may not be properly deemed a spirit. 3.
all those ceremonies which had signification in the Leviticall law, have this
denomination from sacraments, that they are properly called Sacramental: 1.
participating something of the nature of sacraments, though they be not
sacraments properly so called.

SECT. VI.
A Second objection from reason is here brought in^ viz. that if ceremonies
which God himself has ordained to teach his Church by then moral
signification, may not now be used: much less may any of those which man has
devised. But why does the Def. pass by all the allegations which belong to
this reason in the Abridgement, p. 33. 34. they cite to this purpose first the
Council of Nice, Austine, Martyr, Bullinger, Lavater, Hospinian, Piscator,
Cooper, Westphal^s, etc. And then after, Calvin, Bullinger, Hospinian,
Arcularius, Virel, Bison, Reynolds, Willet, etc. And again, Calvin, Bullinger,
Chemnitius, Danaeus, Hospinian, Arcularius, our book of Homilies, Humphrey,
Reynolds, Willet, etc. Are all these worth no answer? at least they show, that
this is no new reason divised by the Nonconformists: but the common tenent of
Protestants, and the ground whereby they confute the superstition of Papists.

Yet let us hear his answer to the reason as it is nakedly in it self
considered: remembering always, that he can say nothing, but that which the
Papists may as well say for many, of their ceremonies against this argument
pressed upon them by our Divines.

His first answer is, that the use of some Jewish rite, without any Jewish
opinion, is not damnable; instancing in circumcision and Easter. Where 1. he
should have told us, how a Jewish rite can be used, without some part of a
Jewish opinion? For he himself after contendeth, that our ceremonies are not
the same with the Papists, because we have not the same opinion of them which
the Papists have. 2. What does he mean by this new term domnable? I hope he
does not symbolize with the Papists in their difference of mortal sin and
venial? of which fault he so vainly accused us before. If he mean by not
damnable, not unlawful: then he holds circumcision, as it is used under
Prester John, to be lawful. If he means any thing else, as, that it does
not utterly destroy the being of a Church, then he speaks some truth, but
nothing at all to the purpose.

His second answer is, that it is far more safe to invent new ceremonies,
then to use those which God once appointed, and now has abolished: because
they might engender an opinion of necessity: and so might bring in all the
Leviticall law. Where 1. it is well he confesses plainly, that all the Jewish
ceremonies are abolished: for therein he contradicts that which he said in
his former answer. 2. from hence our divines use thus to argue, Number vero
veteres figurae sublat^^ sunt, ut locus esset novis? number divine sublatae sunt,
ut human^ succederent: i. Are divine ceremonies abolished, that humane may be
erected in their place? They are the words of Doctor Whitaker, de Pontif. cont.
4. ^. 7. c. 3. and the reason is strong. For if it had been the will of God
that we should have be been taught by other signs then those that are
appointed in the New^ Testament, he could easily, and would surely either
have chosen some of the old, or appointed some new in their places. 3. Though
there may be more danger in some respect, on the one side, yet there may be
more absolutely on the other. 4. The inventing of new humane ceremonies have
engendered an opinion of necessity in them: and have brought in all the Popish
law of rites: so that even in these respects, it may be questioned in whether
side is greater danger.

SECT. VII.
THe third and last reason which the Def. could find brought against
significant ceremonies, is, that this will open a gappe to images, oil,
spittle, and all Popish, ceremonies: all which Bellar^in^ commends, as fit to
put men in remembrance of good things, etc. To this he answers diverse
things. 1. This consequence (says he) from some to all^ is too lavish. But
this consequence is of his own framing: for the consequent which the
Abridgement makes, is from the common nature of significant ceremonies, to
every special, being equally considered in regard of other circumstances.
Neither is there any occasion at all in the Abridgement for that ridiculous
consequence which the Def. makes from may to must* in his example of the Kings
Council.

Secondly, It is as unreasonable (says he) as if a Patient that has some
drugges prescribed him, should thence conclude he may taste of all. But it is
as reasonable, say I, as if a Patient having some druggs prescribed unto him,
should thence conclude, he may taste of any which are of the same nature,
especially if the same Physician should prescribe them unto him.

Thirdly, It is unconscionable (says he) because there are many abuses mixed
with Popish ceremonies. Which answer seems merely unconscionable; because it
is plainly expressed in the Abridgement, that this inference does consider the
Popish ceremonies only, in regard of that signification which they have of
good things.

Fourthly, he disproveth the use of oil and spittle, because they were once
used miraculously. As if the mir^culous using of any thing did forbid, that it
should at any time after be used for signification. Surely then the many
miracles which histories do record to have been done by the Cross, must needs
banish that also out of the Church.

Fifthly, for Images, he says, They are not to be called Popish, but only in
regard of superstitious adoration. As if Cassanders image were not Popish:
which is an assertion, 1. directly against all our Divines, who not only
confute the Papists for adoration of their images, but also for having them in
any religious use, especially in Churches; for this is the controversy betwixt
Calvin and Bellarmine, de Imag. lib. 2. c. 9. wherein this Defendant takes
Bellarmines part. Secondly, it is directly against the Homily concerning
images: unto which we are bound to subscribe. Thirdly, it confirms the soul
words of Bellarmine, who says that the Apology of the Church of England
lies, in saying that the Council of Frankford decreed that Images should be
abolished, De Council. Auth. lib. 2. c. 8. for the only answer is that which
lunius gives in his notes upon that chapter, an. 56. He that forbids Images
to be worshipped, does forbid the having of Images worshipable, especially in
Churches: Which answer this Defendant does flatly deny.

Sixthly, for holy water, he says, that may be accounted Christian, were it
not for the operative power which is ascribed unto it in Poperi^. But good
Protestants, I think, will rather believe Calvin, who calls it a kind of
repetition of baptism. Instit. l. 4. c. 10. sect. 20. and Iunius, who
peremptorily affirms, that no humane ordination, opinion, or superstition,
can make it good and profitable. in Bell. de Cul. sanct. l. 3. c. 7. At the
least let it be called Jewish, not Christian: for Christ will not have his name
called upon such superstitious devices: neither can it, without taking in vain.

7 Lastly, he says, there is no reason to deprive the Church of power of
ordeining significant ceremonies, because she may abuse it: wherein he says
true. But to argue from manifest abuses, against that which is called use, and
yet is as like those abuses as one egg is like another, this I hope is reason.

That which by the way is brought out of Peter Martyr, is not of any great
force. For he there persuadeth that unto Hooper out of a good affection, which
out of conscience he durst not do himself, though his place at Oxford did tie
him unto it, as he professes in an Epistle, p. 1127. Where also he shows,
that the chief end that moved him so to persuade Hooper, was because he hoped,
that by his and such men's yielding, the ceremonies might in time be abolished:
which we find to be an erroneous conjecture. But that has much less reason in
it which he adds, viz. that the open gap of many ceremonies is now quite shut
up, because our church is contented to admit of so few, and no more. For 1. we
have not so much as the word of our Prelates for this nil-ultra. 2. The gap is
every day made wider and wider by such defenses as this is, which allow of
Images themselves for some religious use. For by this means any crucifix may
come in, that is not greater then the Church door. 3 They that shut up a gap
upon their pleasure only, can when they please open it again.

Now I have maintained the testimonies and reasons which this Def. could find
in the Abridg, against significant ceremonies, I will add one, lest it should be
forgotten, or lost: which I know not how the Def. leaped over, seeing in the
Abridg, it has deservedly the first place among all the proofs, which are
brought in to this purpose. The argument stands thus in the Abridg. p. 31. The
second commandment forbids us to make to our selves the likeness of anything
whatsoever, for religious use: and so is this commandment understood by Bucer,
Virel, Fulk, and D. Andrews now Bishop of Winchester. And p. 32. 33. D.
Andrews is brought in alleging this for the root of all superstition and
idolatry, that men thought they could never have admonitions and helps enough
to stir them up to wo^ship God. Yet God (says he) had given four means,
viz. the word written, the word preached, the sacraments, and the book of the
creatures.

Now lest the Def. may seem to have passed over this proof as unworthy any
answer, I will briefly add the grounds of it.

1. The word (...) likeness used in the second commandment is general, and
comprehends under it all religious similitudes, because they are homogeneal
to Images there expressly forbidden.

2. Significant ceremonies are external acts of religious worship, even as they
are used to further devotion. Suarez in Thom. p. 3. ^. 65. a. 4. Bell. de
effect. sacr. l. 2. c. 29. etc. 31. and therefore being invented of man, of the
same nature of Images, by which and at which God is worshipped. The Def.
distinction of essential and accidental worship, will help no more here,
then the Papists (...) and (...). Gods law is not mocked with vain distinctions.

3. The affirmative part inioyneth obedience to all the worship appointed by
God: all which was significative, Heb. 8. 5. and 10. 1. from whence it
follows, that no significant ceremonies must by man be brought into religious
actions. The nature of the affirmative shows the quality of the negative: by
the circuit of the one, we may learn the compass of the other.

4^ Significant ceremonies which are by institution, must of necessity belong
unto the second commandment. An accurate distinction of the commandment will
easily show this. But nothing contained in the second commandment is permitted
to man. For to him this commandment in regard of making, is wholly negative.
Thou shall not make to thy self, etc. Which words, as Calvin says, Nos a
carnalibus observatiunculis, quas stolida men's nostra comminisci solet, in
t^tum revocant and abstrabunt.

SECT. VIII.
IN this passage there is nothing to be found but a noise of words crackling
like thorns under a pot: Let it therefore vanish of it self.

SECT. IX.
HEre the Defendant undertaketh and begins a confutation from Scriptures of
that assertion, which denies significant ceremonies of man's institution to
be lawful in Gods worship. Now a man would have exspected by the title, some
rule of Scripture: but seeing none can be found, we must be content with
examples: which notwithstanding are nothing so firm and certain as rules.
Yet let us hear what examples he can bring.

The first example is Abraham's directing of his servant to put his hand under
his thigh when he did swear. It is mervaile he did not begin before.
Abraham. For Suarez the Jesuit to prove the same point for substance, brings
Abels sacrifice, Noah's Altar etc. in Thom. 3. qu. 65 a 4, which serve also as
much to the purpose as this example. But to the point in hand. 1 It is in all
probabilty false, that Abraham appointed this ceremony. So Calvin, Iunius and
others upon the same place, do judge, because it was a sign of subjection
usual in those eastern parts.

2 It is false also (which he faith in the second place) that swearing is the
most divine service of God of all other. For the proper end of swearing is not
to worship God, but to confirm a truth: though in the appealing unto a
supreme Witness and Judge worship is employed, and so an oath appropriated unto
God as a part of his worship, not in the principal end of it, but in manner
of seeking that end. This is plain by the nature of an oath.

3 It cannot be proved, that this ceremony did teach any spiritual duty. It
is most probable, that it was a common sign of subjection used in solemnities
of that kind, as well out of an oath as in it, without any respect unto
Christ, as with it. If the Def. never read any such thing (as he says he did
not) I cannot help that. I assent unto Calvin herein the rather, because that
as imposition of hands in those parts did always signify some superiority, so
this under position of hands was by proportion fit to signify subjection of
inferiors.

4 Lastly, if all this were granted, that this sign was appointed, that it
was appointed in solemn worship, and that it did signify a holy thing: yet
tho Defendant should remember that Abraham was a Prophet, and of more
authority by far in the Church of God, then our Convocation-house. So that
this instance is nothing to the purpose, as, I am persuaded, Abraham's servant
would swear, if he were here present, and it were needful, even in the
same manner that then he did to his Master.

SECT. X.
Here comes in a straggling objection, as it is here alleged without any
dependence, omitted in the place whereto it belongs. I will not therefore
press it in this place. Only it would be marked how little the Defendant
cares what he says, so that he say something to every thing: 1 he answers
that Papist^ do commonly teach by their ceremonies some new doctrine, not
warranted by Scriptures. For confutation of which, the Papists may well appeal
to Durandus his Rationale, where he shows the signification of almost all
the Popish rites. Now if the Defendant can there find one signification of a
hundred, which teaches any strange doctrine not warranted by the Scriptures,
I have taken my numbers amiss. 2 He says the Papists ceremonies differ from
ours in application, by their opinion of necessity and holiness. But 1 the
question here is only of signification: and therefore it is out of time to
talk of application: 2 the Papists do not hold their ceremonies absolutely
necessary to salvation. For this Bellarmin^ de verbo non scripto l 4 c. 11
denies of all unwritten traditions, as also Aquinas 12. qu. 147 a 4 ad 1.
Neither do they hold them essentially necessary to the being of a Sacrament:
This Aquinas with all his followers deny, p 4 qu. 66 a 10. where he says
expressly, that all signs invented^ly man are only for stirring up of
devotion, and procuring of reverence to the Sacraments: which is, word for
word, our English plea. 3 It does not appear that the learned Papists have any
opinion of all their significant ceremonies, which this Def. does not
maintain. For Suarez a principal Jesuit in Thom. p. 3 q. 65 a 4 propounds
only three errors as he calls them, vvherin Protestants differ from Papists
concerning ceremonies in general: whereof the first is, that only those things
which are written ought to be retained and used in the Church: The second is,
that no outward worship of God is lawful, but only that which is appointed by
God. The third and last is, that the Church has not power of commanding and
ordeyning those things (he means mystical ceremonies) which are necessary
for the convenient celebration of the Sacraments. Now there is none of these
three points vvherin Swar^z and the Def^ does not jumpe.

SECT. XI.
THE next example is the day which Mordeca^ and Ester appointed, Est. 9
concerning which I answer 1 it was no mystical ceremony: but a circumstance
of order. When Bellarmine objecteth the same example to like purpose against
the Protestants, de cult. sanct. lib. 3. c. 10. Iunius answers, praeceptum
fuit politicum: it was a precept of order. And some of our own Writers at home
that it was appointed for a civil use, a day of rejoicing.

SECT. XII.
THE Feast of Dedication, ordained by Iulas Maccabeus is also alleged by
Bellarmine de cult. sanct. li. 3 c. 5. and de Romans pont^li. 4 c. 17 but we need
not be so careful of excusing Machabeus and those times from all fault. Christ
seems, says he, to approve that feast, Ioh. 10 22, but seems, only, say
I. It is said that Christ who had been before that time resident in Jerusalem,
was walking in Salomons porch at the Feast of Dedication, when some Jews came
to ask him whether he was the Christ or no; does it follow that he observed
the Feast? As for Danaeus h^^re cited, it has been showed before how well he
liked of significant ceremonies ordained by man.

SECT. XIII. XIIII.
Here M. Cartwright is brought in as answering the former objections out of
the Machabees and Ester. But M. Cartwright p. 197, does profess that there is
as great difference betwixt these two, as is betwixt heaven and earth. And in
his Confutation of the Rhemists, who urge the feast of Dedication as this Def.
does in Ioh. 10 22, he answers plainly, that this Feast was unduely
instituted and ungroundedly by the Machabees. Which also he proves by such
reasons as neither the Rhemists, nor this D^f. will ever answer. Yet let us
hear, what he has chosen out of M. Cartwright to answer. The Church may
appoint holy days in certain cases: but it is one thing to restrain part of
the day, and another to restrain the whole day. Where 1 M. Cartwright is
vvronged by the Def. for he confesses (in the places quoted) expressly, that
upon some extraordinary cases the Church may restrain a whole day, as at a
solemn fast. 2 He should let us see what mystical signification is in the
times appointed, as he striveth to do in other significant ceremonies: if he
would have a more particular answer, otherwise they are alleged here to no
purpose to prove significant ceremonies.

The other words quoted out of M. Cartwright are, that the ex^mple out of
Ester is no sufficient warrant for our Holy days: 1 because our estate ought
not to be so ceremonious as theirs, 2 That was done by a special direction of
the spirit of God. To this the Def. answers first, that if then when the
ceremonies were so many one might be added, much more now. Which consequence
were good, cae^eris par^bus, if all other things did agree: but this is that
very thing which M. Cartwright denied. He answers in the second place, that
it is presumption to imagine a special direction where none can be proved. But
how shall we trust this man in relating the Arguments and Answers of the
Ministers in private conference, when now the second time, as it were in one
breath, he so unjustly accuses M. Cartwright as giving no reason for that he
says, whose printed book does confute him? for so it follows in M.
Cartwright, immediately upon the words by him quoted, p. 194. This may appear
by another place, where the Jews changed their fasts into feasts, only by the
mouth of the Lord, through the ministry of the Prophet. For further proof
whereof I take the 28 ver. where it appears that this was an order to endure
always, even as long as other feast days, which were instituted by the Lord
himself: so that what abuses soever were of that feast, yet as a perpetual
decree of God it ought to have remained: whereas our Churches can make no such
decree, which may not upon change of time and other circumstances be altered.
For the other proof hereof I take the last verse. For the Prophet contenteth
not himself with that, that he had r^hearsed the decree, as he does sometime
the decree of profane Kings, but adds precisely, that as soon as ever the
decree was made, it was registered in this book of Ester, which is one of the
books of Canonical Scripture: declaring thereby in what esteem they had it. If
it had been of no further authority then our decrees, or then a canon of one of
the Councels, it had been presumption to have brought it into the Library of
the Holy Ghost.

SECT. XV. XVI.
IN the title of these two Sections, the Defendant promises an instance of a
ceremonious instrument belonging unto the worship of God. But he brings none
save the Altar of the two tribes mentioned, Josh. 22 which he cannot show to
have been any instrument of Gods worship: so that he seems merely to have
forgotten his title. But for the thing it self M. Parker long since p. 1 c. 2
s. 33 has given this answer. 1 that we may better argue from the Altar of
Damascus 2 King. 16 against the cross, then they can from this Altar for it. 2
that this Altar of the two Tribes, was not in state or use religious as the
Cross is, which he confirms by the confession of B. Babington on the second
Com. and by the testimony of Lavater on Ios. hom. 61, 3 that in this our men
say nothing which the Papists allege not for their superstitions, and the
Lutherans for their images, as probably as they, Masi^^ and Chitreus upon this
place. To the same purpose tends the answer which the Def. has set down in
the name of certain Ministers. Let us here therefore his Reply. 1 He proves
the setting up of this Altar to have been humane, which no man that I know
ever doubted of.

2 He would prove that it was appointed to Gods service. But alas he can bring
no color for that. It was a pattern (says he) of the Lords altar, which was
a chief^ instrument of Gods worship: as our cross is a resemblance of the
cross of Christ. Where 1 why does he compare the cross whereon Christ did
suffer with the Lords Altar? that cross was no more holy, then the soldiers
that nailed Christ to it, or then Judas, that betrayed him into their hands:
and therefore the sign of that cross in respect of the resemblance which it
has to that, is no more holy then the picture of Judas. 2 Is every resemblance
of a holy thing holy? then every Al^house picture, which resembles any thing
belonging to the Scripture and holy uses, is also holy. 3 If any of the Tyrians
which wrought under Solomon about the work of the Temple, should have
procured a model of the Temple to be drawn, and carried it with him into his
Country for to have showed it them for news, had that model been religious or
holy? the Def. thought he had to do with such as would believe whatsoever he
said.

3 He goes about to prove, that it was mystical signification ^eaching a
spiritual duty: because that one end of it was, in respect of the present
Gileadites, to teach that the Lord was God: and another in respect of their
posterity, to testify their consent in the true Religion. But in all this
fair show, there is scarce one word true. For 1 it does not appear out of the
text, that there was intended any use of it for the present age that then
lived. The contrary appears plainly, verse. 27, 28 etc. The last verse cited
to this purpose by the Defendant, must be interpreted as Iun^us notes out of
the 30 verse. So that even by this it is manifest that a direct help unto
devotion was not sought for in the erecting of this altar. For then not only
the two Tribes then living should have had use of it, but most of the other
Tribes should have had reason to have imitated their example, in setting up
Altars of devotion even at every three-way-leet, as crosses are wont to stand.
2 in regard of posterity, the immediate end was to testify, that though they
were separated from the other Tribes by the river Jordan, yet they belonged to
the same people, and had right to come unto the same place of worship. Now
what is this to a ceremony which has state and immediate use in the special
solemn worship of God? the use of this testifying was to procure a consent
and approbation in future times among the other Tribes, that these two Tribes
might be suffered to come to the Temple for to worship God there. So that
neither the two Tribes, nor the other ten were stirred up by this Altar as by
an instituted mystical ceremony unto worship or devotion: for as for the two
Tribes, they were only to show this monument unto those which called their
right into qu^stion. And the other were to consent and grant them their right.
What is this to a garment of religion, or solemn religious worship?

SECT. XVII. XVIII. XIX. XX. XXI.
THE second instance is Salomons altar, 1 King. 8 64, wherein 1 I cannot but
marvel at the addition which the Def. makes unto the Text, when he tells
us out of the Scripture of an altar, and of a brazen Altar, built by Solomon,
without special warrant: whereas in the text there is neither mention made of
brass, nor of Altar, but only of sanctifying the inner part of the Court: he
did not surely attend much unto that which he wishes to another, sect. 20 in
these words, I would you had leisure to look more directly upon the text
alleged. But for the matter it self, it is vvorth the marking, to observe by
this example what authority is given unto men in the worship of God by our
Masters of ceremonies, not only to appoint accidental worship, but even that
which is principal and most essential: that which makes other essential
worship to be holy: For what is this else, when they say man may of his own
head appoint an Altar? If they say man may appoint an Altar, but not the
offering upon the Altar, let them hear our Saviors answer, Math. 23 19 Ye
fools and blind, whether is greater, the offering, or the Altar that
sanctifies the offering?

As for our answer it is the same which all our divines give unto Bellarmine:
as the objection is the very same with that which Bellarmine oppose^h to
Calvin, de pont. lib. 4 c. 19. 1. this act of Salomons was by special
direction of Gods Spirit. So D. Whitakers answers, de pont. c. 4 qu. 7. ad
arg. 7 quicquid Solomon fecit, id Dei authoritate and spiritus sancti nutu
fecit. So D. Su^cleife de pont. l. 4. c. 6. But from M. Nic. this answer will
not be received. The Def. says it can never be proved. But suppose an altar to
have been built as the Def. will have it, and then I hope the nature of the
thing does sufficiently prove it, as before I showed: Beside Solomon had not
yet declined from the right ways of his father David, who did attempt
nothing about the Temple but according to the vvriting which he received from
God, as he told Solomon 1 Chronicles. 28 19, Neither is it to be omitted, that
Solomon at that very time when he did this thing in question, was acted and
lifted up extraordinarily in communion with God: as appears by that divine
prayer which he then made for the Dedication of the Temple, which cannot be
judged but to proceed from the extraordinary direction of Gods holy Spirit.
Lastly, if that had not been so, yet the high Priest was at hand with Vrim and
Thummim, by which when it was so easy to have special direction, who can
think that Solomon would venture on such a matter as this upon his own head?
But the contrary is proved (says the Def.) because a reason is rendered in the
Text which moved Solomon to do that he did. As if these two could not stand
together, to do a thing upon some reason: and yet to do it upon special
direction from God! see Number. 36.

A second answer is given by some of our Divines, that Solomon did this out of
the equity of Moses law: so Iunius cont. 3. l. 4. c. 19. To this the Def.
replies, that this answer overthwarts the former. Which is nothing so. For
Solomon might be, and no doubt was in special manner directed to see the
equity of the Law, and specially directed and authorized also to follow it. The
Def. therefore is deceived in that advantage which he makes of this answer.

A third answer is brought in by the Def. under the name of M. Nic. viz. that
God by his visible descending approved of the work of the Temple, and did
authorize Solomon to do that he did. To whom the Def. wishes more leisure,
that he may look better upon the Text, where he should not find that God
approved the Temple of Solomon by any visible appearance, until the sacrifice
was ended. But if the Def. had had both leisure and pleasure to look better
upon the text, before he had censured another, then 1 he would have seen that
God appeared in the Temple before the sacrifice was either ended or begun: 1
King. 8 10 11 2 Chronicles. 5 13 14. 2 He should have seen also that Solomon built
the brazen Altar, not of his own head, nor upon a sudden which was
impossible, but by the same direction that he did all the other holy things, 2 Chronicles. 4. 1. 3. He would not have talked so loosely as he does here s. 20,
where no man can gather by his words, that he knows of any Altar appointed
particularly of God, beside the Altar of incense.

A fourth answer is, that which Daneus gives unto Bellarmine, ^on. 3 lib. 4
c. 19, viz. that this was not a new additament for kind, but for some
circumstance only; because this Court was sanctified by God, Exodus 27 and 40,
and Solomon is said to sanctify because he put it to that use which was not
ordinary. To this the Def. replyeth nothing vvorth the answering: but only
that he accuses M. Nic. and so in deed the Divines formerly alleged, of
unconstancie and unconsonancie: whereas the answers that have been given may
very well concur all of them in one action, and one answer. The rest of his
talk does hang upon the horns of his new found brazen Altar: and there I
leave it.

SECT. XXII.
COncerning synagogues, I answer, 1. they were no significant ceremonies about
which the question now is, 2. it is most likely though that the same Prophets
which erected schools, called schools of the Prophets, were the first
founders of those synagogues. 3. seeing in the synagogues there was no
significant ceremony of action or apparel, appointed by men, to be used in
them: therefore in the Christian congregations, which in form of worship,
(saving the addition of sacraments appointed by God) is altogether the same
with the synagogues, there ought much less to be any.

SECT. XXIII. XXIIII. XXV. XXVI.
THe first example brought out of the New Testament, are the the feasts of
charity, ordained (as the Def. says) by the Apostles. To which our answer is
ready, that if they were ordained by the Apostles, then they were not humane,
but divine, and therefore nothing pertaining to our question. To this the
Defendants reply is, that if divine be opposed unto constitutions not commanded
of God, then we could not have uttered a more unlearned position: because all
Divines distinguish betwixt divine, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical
traditions. All Popish Divines indeed do allow of this distinction, because it
makes for their purpose: and some of our English when they write in defense
of the Hierarchy, or of the ceremonies: but so deeply to accuse those that
refuse it, for want of learning, this is too magisteriall For 1. that which
came from the Apostles as they were Apostles, that came from the spirit of
God, Act. 15. 28. 1. Cor. 7. 40. and to call that divine which has the divine
spirit of God: 1. God himself for author, what want of learning is in this?
2 Iunius was a Divine, and learned, yet he says, that this distinction
betwixt Divine and Apostolical traditions, is almost imaginary and
superfluous in Bellcont. 1. lib. 4. c. 2. an. 6. Danaeus calls it a childish
distribution, in eund. loc. more learned divines, might easily be named, that
do so allow of this distinction. And indeed, to examine it by that learning,
by which distinctions are chiefly to be tried, it has no Logic at all in it.
For 1. the distinction pretended betwixt things appointed for perpetual use,
and those that may be altered upon occasion: This distinction or difference (I
say) is no way contained, in the terms Divine, Apostolical 2. Some things
were immediately by Christ appointed, which were not perpetual: as many
things proper to the Apostles and their times. And some things appointed by the
Apostles which were to be perpetual, as the essentialls of Ecclesiastical
government.

A second answer is brought in, that these feasts were abrogated by the
Apostles. Then (says the Def.) 1. they were not of divine institution. Not in
that sense indeed, which means by divine perpetual: but yet they might be
divine, as gifts of tongues, healing, prophesying, etc. were. Then 2. (says
he) the Church may institute and abrogate as the Apostles did. The consequence
is but faint: yet the consequent or thing inferred, may be granted, so that the
Church keep within her bounds. Our final answer is, That these feasts of
charity were not of mystical signification, nor yet merely Ecclesiastical.
And indeed it is plain, that these feasts did carry no ordained signification,
but that which nature her self had imprinted in their foreheads. For who
knows not that familiar feasting of poor and rich together, is a
demonstration and preservation of love, without institution? and yet this is
all that the Def. can say for their signification. Neither were these feasts
merely Ecclesiastical or religious, because they were used in the assemblies:
for they were also used in the same manner, and to the same end, out of the
assemblies. Their proper end was relief of the poor, and maintenance of
brotherly love.

Last of all, for the ordination of these feasts, it cannot be showed to have
been Apostolical. Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 11. 22. judges otherwise. So that
in this example, the Def. can neither show mystical signification, religious
ceremony, nor Ecclesiastical ordination: and yet except all these be proved,
the instance makes nothing at all unto his purpose. But that which he lacks
in weight of arguments, he strives to make up in number.

SECT. XXVII.
THE next instance (like the former) is the kiss of peace. To which our
answer is, that it was a natural indicant sign of peace and reconciliation.
But the Def. borrowing light from some oratoriall phrases of the Fathers, will
prove the contrary: though it be as manifest as any thing can be, both by
Scripture, and also by other histories, that it was a civil natural fashion
used in those parts upon civil occasions as well as holy. Now what does he
prove? First the institution, so far as it was not commanded by Christ, was
humane. This he affirms, but proves not: and in his affirmation wavereth
like a reed shaken with some wind. So far it was from Christ; and so far
it was from man: and yet we hear not how far from either. The plain truth
is, it was of no institution at all: but of natural inclination and civil
custom, used long before the coming of Christ, as is to be seen every where
in the old Testament, Genesis 29. 13. 1. Sam. 20. 41. etc. yet by direction or
custom it received constant application unto some special acts. Secondly, he
says, it was significant, that is, it had a natural fitness to declare the
inward affection of love. What is this to a signification imposed by man? it
was so significant as shaking of hands: which gesture also used to be joined
with it: Tunc ambo nexi ad invicem dextras damus in osculo pacis sacrae, etc.
It did so signify love as the turning away of the face does signify
alienation of mind. But (says he) it signified Christian love. As if
Christian love had not in it the common nature of love, and therefore cannot be
signified partly by natural signs common to love. Cleanliness in the
celebration of the sacraments, is the same that it is at another feast; though
in regard of that application, it may be called Christian or holy cleanliness
or decency. Thirdly, he says, it was used in time of holy worship. So no
doubt was giving of the upper place unto the Elders, etc. in token of
reverence: and yet it was no religious instituted sign of mystical
signification: such reasons as these bewray more confidence then good
consideration.

SECT. XXVIII.
THe third and last example which is brought out of Scripture, is, the
covering and uncovering of the head at divine service, 1. Cor. 11. to which I
answer as before, that it was a civil order of decency, used as well out of
Gods worship, as in it. But here the Def. takes pains to make many
collections, and confirm the same by diverse witnesses. Because (as he says)
this point is of some moment; though the other were of none: let us therefore
briefly consider what they be.

1. I would first learn (says he) whether this ceremony of covering and
uncovering were not significant of some good thing? I answer, that this fashion
which he abusiuely calls a ceremony, was significant in a general sense:
that is, it did declare or argue a good thing.

2 I would ask what thing it is that is hereby signified? I answer, subjection
and superior power. But there is a relation also to God, says the Def. I
answer, there is in man's superiority, a kind of resemblance of Gods
soveraignite: and so there is also, as Calvin observes, in omni principatu in
all superior power: so that this makes covering and uncovering, no more a
religious significant ceremony, then the upper seat of a heathen Magistrate
sitting in judgment: for by that seat is signified a superiority, in which
there is some image of Gods sovoraigntie. There is nothing alleged out of our
Divines by the Defendant, which may not as well be applied to the Judges
bench, as to this covering and uncovering. And the Apostle does show plainly,
that the veil he speaks of, was of the same nature with long hair. So
that, by the Def. reason, men's short, and vvomens long hair, must be accounted
religious mystical ceremonies.

3 Our third demand (says he) is, whether these ceremonies of covering and
uncovering, were not instituted to be observed in Gods public worship? I
answer, it was required that they should be observed in holy Assemblies. But 1.
it was not only required in Gods public worship, but also as Calvin upon the
place grants, In quovis graviore coetu aut matronarum aut virorum, in any
grave meeting of men and women. And instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 29. ne
mulieres in publicum nisi velatae procedant: ^. Whenever they go into
public places. 2. It was not instituted primarily and principally for Gods
worship. If it were, I ask, when and by whom? Paul surely did not institute a
new ceremony in this place: for v. 14. he groundeth his admonition upon nature,
i. as Calvin well expounds it, upon a received use and ancient custom in
those parts: which some through lightness began unseemly to transgress. There
is nothing alleged out of Martyr or Chrysostom against this answer.

4. Fourthly (says he) we desire to know, whether this matter were not a
thing indifferent? I answer, it is indifferent in the general nature of it;
yet at that time, and in that place, they sinned that did otherwise, even
before Paul, or any of their overseers, gave them charge about it.

Lastly, (says he) it is worthy our inquiry to learn how far other
Churches may be directed by this example? I answer, so far just as the
Apostles rule stretches, 1. Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done comely.

Now the Defendant has a direct answer to all and every one of his demands,
let him cast up his sum, and he shall find, that he has proved just
nothing. He could find but three examples in all the New Testament, which had
any color, so as they might be alleged for mystical ceremonies,
appropriated to Gods worship, by man's institution. The Loue-feasts, the kiss
of peace, and the veil of women. And yet there is not one of these three, (as
any indifferent man, if he has common sense may see by that which has been
said) that can be showed either to be of mystical signification, other then
nature gives it, nor appropriated unto Gods worship more then to civil
occasions, nor yet ever instituted by any man in the Church of God. Is it not a
mavelous thing that men should presume so as they do to domineere in words
and deeds over poor men, in such things as they can show neither precept nor
pattern for in all the Scriptures.

We will descend lower, says the Def. And that, I assure him, is his best
course: for so long as he wadeth in the pure waters of holy Scripture, he does
but strive against the stream: descending lower to humane vvritings, he may
find the waters troubled, and so bring some fish to his net. Yet having the
Scriptures on our side, we need not fear to follow him whether soever he
pleases to lead us.

SECT. XXIX.
Here is alleged the universal custom of the ancient Church, even from the
Apostles times for confirmation of humane mystical ceremonies in Gods
worship. To which I answer, 1 of the first and purest times, next after the
Apostles, this cannot be proved: nor is likely, because it is not to be thought
that all Churches would immediately admit of any thing which they had not
received from the Apostles. 2 For the next ages it may easily be showed, that
the best Writers taught many general rules concerning the perfection of
Scripture, and the purity of Gods worship, which cannot stand with these
humane inventions: howsoever in their practice they were carried away unto
other customs. 3 The infinite troubles of those times against Infidels and
Heretics, about the chief grounds and maine foundations of faith, would not
suffer them to examine these points of less moment as they should. And in
deed, they were so taken up with those conflicts, that they neglected many
usual truths. So that if all should be received which the Fathers practiced,
neither any thing understood but by their interpretations, we should be
destitute of much truth, and overcharged with the burden of humane
presumptions, as Augustine complained in his time, ep. 119, 4 the Lord in
justice would have Antichrist to prevail: which mystery could never have
grown to any ripeness, had the worship of God been preserved sincere. That
corruption begot him, and the reformation thereof must be his utter ruin. It
is sufficient that the lamentable experience of fifteen hundred years has
declared unto us, what fruit of significant ceremonies brought by man into
Gods worship are wont to afford unto those that affect them. To fetch
authority in this case, from their practice, by which has insued such
inestimable hurt to the Church of God, is not the wisdom of the burnt child,
who dreadeth the fire.

SECT. XXX.
OF our own Writers the Def. here opposes unto us, Calvin Iunius, Chemnitius
and Zepperus. Now for these, it has been plainly manifested before, that they
all with one consent condemn humane symbolicall ceremonies in Gods worship:
and that upon good grounds out of Gods word. Now therefore if any thing
elsewhere has fallen from any of them by occasion, sounding to the contrary,
then we may well think that either their meaning is mistaken therein, or else
they showed themselves to be men: and indeed (to say the truth) there is a
little variety to be found in some of our divines concerning the point of
ceremonies. But the cause thereof being marked, will make it less offensive.
All our Divines, when they look into the clear crystal of the scripture,
condemn plainly all devices of man in Gods worship, whatsoeever: but again,
some of them when they fix their eyes on the false gloss of ancient times,
and consider withal how hardly men are drawn from their accustomed vanities,
and what good some men may do by applying themselves somewhat to the times,
then receiving another kind of impression, they seem sometime to vvaver in
their words. This observation I thought fit to set down in general, because it
may have good use in some particular places which this Def. threat^eth
hereafter to object. But as for the places here quoted, the answer is easy.

Calvin in the first place, disputing against the gross corruptions of the
Papists, says, he does not contend therein about ceremonies, which he might
truly say not only comparatively, but even absolutely in regard of contention
with others, who did not obtrude them upon him. And so I am assured few or none
would contend much about ceremonies, if they would not force them upon others.

In the other place, he understands by ceremonies, such as are given us of
God: as the following words show: Paucae igitur nobis divinitus datae sunt
ceremoniae. What indeed he thought was to be given to the rude people in this
kind, he showed sufficiently, not only by his words formerly cited, but also
by his practice, in that he banished such ceremonies utterly not only out of
Geneva, but also out of all Churches, which hearkened unto his counsel.

Chemnitius in regard that some ceremonies were in use where he lived, handles
them so gently as he can: and speaks too favorably of Images: yet in other
places, the truth wresteth from him and Brentius also, a right confession, as
has been alleged before.

Zepperus means only that the simple having of Images in Churches is not
such impiety as does unchurch a people.

Iunius and Chemnitius in the last place, do but give a difference betwixt the
Fathers and Papists use of some things. Here is nothing directly against our
assertion. But if all these witnesses did speak as the Defendant would have
them in these places mentioned, what were that to the cloud of testimonies
which are brought forth in the Abridgment, and unanswered as yet by the
Defender. His own mouth will testify that our Divines are generally on out
side. For in that regard (if he speaks with good reason) he calls them
still our own witnesses. Our own they are not, because we allege them only:
for so both Fathers, and Papists, and Conformists also are alleged by us: but
because they speak plainly for us. Which appears also the more by his
silence at the most part of their speeches.

SECT. XXXI.
AFter much sailing in the maine sea, the Defendant directs his course (as he
says) homeward to the narrow seas, by instancing, in the practice of
Non-conformists themselves. His comparison is good: for as the scriptures were
too deep for him to fasten any anchor of a conforming argument in: so the
practices of vveak men are so full of sands and shelves, that here he can have
no sure riding. The sea of Rome turned, by one of our Prelates, mare Romanum,
is the best harbor of all the world for the ceremonies to arrive and rest in.

The first example brought is the form of an oath, which is taken on a book.
To which I answer, 1. That if this form of swearing can be proved to be of
the same nature with the cross in baptism, etc. we will rather abandon this
form to avoid the Cross, then admit of the cross for love of this. 2 I
affirm, that it were much better that this form (invented by Papists, and
abused not only by them, but also by many among our selves) were abolished, as
it is in other Countries not Popish, Mr. Fox.
then retained. Mr. W. Thorpe a Martyr, or Confessor, in King Henry the fourth
his days, refused to swear upon a book, alleging Chrysostom for the same
opinion. 3. This form if it be worship, seems to be essential and
necessary worship, not accidental: for no man is esteemed to have taken his
corporal oath (as Lindwood affirms) but he that swears upon a book. 4.
It is not our practice to make any more of touching the book, then of lifting
up, of the hand, which is used in other Countries: i. to make it a sign of
assent unto that which is required of us. So that I for my part would not
find fault with those which sometime hold out a service-booke, or any other
to touch and kiss: for it is all one whether we show our assent one way or
another, so it be shown i^ a decent manner. 5. This form is not used in the
special solemn worship of God: but in a civil assembly, where occasionally
God is called upon for confirmation of the truth. And indeed, as the Def.
speaks well, an oath is rather a cognifance or note of supreme worship, then
proper and direct worship.

SECT. XXXII.
THe next instance is, The observation of the Lords day: which the Defendant
would never have brought in as an example of a humane ceremony, if he had not
either been sea-sicke or else sleepie with his long sailing which he spoke of
in the former section. For he takes it for granted, that we hold the Lords day
to be an institution of man, which we utterly deny: We hold, as Iunius
answers Bell. about this matter de cult. sanct. l. 3. c. 10. an. 33. c. 11.
an. 3. it is the divine institution of Christ himself.

By the way here he brings in a testimony of Zanchius, calling our Temples
types and shadows of the celestial Temple. But Zanchier meaning was not to
make them destinated instituted types: but only such things as by
accommodation may serve fitly to put us in mind of such a matter: even as any
arbitrarie similitude that is fit, may be called a tide and shadow. I would the
Defendant would read the very next Thesis of Zanchie to that he quoteth: there
he should see, that Images, though they be not for the present worshipped, yet
ought to be removed out of Churches, because they help not but hinder the
worship of God. If Images, then by the Def. own former grant, mystical
ceremonies of man's invention: and so mystical Churches too.

SECT. XXXIIII.
IN this last section, some reason is promised for a final confutation of the
Non-conformists in this point; but I for my part can see none. Nothing (says
he) is properly called a ceremony, if it be altogether destitute of
signification. Then (say I) away, and out of the Church with all ceremonies
properly so called, of man's invention. But why has he gone about to deceive
us so often before, by confounding circumstances of order and decency with
other ceremonies, and now in the winding up of all, confesses that they cannot
be properly called ceremonies? surely there is no reason in this kind of
dealing, but only that which they call Sophistry.

Calvin (says the Def.) and some other, do accuse the Popish ceremonies
because they are dumb. I answer, they accuse them also for speaking, as the
scripture does condemn Images both for being dumb, and also for teaching lies.
So that lay all together which those Divines say, and you shall find that in
their judgment, humane ceremonies in Gods worship, are like a fool in a place
of honor, who whether he speaks, or holds his peace, still shows
himself unworthy of that place.

CHAP. IIII.
SECT. I.
THis argument in the Abridgement, p. 17. stands thus: It is contrary to Gods
word to use (much more to command the use of) such ceremonies in the worship of
God, as man has devised, if they be notoriously known to have been of old,
and still to be abused unto idolatry or superstition by the Papists, specially
if the same be now of no necessary use in the Church. But our ceremonies are
such: Ergo.

The Defendants answer is very brief: he dares not absolutely deny either part
of the argument. He could not find a fit distinction whereupon to ground a
conditional denial with reason: he contents himself therefore to make a show
of distinguishing after an unreasonable manner. For he does not distinguish of
any one term found in the argument: nor makes the parts of his supposed
distinction such as will bear any Logical sense. If (says he) you require
such ceremonies to be abolished, then we deny your Major: but if you
understand indifferent things, or mean an absolute, not a convenient
necessity, we deny your Assumption. If this and but if that, this form of
speech, as indeed, every distinction, implies some dissension and segregation
in the parts distinguished. But here is no show of any such thing, betwixt
abolishing and indifferency, or absolute necssitie. I know not what to make of
such a confused distinction. It is as if one should say, If you require an
establishing of the ceremonies, I deny one thing; but if you understand
convevient ceremonies, I deny another thing. Such kind of speaking is nothing
else but non sense, or as some use to call it, a very bull. Let this general
answer therefore pass: though he says, that in it we may see our marks, and
take our aim.

SECT. II.
THE Abridgement begins the proof of the proposition thus. This may appear
1 by the second Com: which forbids all provocation unto spiritual fornication,
as the seventh does unto that which is carnal. 2 By ^^e commandment and
direction God has given as in his word, 3 By the equity and reason of these
commandments. Now the Def. though he professes a full answer to all that is
objected, yet he silently passes over the first proof out of the second
Command. wholy: and in the 2 and 3 proof, where about forty places of
Scripture are cited for confirmation of them, he does not attempt to answer
above 8 or 9. But let us examine his answer to these.

Lev. 18 etc. three kind of things are forbidden, 1 incest, 2 rounding their
heads and cutting their flesh for the dead, 3 sowing with diverse seeds, and
letting diverse beasts to engender together. The first was a sin against
nature: the second was a wicked custom of infidelity; the third did signify
adultery: in all which our ceremonies are innocent. He answers here only
unto the places taken out of the 18 and 19 of Lev. concerning which I reply 1
that in the first place the words are general, v. 3 4: howsoever therefore in
the following verses they be applied unto foul sins, yet seeing in other
places of Scripture the like application is made unto ceremonies, they were
therefore mentioned as the general ground, comprehending both kinds in it, and
joined unto other places condemning conformity with idolaters even in matters
of ceremony. 2 The second and third were no more wicked, nor yet so much in
any respect among the Heathen, as our ceremonies have been among the Papists:
And therefore in these, M. Calvin's collection in Lev. 19 27, is sound, God
would have his people to know, that they could not have his favor, except they
would in all points be unlike to such, and go as far as they could from
their fashions and examples, especially in those rites wherein there was any
show of Religion. 3 I would demand whether, if the high Priest, with the
whole Synedrion of the Jews lawfully assembled, had with one consent
decreed, that vvheras the Lord enjoyneth, Lev. 19 Ye shall not sow with
diverse seeds, nor cut round your heads, nor mar the tusts of your beards:
this was only in regard of infidelity, and in respect of an evil
signification: but seeing the things are in their nature indifferent, and that
it might be convenient for them to use them, they would therefore all from
thenceforth use the same, provided that none should use them upon infidelity as
the heathen did, not make any evil interpretation of them: I would demand (I
say) whether such a decree should ever have been lawfully made, or vvarrantably
obeyed? I think the Def. will say no. But why? Perhaps because of the
express commandment to the contrary; but does not this commandment then
respect some other reason, beside those which by this decree should be now
taken away? and may we not collect a further matter from them?

SECT. III.
BEcause one usual evasion, much esteemed by the patrones of our ceremonies,
is, that they had a good beginning: therefore the Authors of the Abridgement to
stop that muse, add that even such things are to be cast away, which had a
good original and use (if they be not still necessary and commanded of God)
when once they are known to have been defiled by idolatry, or abused unto it.
For proof vvherof they allege Lev. 26 1, and other places more. But the Def.
here singleth out this one, and denies that the titulary pillars of the
heathen (which were set up at limits of their grounds) had a good beginning.
Suppose that this be true, and that the Authors of the Abridgment were mistaken
in this place: is not the same thing sufficiently proved our of 2 King. 18 4,
Dan. 1 8, Hos. 2 16 17. But yet it is more then probable, that those titular
pillars, were at the first only set up for civil use: because many statues
which afterward served only for worship, were at the first only for civil
respects, and these had still a civil use for distinction of bounds. But
Calvin collecteth, that no statue was here condemned, but that which was
erected to represent God. Calvin indeed has those words: but what kind of
representation he means, he shows sufficiently before, omnes picturas
quibus corrumpitur spiritualis Dei cultus: all pictures that corrupts Gods
spiritual worship. And after, quaecunque nos a spiritualie^us cultu abducun^:
whatsoever lead us from the spiritual worship of God.

Jacob erected a pillar for a religious monument (says the Def.) Genesis 28,
true: but not after the Law was given against it: so also he offered
sacrifices, and many other things, in such sort as after the Law was not
lawful.

SECT. IIII.
THE third proof in the Abridgement stands thus: the equity of these
commandments is thus set down in Scripture: 1 the detestation which the Lord
our God being a jealous God bears unto idolatry, and all the instruments and
tokens thereof, as unto spiritual whoredom, Exodus 20 5 6, Deuteronomy. 7 25 26. 2
that we cannot be said sincerely to have repented of the idolatry or
superstition whereby we or our forefathers have provoked the Lord unless we
be ashamed of and cast away with detestation all the instruments and monuments
of it, 2 Chronicles. 33 15, Es. 1 29 and 2 20 and 30 22 2 Cor. 7 11, Call. in Deuteronomy.
sermon. 52 ep. 86 p. 166 167. 3 that we shall be in danger to be corrupted. Ex.
34 12 15, Deuteronomy. 7 4. 25. 26, Iud. 2 13, Gal. 2 5. 4. We shall harden
Idolaters, Ezech. 16 54 1 Cor. 6 10. 5. There is more danger in Popish
ceremonies, because the Pope is Antichrist, and we converse more with Papists
then with other Idolaters.

Now of all these reasons and allegations the Def. answers directly to
nothing, but only to those words see Calvin: and yet not to them neither as
they are cited in the Abridgement. For there it is, see Calvin in his 52 sermon.
on Deuteronomy. and ep. 87. Now on these places the Defendants eyes would not serve
to look: or at least, his heart would not suffer him to give answer, they are
so pregnant. If we have any drop of good zeal in us, it must needs vex and
grieve us to see the marks and signs of idolatry: and that we must to the
uttermost of our power deface them, etc. nothing upon pretense must be
tolerated in the Church, which came either from Satan or from Antichrist. Yet
the Def. says, he has seen Calvin upon Exodus 23 and 24, and Numb. 23 and
Deuteronomy. 7 12, and finds that Calvin holds these precepts of destroying Altars
and Groves, to bind the Jews only, not Christians: and he bids us see
Calvin on these places. Surely I have looked and could find no such thing. If
there had been any thing vvorth the knowing, for maintenance of the ceremonies,
we should have heard of the words of Calvin; whereas now Calvin is brought in
expressly affirming that we may use temples which have been defiled with
idols: which is nothing at all to the question of unnecessary ceremon. But if
the Def. would discuss this point out of Authors, whether the laws alleged
out of the old. Testament against the monuments of Idolatry, do not bind
Christians, why does he not answer to the testimonies of Calvin, Martyr,
Grineus, Wolphius, Visinus, Machabeus, Zanchius, Simlerus, Zepperus, Fulk, and
our book of homilies alleged to this purpose in the Abridg. p. 24.

SECT. V.
IN one place of Scripture yet, viz. Dan. 1 8, the Def. thinks he has some
advantage; because Calvin interprets it otherwise then of ceremonial
pollution. But therein the Abridgement followed that interpretation which is
most generally, received: for which see Iunius in his Commentary upon the
place. And suppose that pollution was not ceremonial or idolatrous, yet I
hope the Def. will not say but if the meat had been so polluted Daniel would
have absteyned from it.

Take therefore some other testimonies to prove your assertion, says the Def.
So confidently as if he knew of no ^estimonies which he had not answered. What
can one say to him that will not take that which is thrust into his hands, and
yet calls for more, as if he could find none?

SECT. VI.
THE last thing which the Def. will take knowledge of, as alleged out of the
Scriptures, in this point, is the example of Hezekiah 2 King. 1^ in breaking
down the brazen Serpent. This example is so famous, that he could not omit it:
yet he knows not well what to say unto it.

First, he gives five reasons for the abolishing of the brazen serpent. As if
any of us doubted, but that Hezekiah had reason enough for that he did: Or, as
if there could not be reasons enough alleged, and those almost the very same,
for abolishing of our ceremonies. Let them be abolished by public authority,
and I will undertake reasons to justify, the action done, will easily be
acknowledged even of those that now can see none to persuade unto the doing of
it.

Secondly, he propounds, as very observable, that Hezekiah did not abolish
the idols which Solomon suffered to be set up, because they were neglected.
But 1 it may well be thought that those idols were destroyed by Hezekiah, and
set up again before the time of Josiah, as many other superstitions were. 2 It
cannot be doubted but they should have been destroyed, even though they were
for the time neglected: because either Hezekiah had as good cause to destroy
them as Josiah: or else he might have prevented that cause which Josiah had:
and to prevent evil, we are as well bound, as to correct it.

Thirdly, he cites Zanchius to prove, that this is not an universal remedy
for all abuses of ceremonies. The place in Zanchie I cannot find: neither
skilleth it much. I grant the conclusion, it is not a remedy for all abuses of
ceremonies, viz. for such as Gods appointment has made necessary to be
retained. Besides the words of Zanchie here cited by the Def. do only
therefore seem to make for him, because they are not full enough against him.
But in other places of the same book Zanchius judgment is plain enough, as p.
649 where from this example he reproves those that keep the relics of
superstition in some holy places; though they have removed them out of
Churches. And if about this matter the Def. does ascribe any thing to the
judgment of our divines, why does he not answer the testimonies of Augustine,
Calvin, Martyr, Wolphius, Lavater, Zanchius, Sadeel, Jewel, Bilson, Fulk,
Rainolds, Andrews, Perkins, alleged to this purpose in the Abridgement, p. 24?

Fourthly and lastly (which only in deed is to the purpose) the Def. would
show us a disparity betwixt the idolatry of the Jews, and that of the Papists.
The first is, that that idolatry of the Jews was done publickely, and
generally, and in the bowels of the same Church: but the Papists is not so. To
which I answer 1 these circumstances are not rendered as reasons of the
abolishing in the text, but invented by the Def. 2 private particular idolatry
is to be removed as well as public and general: 3 all these circumstances did
more then agree to our ceremonies in the beginning of our reformation. And sure
they are not grown better since, by any good that they have done.

The second difference which the Def. imagines, is that there was no other
means to cure the idolatry of those times: but now there is. I answ. 1 this is
the very question whether there be any other sufficient means to cure the
disease of humane ceremonies idolatrously abused beside abolishing. 2 It is a
vain imagination whereby this difference is confirmed, and no reason at all.
In the Dominions of our Ezekias (says the Def.) this disease would be found
curable without any such extremity. But the experience of 50 or 60 years show,
that hitherto it is not cured neither in Ireland, nor Wales, to say nothing of
England. Surely our Prelates are miserable Physicians, that in a disease so
easy to be cured, suffer the patients to languish under their hands, unto
death. Especially (says he) in this our most truly reformed Church, which
does most lively express the face and full body of her primitive mother
Church. This he has now 3 or 4 times repeated: as if he did desire to make a
question of it: and here propounds it with a doubt, if you will allow. It is
not sit here to make a long digression about this matter. In short therefore
thus, we allow with all thankefulnes, that our Church is to be called a
reformed Church in regard of the main points of faith, which are purely and
freely taught among us with public approbation: and also in regard that the
grossest superstitions are by public authority cast out of our Assembles. But
if our Ecclesiastical government be considered, and some ceremonious
superstions, we deny utterly, that we have such a reformation therein, as may
represent the face of the primitive Church. Let the Defendant tell us, if ever
the primitive Church had such chanting idol service as is every day to be seen
in our Cathedral Churches? If there were in the primitive Church Chancellors,
Commissaries, Officials under the Bishops, which executed the censures of that
Church? If he can show any primitive pompous Bishops that had sole authority
of ordination and excommunication? If any Minister was called in the primitive
Chapter without express consent of the congreg. over which he was set? if
Ministers were then wont to go to law for their places? if the Primitive
Church ever heard of Pluralists, Non-residents or dumb ministers? If either in
primitue or else in Popish Church almost simony was ever so ordinary as it is
with us? If ever so many profane men, openly known to be contemners of
Religion, were members of any primitive Church, as are of ours? If ever he
read of such carnal proceedings about Ecclesiastical affairs in primitive
times, as are every day practiced in our spirituall-courts? who took money for
ordination, citation, absolution, or change of penance?

I will not insist on these things, because they are beside our present
question; but only desire the Def. to behold this face which I have described
in a right glass, and see if it be the face of the pure primitive Church.

SECT. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
THE testimonies of Councels and Fathers, alleged in the Abridgement about
this point, are largely ranked by the Def. into 14 Sections, as if the maine
burden of this Controversy did lie upon their authority: vvheras in the
Abridgement they are briefly mentioned as illustrations. I will therefore
according to the intent of those which alleged them, consider all together.

7. In the fifth Council of Carhage it is true, that he says, those Altars
were only expressly appointed to be abolished, which were set up without
relics of Martyrs. But let the Def. show any reason, why those also were not
to have the same measure which had relics of martyrs in them? Surely the
Council* seems to aim at a perfect reformation: but stayed at this, because
of the superstition which then prevailed among the peoples as they show in
that parenthesis (si fieri potest) if it may be: and in the next Canon.

8 In the next canon (says the Def.) they would only have immediate
instruments of Idolatry then brought into public use abolished. But how does
he gather this gloss out of the Text? Or wherein does this gloss excuse our
ceremonies, especially as they were in the beginning of our reformation? and
since they have mended as sour Al^ does in summer.

9 To the decree of the Council of Bracara, forbidding men to deck their
houses etc. in such manner and at such time as idolaters did, the Def.
answers nothing that has any show of reason in it. For our ceremonies differ
nothing from the Papists in place, persons, time, but only in some opinion:
Now the Council there does not forbid the opinion, but the ceremony, even to
them which were of a better opinion.

10 The Council of Afric does give a reason why they condemned certain
feasts, because, they were drawn from the errors of the Gentiles. Herein I am
sure it makes against our ceremonies.

11 To Tertullian de Coron. the Def. says less then nothing. For he does not
speak of the same individual habit which was used to idolatry, as the Def.
vainly pretends: nor of that kind which was only used in idolatrous
worship. For in the same book c. 13, he says this habit of a garland was used
in most base places, as plays, stews, jakes etc.

12 The like answer is given unto Tertullian de Orat. 1 in general it is said,
that Tertullian does not condemn these ceremonies merely for resemblance with
idolaters: but for opinion of efficacy and necessity: whereas the contrary is
plain in Tertullian, for he says expressly, Propterea in nobis reprehendi
meretur, quod apud idola celebratur. Therefore it is to be blamed in us,
because it is used before Idols: And B. Jewel Def. Apol. with many other of
our best Writers against the Papists do urge these testimonies of Tertullian
merely in regard of resemblance. 2 In washing (says the Def.) some did then
hold an opinion of efficacy and necessity. If they did, that is nothing to
the purpose; for they might be condemned in that behalf, and yet merely also
for resemblance with idolaters. But no such thing appears in Tertullian, he
tells us plainly, that the washing before prayer was a significant sign in
remembrance of Christ's delivering unto the Jews by Pilate, when he had washed.
Cum scrupulose percontarer, and rationem requirerem, compe^i commemorationem
esse in domini deditionem, c. 11, so that I do not see but that this washing
was every way like unto our sign of the cross in regard of the original
signification and use of it. 3 In the ceremony of dossing cloakes before
prayer, there was an opinion of necessity, because Tertullian says, si sic
oportet, if this ought to be done. As if sic oportet, ought to be done, ought
always to be expounnded of an absolute necessity. Do not our Prelates now
say, sic oportet, we ought to use the ceremonies, and yet disclaim this
opinion of necessity? Tertullian only condemns, Vacua observatio, vanitas,
quae sine ullius dominici out apostolici praecepti authoritate fit, atque adeo
superstitioni deputanda^ All these agree to our ceremonies as well as to that.
4 For sitting upon beds after prayer, the opinion of necessity is only
condemned by Tertullian (says the Def.) because he infers, otherways we
ought not to pray but sitting. But that inference is only upon an allegation
out of Hermas which Tertullian opposes to himself about the matter.
Concerning the ceremony it self, the grounds of his condemnation are, perinde
faciunt nationes: apud idola celebratur. So that the Defendant has given no
colorable answer unto Tertullian. Yet one thing he cannot conceal, though it
be nothing to the purpose, viz. that Tertullian in that place condemns
sitting at prayer, which we bring up our Scholars unto. He might surely have
concealed this, as being a shameless slander in regard of us, as all that know
us can witness: and a shameful practice of our Prelates, generally in all
prayers before and after Sermons, except it be when the Lords prayer is
repeated: for it is well known how little respect they give unto any prayers,
but only to the Lords prayer, and those that are in the Service Book.

13 Melchiades forbad fasting at the same time with Pagans. That was (says
the Def.) because they lived in the same Conutrey, at the same time and place
Nothing else he has to answer. And does Country, time and place, make such a
difference, that the same ceremonies in one Country, time and place, shall be
Christian, and in another Paganish? What if the Countries be within half a
days sail, as France is to England, and the time be the same, as it is in our
case? confess the truth, and shame the devil.

14 Ambrose dissuaded Monica from bringing of wine and cakes to the Church.
There is no proportion (says the Def.) for that was an act of sacrificing
performed by women, who are forbidden to sacrifice, as well as to preach:
devised by private persons: of an idolatrous invention. The first of which
answers is Bellarmines de sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 14, but evidently false. For
the Papists themselves are not so gross as to confess that they offer any
proper sacrifice unto any creature whatsoever, Bellat. de sanct. beat. lib. 1
cap. 12: and shall I we think the mother of Augustine, with other religious
women in those purer times to have been guilty of so great impiety? Epiphanius
may call it a sacrifice in a rhetorical phrase, because it was an offering:
but in disputations we must speak properly, yet Epiphanius does call it only
an offering. 2 the person or sex of a woman, makes no difference. For Monica
was not the inventer and appointer, but only the actor: and a woman may bring
her offering and lay it upon the Communion table as well as a man. 3. It does
not appear that this was the invention of private persons: there have been
Bishops which have fathered as good children as this was: and I do not know
why such a thing, or any significant ceremony may not be lawfully used upon
private devotion, if it be lawful for men to impose it. 4. If that which
Monica did was Idolatrous, it is the very thing for which our ceremonies are
accused. 5. Lastly, neither Ambrose, Augustine, or Monica regarded these things
in condemning of that act: for the reasons are only two Ne ulla occasio
ingurgitandi se daretur ebriosis: and quia illa quasi parentalia superstitioni
gentilium essent simillima. The latter of which, viz. resemblance of ^igans, is
that which we urge.

15 To a grave sentence of Augustine, counselling to forsake all the toys of
Pagans, if we would winn them, nothing is answered but that those toys are
not to be used together with Pagans, as if apart some of those toys at the
least may be profitably used. Surely to return his own phrase upon him, de bove
and efus caud^, if others will eat up the ox, this Def. will make no bones of
the tail, so it be apart.

16 The Council of Nice decreed that Christians might not keep the feast of
Easter at the time, or in the manner as the Jews did. Not (says the Def.)
that it was always unlawful so to do, which question I will leave to them
that are skilful in human trao^tions, but 1. for hatred of the Jews. 2.
because of the Jews insultation. 3. for uniformity. The last of these causes
does not agree: for uniformity might as well have followed, if all Christians
could have been drawn to the same time with the Jews. The other two agree
well to our ceremonies. For we are to hate the idolatrous superstitions of the
Papists with a perfect hatred. And the Papists do insult over us for this,
that we have borrowed our ceremonies from them; as is to be seen in the Abridg.
p. 25. where much is said to this purpose, and by the D. unanswered. And I
would fain know for what causes other ceremonies of the Papists are abolished,
if not these, or for such at the least as would sweep away our ceremonies in
controversy, as well as them, if it pleased them that have such bezomes in
their hands?

17 The Council of Gangren forbad fasting on the Lords day only (says the
Def.) if it were in contempt of Christian profession. But Augustine Ep. 86.
tells us the true reason was because the heretics did reach men to do so,
sacra solemnitate statuta; with religious solemnity, as the Papists now do in
the Cross. And whereas the Defen^ asks, if there be any contempt of any
Christian article in our ceremonies: I answer, the cross cannot be otherwise
used, then with proiudice, disgrace, and so some kind of contempt cast upon
baptism.

18 The 1 council of Bracar forbad abstinence from flesh, that Christians might
show themselves to differ from Priscillianists, the Def. answer is, that the
Papists do not consort with us in the same ceremonial acts as the
Priscillianists did with the Catholics, at the same ordinaries and banquets.
But there is no such reason rendered, or limitation set in the council, of the
same ordinaries and banquets: the same ceremony only is condemned.

19 Thrice-dipping in Baptism was condemned by a Council of Toledo, approved
by Leo, because it was the custom of Heretics. This was (says the Def.)
because an heretical construction was made of it. Even so (say we) a
superstitious construction is made of our cross, not only by the Papists, but
by our own canons and Canonical imposers of it.

20 Leo forbidding men to have any thing to do with heretics, means it only
of doctrinal conference, says the Def. But conformity with them in their
ceremonies is a greater fault (for the nature of it) then doctrinall disputing
with them. Therefore the testimony holds, from the less to the greater.

Thus in brief I have examined his particular answers unto our testimonies out
of Counsels and Fathers. B^t one answer might have served for all, viz. that
they were not brought in by the Authors of the Abridgement for to make an
immediate conclusion by against our ceremonies, as the Def. in his answers
evermore takes them: but to illustrate the proposition which condemns
conformity with Idolaters in their ceremonies. And herein we have not only
the Fathers, but even the Papists themselves in words many times consenting
with us. Suarez. in Thom. p. 3. q. 65. makes it one rule which the Church is
to follow in appointing of ceremonies.

Now the Def. passes from the proposition of this argument, unto the
assumption. But he should have done well to have made a little stand at the
army of Protestants which are brought in as giving witness to this truth.
Abridg. p. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. and 25. why had we not hear one head of
Protestant Divines, as well as in the former arguments, seeing more are cited
here then in them? Surely the Def. could not tell how to give a colorable answer
to so many pregnant testimonies, and therefore thought good to pass them over
in silence, and make his reader believe, that none were objected, because none
are answered.

SECT. XXI.
THe Def. here meaning to say something against the assumption, sets it down
by halves, or rather by quarters. For the assumption is, Abridg. 26. 27. our
ceremonies in question are humane inventions, of no necessary use, and abused
to idolatry. He sets it thus down, our ceremonies have been idolatrously
abused by Papists. There is great difference, as by and by we shall see. His
answer is by a distinction: These ceremonies are either generally or
individually and numerally the same that have been abused to idolatry: If
generally, then it hinders not, but they may still lawfully be used, though
they have been so abused. If individually, then it is not true, which is
affirmed: neither does it follow from thence, that they must be abolished,
because they have been so abused, except they be the same formally: i. in
intention and opinion of those that impose and practice them: What miserable
shifts is the Def. put to? he told us before, his distinctions were wedges: but
this is a very pick-lock, made for to open the doors of Gods^ Church into
those ceremonies against which by the keys of Gods kingdom they are
straightly shut up. For by this means any kind of Popish, Jewish, Heathenish
ceremony may come in, so there be new particulars of the same kind, and a new
intention used. The first assertion is most gross, viz. that in ceremonies
abused to Idolatry, those are not forbidden which are generally the same, but
only the same individualls. For by the like reason, of ceremonies instituted
by Christ, those only are commanded which Christ individually and numerally
did sanctify: not all of the same kind. So also Papists are justified against
all the charges of our divines, who accuse them for using of Jewish and
Heathenish ceremonies: for they are not the same individually and numerally,
but only in kind with those which Jews and heathens used. So the meaning of
the scripture, forbidding conformity with the heathen Idolaters, should only
be of using the same particular rites and ceremonies with them: as if when the
cutting of their heads, and rounding of their hair like the heathen, was
forbidden to the Israelites; Lev. 18. and 19. there had been danger lest the
people of Israel should either get heathen men's heads, and set them upon their
shoulders, or heathen men's beards, and set them upon their faces, and then put
them into the forbidden fashion. It is but folly to confute largely such a
beggarly assertion.

But if (says the Def.) the same generally be forbidden, then you cannot
justify any one of your own ceremonies of order and decency. Why so? because
there is no gesture or circumstance of worship which has not been abused to
Idolatry. Now he shows plainly wherefore he set down only a piece of the
assumption: for if the reader mark, that our assumption is only of ceremonies
devised by man, and of no necessary use, then he shall see that this poor
objection concerning circumstances of order and decency, can have no place
here: for they are of necessary use in their kind, neither are they mere
inventions of man, as the ceremonies are, by Bellarmines own confession, de
effect. sacr. lib. 2. c. 29. For the second, that our ceremonies are not (...)
the same which the Papists have solemnly abused to Idolatry, if this be
granted, it is no marvel: for it is altogether impossible to carry the same
particular sign of the cross so far as, from the font to the Church door: or
to keep it in being, so long as it is in making. Has not the Def. then found
out a great subtle mystery in this distinction? yet it seems more true, that
the Papists do give divine honor unto the same individual ceremonies which are
used in England: especially to the sign of the cross as it is used among us.
For Bellarmine ascribes divine honor and operation unto the sign of the
cross as it was used by heathens, by Jews, by Julian the Apostate, Bell^de
eff. sacr. l. 2. c. 31. Though the Papists count us heretics, and I know not
what, yet they esteem us not worse then Pagans, unbeleeving Jews, and cursed
Apostates. Seeing therefore they yield such honor to this sign as it was used
by them, they cannot deny it unto our individual crosses.

The last conceit, that our ceremonies are not formally the same with the
Papists, because we have another intention and opinion of them then they, and
therefore need not be abolished, is as vain as the former. For (not to dispute
here of material and formal identitie) 1. a very show of Idolatry must be
abstained from and abolished. 2. It cannot be said simply and truly, that our
intention and opinion concerning the ceremonies, is not the same with the
Papists. For we have no intention or opinion in the use of the cross, or other
ceremonies, but the Papists have the same; only they have some other opinions
about these things which we have not. And if this does make a ceremony not
the same, that men have not altogether the same opinion of it, then among the
Papists there are also as many kind of ceremonies, crosses, Surplices, etc. as
there is diversity of opinion about their nature and use, which no man will
say. 3. the Altar erected by Vria, 2. King. 16. was an idolatrous Altar, like
that of Damascus, though it was for another intention. 4. the Papists do
ascribe divine honor to the ceremonies used with our intention, as formerly
was showed out of Bellarmine. 5. This is the Papists answer when they are
accused for symbolizing with Pagans and Jews in their ceremonies: Licet in
externo symbolo sit aliqua similitudo, absolute tamen maximum est discrimen:
nam a sine and intention sumunt externae actiones speciem suam. Bell. de
effect. sacr. lib. 2. c. 32.

SECT. XXII.
HEre, as a ground of confutation, the Def. sets down the profession of the
Church of England: which because he draws no conclusion from, it is not
needful to examine, though it cannot be defended, that the most abused
ceremonies are taken away (as this profession tells us) because no one
ceremony among the Papists has been so much abused as the cross. That
therefore only I would have here marked, how this profession does confute this
Defender. For he would make us believe, that none of the old ceremonies used in
Popery, are retained, because they are not formally the same in respect of
intention and opinion. But this profession tells us plainly, that some of the
old ceremonies do remain.

SECT. XXIII.
NO example can the Defendant find in all the book of God, for lawful
reserving of Idolatrous ceremonies, but only two; one of Gedeon, Judge. 6. 26.
and another of Joshua, los. 6. 19. and yet of Gedeons example, the Def.
himself confesses, that it was by special commandment from God: and that it
is not every way imitable. And of Ioshuas, beside that it was also the
express commandment of God; and that there is no mention made of things
appropriated unto Idolatry, but only of goods which had been the possession of
Idolaters: so that he may fetch as good an argument and better, from the
Spanish Crusadoes, for the cross in baptism, then from the riches of Jericho.
It does no way appear in the text, but that the vessels were first molten,
and then the gold only, and the silver, brass or iron of them, brought into
the tabernacle. So that by this wretched penury of Scripture proofs, it is
manifest, that the vvarrant for reteining of humane Idolatrous ceremonies, must
be fetched out of another court, then that which God holds in his holy word.

SECT. XXIIII.
I Had thought verily that the Def. would have brought some pregnant
testimonies out of the Fathers, though he could find none in the holy
Scriptures. But he is here also as far to seek as before: for he brings
nothing at all vvorth the answering. The feast of Easter (which now the fourth
time is brought upon the stage by the Def. in vain) was never generally
observed at the same time with the Jews, nor ever so appointed by any decree
or canon of Council: if it had, yet that had been but an agreement in a
circumstance of time, and the translation of it to another time, did show, they
liked of no conformity of Jews. There were feasts also appointed at times
differing from heretics. What Cart-rope will draw a conclusion from hence for
conformity with idolaters in their ceremonies? Besides, feasts and fasts, he
names habits, but gives no instance or proof at all of any such thing.
Circumcision, he says, was continued under many Christian Bishops of
Jerusalem. But let him show that those Christian Bish. allowed of any such
thing. I never heard nor read of more confident conclusions out of such
beggarly premises.

SECT. XXV.
THe reasons had need be strong, when they come without any testimony of
Scripture, and antiquity. But here the Defendant is as much forsaken of all
help, as he was in the other. His first reason is, because heretics have
perverted the sacraments Now he knew that the question is of humane ceremonies,
not of Gods holy institutions: therefore he fetches about, and draws this to
his purpose, by gathering from thence, that it is almost impossible to find
any ceremony without exception. All which we grant, of human significant
ceremonies, as he knows well: except therefore he be resolved to make a
trade of begging the question, I know not what he should mean by this
unreasonable reason.

SECT. XXVI. XXVII.
THe very same disease is found in his second reason: vvherout he can conclude
nothing, but that some things abused may afterward be rightly used; which we
willingly grant: nay, it may be granted of some human ceremonies also* as if
the Surplices of England were turned into under garments for poor people: and
vvoodden crosses were given them for firing. But if any conclude from hence,
that therefore they may have lawful state in Gods worship, and there have a
good use, surely his wit and words might be better used.

In the 27 section there is no show of any reason at all, except affirmations
be reasons.

SECT. XXVIII.
THE last reason is, because Popery and Popish rites are not to be esteemed of
equal abomination with Paganism and Paganish rites. Suppose this were true
every way (as it is not) yet in this they may ^agrree, that both alike are to
be detested and abandoned. Nay, a lesser superstition the authors and
countenances whereof are near at hand, does call for more hasty removal, then
a greater, whose authors and users are unknown. Howsoever, when the
scriptures bid us fly from Idolatry, and that also particularly, from Popish
Idolatries without any distinction, as from Devils, Ap. 18. a few smoothing
words cannot satisfy our consciences in this, but, that we are as well and
as far to fly from Popish Idolatry, as from Paganish. But if the Defendant
would have thoroughly discussed this question, why did he not answer that
which Mr. Parker has to this purpose? p. 1. c. 1. S. 25. or that which is
alleged in the Abridgement, p. 24.

SECT. XXIX.
OUR Witnesses can give the Defendant but small aid, being separated from
scripture and reason; yet he catches at three, Calvin, Martyr, and Zepperus.
Calvin (says he) teaches that there is great difference betwixt Turks and
Papists, lib. de vitand superst. True, but in the same place he answers the
consequence which you would make from hence, viz. that therefore we need not
fly so far from Popish superstition, as from heathen: and in the same place
also he argues from Turks to Papists. Calvin's purpose was not to condeme any
thing but that which is evil in it self. True, in that discourse wherein he
deals against those which could swallow down the mass it self: it had
been no wisdom to dispute with them about Cross and Surplice. He allows
of Temples which have been abused to Idolatry. So do we, because they are not
religious ceremonies, of mystical signification, without necessary use. And
is this all that can be brought out of Calvin? Then surely he does not
contradict the many sentences of condemnation which as other where, so also in
that very Tractate, he passes against Idolatrous relics.

Zepperus is alleged as allowing of Temples, which have been abused, because
they were not immediate instruments of Idolatry. So do we al^o, as before I
said, for that and other causes. But altars in the same place he condemns:
which yet are retained in our Cathedral Churches, and I hope the cross being
an Idol it self, had as immediate commu^ion with Idolatry, as Zepper or any
reasonable Judge would require for the cashiering of it.

As for Peter Martyr, howsoever in one epistle to Hooper, he sets as good a
color upon the relics of Idolatry as he could, because he thought by a
little yielding of Hooper and such men, the superstitions themselves might
quickly be removed: yet in another Epistle, p. 1125. he gives this peremptory
sentence, Profecto si ex animo superstitiones edissemus, vel ipsa eorum
vestigia omnibus modis curaremus extirpanda: 1. If we hated superstition from
the heart, we would abolish all the relics of it. To the same purpose he
speaks p. 1127. where he shows that his conscience would never suffer him
to wear the Surplice, when he was Canon of Christ church in Oxford. If this
were not his reason, he had some other very much a kin to this. Neither will
the Defendant say hastily, I hope, that either Peter Martyr, or Hooper, were
disorderderly exorbitant men in those times, fit to be displaced, that more
discreet conformists might come in their places: as now he pronounces of those
that refuse to conform.

SECT. XXX.
WHen all fail, a contradiction must be found betwixt our conclusions, and our
confessions and practices, but I assure my self, there is not any reader so
simple, but if he look over this section, will presently see, that he has not
brought one example of any humane ceremony, not necessary, notoriously known*
to have been abused unto Idolatry, that is allowed by us. Why then should I
spend ink and paper in laboring to un^wine such ropes of sand? Only I would
ask the Defendant certain questions.

1. If a Temple, a Bell, or a Table-cloth have such idolatry put upon them by
the Papists, as the cross has?

2 If his own heart do not tell him, that there is a civil use of such things,
which cannot be imagined of the cross?

3 What superstition there was in the mere significations given by Durandus
unto Bells, and Bell-ropes, which is not to be found in the Cross and
Surplice?

4 Whether the Pagan use of Bay-leaues which was above a thousand years past,
does cast such a reflection upon our civil use of bay-leaues, as the Popish
superstition does upon our ceremonies?

5 What sense he had to find fault with us for not altering the situation of
Churches?

6 If it be all one to call a ship by the name of Castor and Pollux, as Paul
does, Act. 28. 11. and to use a religious ceremony in Gods worship, which is
taken from these Idols?

7 If it be one thing to change copes into cushions, and to use a Mass
vestiment in Gods worship?

8 If it be not a kind of slander to say, that the Church of Geneva imposes a
round wafer cake, like the Papists, to be used in the Lords Supper, when as
only unleavened bread is used, because custom in that part more prevailed,
then the grave advice of Calvin, Farel, Viret, and the other excellent pastors?
And if it be not a wide leap, to bring in the practice of Geneva, for an
instance of the Non-conformists practice in England?

By that time these questions be truly answered, the Defendant will have but
a small harvest out of our confessions and practices.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I. ad X.
THE Authors of the Abridgement framed a strong Argument against our
ceremonies from the rules of ceremonies prescribed in the Word, p. 43 etc. with
this Argument when the Defendant was not able to grappell, as it stood in the
parts combined, he thought good to sever some parcels of it, and try what he
could say to them apart. Thus out of this one Argument he has taken that which
he calls our first: and out of the same he has made up this fifth: and yet
he has quite left out a great part of the sinews wherewith that one reason
is knit together in the Abridgement.

The argument is taken from the scandal or offense which the imposing and
using of these ceremonies do bring unto diverse sort^ of men.

The Defendant here makes great flourishing in nine whole Sections, defining,
dividing, and subdividing a scandal, as if he would make all clear before
him: but at the end of all this preparation, he makes no application of these
Rules unto the matter in hand at all: but only, tells his Reader, p. 154,
That these divisions and subdivisions will expedite all difficulties, so that
out of them he may collect the true and false sense of Scriptures alleged. It
were sufficient therefore either to deny this power to be in his divisions: or
else to set down as many other subdivisions of scandal (which were easy to
do) and then tell him that these will expedite the controversy, and that
from them he may collect the errors of his answer. But I will notwithstanding
briefly show my opinion concerning some of these dictates.

The definition which he only allows of as accurate is, that a scandal is
a wilful offense against Christians, in provoking of them unto any damnable
error or sin, by any sensible external means: Sect. 1. Wherein
notwithstanding many faults may be found. For 1 every scandal is not wilful,
except the word be taken more largely then use of speech will allow. 2 Every
scandal is not against Christians. 3 A scandal is not only by provoking to
sin, but also in hindering from good. 4 what does he mean to put in the word
damnable? the occasioning of any sin, suffices to make up a scandal.

Among his subdivisions, the first thing I except against is, section 5, where
he distinguishes so betwixt persons and causes, either determined or
undetermined, that in matters determined by the Church (as he teaches)
obedience is to be given without respect of scandal: and only in matters
undetermined there is a charitable consideration to be had of other men's
consciences. This is a new and a tickle point of Divinity touching the
tenderest part of our spirits, even our consciences, and other men's also. It
ought therefore either not to have been propounded, or else to be well
confirmed either with testimonies, or with reasons drawn out of Scripture. But
alas the Def. thrusts it upon us without any such vvarrant. The peace of the
Church (says he) is to be preferred before the grievance i. e. scandal of any
sort of men. As if the peace of the Church did not more consist in avoiding of
scandals, then in observing of humane ceremonies! it is not the peace of God
which is broken by a charitable care of avoiding offenses, but by rushing into
them.

A scandal in the nature of it is spiritual murder. Now suppose a Superior
should command a thing in it self indifferent, whereupon murder were like to
follow, as to run a horse, or a cart, in a certain way, at a certain time,
when it may be unwitting to the commander, little children were playing in the
way, would any man's conscience serve him to do it?

Avoiding of scandal is a maine duty of charity. May Superiors at their
pleasure appoint how far I shall show my charity toward my brothers soul?
Then surely an inferior earthly court may cross the determinations of the
high Court of heaven.

The superiors have no power given them for destruction, but only for
edification. If therefore they command scandalls, they go beyond their
commission: neither are we tied therein to do as they bid, but as they should
bid.

If determination by superiors were sufficient to take away the sin of a
scandal. Then they do very ill that they do not (so far as is possible)
determine all things indifferent, that so no danger may be left in giving of
offense by the use of them. Then the Church of Rome is to be praised in that
she has determined of so many indifferents; then Paul with the other Apostles
might have spared a great deal of labor in admonishing the Churches how they
should avoid offenses about some indifferent things. A far shorter way had
been either to determine the matter finally, or else to have given order that
the Churches should among themselves determine it at home.

But say that the Archbishop of Corinth (for now I suppose such a one) had
called his Convocation, and with consent of his Clergy had determined that
men might, and for testifying of liberty should at a certain time eat of such
and such meats which men formerly doubted of: would not yet the Apostle have
given the same direction he did? would not good Christians still have had care
of their brothers consciences? Can the determination of a superior be a
sufficient plea at the bar of Gods judgment seat, for a man that by virtue
or force thereof alone, has done any action that his conscience tells him
will scandalize his brother?

Lastly, I would feign know whether those superiors do not give a great
scandal, which take upon them determinately to impose unnecessary rites
which they know many good men will be scandalized by?

The second notorious flaw which I find in the Defendant his subdivisions is
sect 9, where he grants that much indulgence indeed is to be used in things
indifferent toward weak persons, whose infirmity proceeds only from simple
ignorance: but that only till such time as the doctrine concerning such things
have been sufficiently declared: because a scandal does always presuppose a
mere weakness for want of due means of knowledge. For 1 Paul had
sufficiently declared that it was lawful for him to take wages, yet he would
not, 1 Cor. 9, he had given sufficient reasons for the lawfulness of eating
all kind of meats, yet he abstayned, and so counseled others, for fear of
scandal, Romans 14 1 Cor 9. 2 There can be no certain set time for all sorts of
men when they are sufficiently taught. 3 Who is this Def. that he dare judge
so many of his fellow servants, that in such indifferencies as our ceremonies
are held to be, they take offense not upon weakness, but upon presumption? 4
What authority have our Prelates to obtrude unnecessary ceremonies upon the
Church, which must be declared before they can be used? Is it fit that the
people should be troubled with the declararion of men's inventions, when they
are hardly brought to hear willingly the maine things of the Gospel? 5 Is it
not more agreeable to the wisdom of God, Ex. 21. 33, to fill up the pit, then
to set one by for to warn the passengers they fall not into it? 6 There was
never yet sufficient declaration of this doctrine of ceremonies throughout
England. In many places there is no preaching at all. Many preach so, that they
declare nothing almost to the people but their own folly. Many are ashamed, or
at least unwilling to declare unto the people men's devices. Many declare them
so corruptly that the scandal thereby is not removed but increased. And among
those that go about with some good mind to declare this kind of doctrine,
there is almost as great variety of declarations as there is of declarers:
while some will have them significant some not: some say they are good and
profitable to edification, and others condemning them as altogether unfit,
declare them to be tolerable for avoiding of a greater mischief: Some will
have them only civil, and others Ecclesiastical: some excuse all but the
cross, and some extol the cross above all. Are not such declarations (think
you) likely to inform well the consciences of poor men who doubt more whom
they should take for a good Declarer, then they did at the first of the things
themselves?

SECT. X.
AMong the instances of scandal arising from the ceremonies, that which in
the Abridgement has the third place is set first by the Def. viz, that the
superstitions Papist will be hardened in the liking of his abominable Religion,
from which he sees we borrow our ceremonies, and increase in his hope of the
full restoring of it again. To this the Def. answers, that our rites are not
the ceremonies of Papists, because they are purged from superstition. But 1
that they are not purged from all superstition has sufficiently been declared
before. 2 This plea of transubstantiating of ceremonies by the breath of our
Convocation is a mere shift, contrary not only to the language of all our
Divines, and to that which every man's senses do tell him, but also to the
public profession of the Church of England, in the preface to our
service book, as it is cited by him p. 127. For there we are told 1 that an
abatement is made of the excess of Popish ceremonies: All therefore are not
abolished, but some remain. And which be they, if these in question be not? 2
That some of the old ceremonies do remain. What sense can be given of these
words, if our ceremonies be not the same with those which were of old among
the Papists? if it were meant of old ceremonies not used among the Papists,
then they do not remain, nor are retained, but restored. 3 That none are
devised anew* therefore they must needs be taken from the Papists, or from the
Fathers: but of the Fathers surplice or kneeling at the communion, no instance
can be given: and as for the cross, the Def. himself will not defend, I
think, all that use which the Fathers put it to. 3. The Papists own words do
sufficiently manifest how they are hardened by the imposition and use of our
ceremonies. For as it is showed in the Abridgement p. 25, they seek to justify
their superstition by this, that we have borrowed our ceremonies from them. And
some of them thence conclude (as there is showed) that our Governors like
well of their superstition. Beside Gretser, a principal Jesuit says, that in
these ceremonies our Ministers are as Apes of Popish Priests, Apol. pr^ Gregor.
7 page 8, and in his defense, t^m. 2 lib. 4 cap. 16 says, that our Convocation
house in imposing these Ceremonies, do cross the judgment of our best
Divines. Lastly, the respect of that Popish superstition wherewith our people
were then generally infected, was the chief, if not the only cause why these
ceremonies were retained by our first Reformers. See more of this in M.
Parker, p. 2 c. 6 sect. 10.

SECT. XI.
THE second instance is, that that the profane will draw many arguments hence
to bless himself in his contempt of all Religion. The Def. asks, from
whence? I answer, from hence: 1 that Religious rites are invented by men, and
appointed to be used in Gods worship, even after the same manner that Gods
Ordinances are, or at least were of old: 2 That trifles are urged, to the
increasing of contention: 3 that many place such holiness in these things which
they know to be men's devises: 4 that other ceremonies are cried down, as if
they were against Religion, which yet are every way as good as these: 4 that
religious men are more molested for these toys, then they are for their
profaneness.

SECT. XII.
THE third instance of scandal is in vveak brethren, who will be drawn to
yield unto the ceremonies against their consciences, or else doubtingly: and
some also will grow to dislike some Ministers for these things, and so be
hindered from profiting by their ministry. To this the Def. answers in many
words: but the sum of all he says is, that these are not weak brethren,
because they have been diligently catechized by Non-conformists. But 1 the
Corinthians no doubt were diligently catechized: and yet there were many weak
among them. 2 The Def. I hope takes order (or else he may be ashamed) that all
his Dioc^ffe be diligently catechized; yet I think he will not say but there
are many vveak souls in that circuit: 3 The Catechisers he speaks of have
had enough to do, to teach the people the maine points of Religion: as for
instructing them concerning the lawfulness of humane ceremonies, they left
that to those that impose them, or to their servants: 4 After long teaching and
sufficient knowledge, there may be still a weakness in regard of some things,
through many circumstances required unto strength, beside bare knowledge.
Lastly, we confess, that (upon supposition that the Def. his doctrine be sound
in these points) we are yet weak in these points, as we are also in some other,
wherein our adversaries are so strong, that they can bear many Churches and
such like things, upon their shoulders, without feeling any burden of them,
which we cannot. See M. Park. ca. 6 sect. 18.

SECT. XIII.
THE fourth instance is thus set down in the Abridgement, pa. 50, As there is
danger in the use of these ceremonies in all Congreg^tions, so especially if
they shall be brought back again unto those, where they have been long out of
use. In this case Calvin, Brentius, B^cer, Hemingius, Beza, Grinaeus and other
great Divines esteem^ them wicked and unlawful.

To all this the Def. gives no answer: but only takes occasion to make a
frothy comparison betwixt the laws and power of particular Congregations, and
the whole Convocation house. Which because it neither pertains to the
present purpose, nor contains any thing of moment, I leave as I found: though
it may be easily proved, that many particular Congregations can tell better
what is fitting for their edification in some things, then all our National
Convocation. Nay, I dare boldly say, there is no Town of note in all England,
but twelve men may be chosen out of, which would find out Canons more to the
edification of all the Congregations in England, then those are, which B.
Bancroft with his Clergy, concluded.

SECT. XIIII.
A Fifth instance, or rather an enlargement of the former is, in respect of the
Ministers who have formerly refused the ceremonies, for whereas the Minister is
bound to lead his people forward unto perfection; and to provide by all good
means, that his ministry be not despised: by this means be shall draw them
back again unto the liking of superstition; or at least not to dislike it so
much as they have done: and give them evident occasion to blame his Ministry,
and to call in question the truth of all his doctrine.

Here the Def. comes upon them with open mouth, avouching peremptorily, that
this is a false, presumptuous, irreligious, partial, and pernicious pretense:
and all this he will prove. If he can, we shall the easilyer bear these great
words. But why is it False? forsooth, because most of the Non-conformists have
once subscribed: the contradicting of which subscription is no less a matter
of discredit then returning unto conformity. What kind of proof is this?
because they were subject to another discredit, therefore this is no
discredit. Beside it does not appear, nor is likely that most of these
Ministers did ever absolutely subscribe: neither is it likely: because it is
well known how easy and how ordinary it was in Qu Elizabeth's days, to enter
into the Ministry without passing under that gallows. If the most had, yet how
would this prove it a fall pretense in the rest? If all had done so, yet this
was no act of their Ministry, nor known it may be to their people, and
therefore the crossing of it did not so directly tend to the discrediting of
their Ministry, as the crossing of their public doctrine. Lastly, that which
is done before a man be settled in the Ministry at one time, without any great
deliberation, is not of such note as that which a man has long professed and
persuaded by reasons taken from the word of God. By all this it appears, that
this first accusation of falsehood was rather an adventure as the Def.
himself calls it, the^ a grounded assertion.

He did but adventure neither to call the same plea presumptuous. For he can
find no other reason to bear up this charge withal then, that they seem to
arrogate to themselves a prerogative proper to the Apostles. How can this be I
wonder, seeing they follow herein the direction of the Apostle himself, Tit. 2
15. Let no man despise thee. What this prerogative is, he does not plainly tells
us: but compriseth it in two places of Scripture, 1 Cor 15, Gal. 2 18, the
first vvherof is nothing at all to the purpose. For the Apostle does not say as
the Def. makes him, If we be found false witnesses, then is your faith in
vain: but if Christ be not risen; then are we false Witnesses, and your faith
is vain: Which also any preacher of the Gospel may say without falsehood or
presumption to his people. The second place, If I build again that which I
have destroyed, I make my self a prevaricator, is applyable to any Minister
that has taught the truth against Popish superstition. This very doctrine M.
Perkins gathers out of the words. Proculcavimus superstitionem Papisticam
etc. I hope the Def. does not think he may build up any superstition, and not
be accounted therefore a prevaricator: if he do; or though he do not, let him
consider where the presumption lies.

But why irreligious? because it is persisting in an error, for the
preservation of their own credit. But 1 who taught the Def. to make that
which is in question the ground of an accusation in dispute. First, let him
prove that it is an error, before he take it so for granted, that upon that
ground he will challenge men's reasons as irreligious. 2 It is not their
credit, but the credit of their Ministry which they speak of. 3 Is it such
an irreligious thing, to desire that certain ceremonies may not be imposed
upon them, lest their Ministry be by that means prejudiced?

Why partial? because men should rather yield to Conformity for the credit of
the Church: i. e. for the credit of the Convocation house. Alas, the credit
which a great part of that generation does seek for, is that they may rejoice
in our flesh. But suppose they meant sincerely: would the Def. have men
discredit and prejudice their Ministry, to bring some credit unto other men's
decrees? Or does the forbearing of some ceremonies bring such discredit to the
Authorizers of them? surely then they are more for the honor of mortal men,
then for the honor of God. For Gods honor and worship is no ways prejudiced
by their absence.

The last charge is pernicious. And here many words are used to give
countenance unto that one. The maine ground is, Woe to me if I preach not the
Gospel; and Simon love thou me? then feed my sheep. Whereupon he gathers,
that it is a pernicious thing for a Minister to put himself unto silence. But
1 what is this to the question of discrediting ones Ministry? 2 Although we
were most worthy to have these remembrances out of Scripture rubbed upon us
yet the Prelates are altogether unworthy and unfit to do it. Let any man
conceive with himself B. B^ncroft, or any other in the end of the
Convocation, after all the Canons were concluded, coming forth as Prolocutor,
and speaking thus to the Ministers assembled together before him. Men and
brethren, the reverend fathers of this Convocation, as they always meditate on
the law of God, and every part of it, both day and night; so especially do
they lay to heart those passages of holy Writ which properly concern their
office: as woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel: and Simon love thou me?
feed my sheep. Out of these considerations, being carried with a fervent zeal
both of preaching themselves in their several pl^ces, and also of procuring
more faithful Preachers, and more fruitful preaching throughout the land,
they have over and above the institutions of Christ, appointed certain
ceremonies strictly to be observed of every Minister: so that whosoever shall
hereafter upon any pretense refuse to observe the same, they shall be esteemed
factious, schismatic, disarderly, exorbitant men, and for that cause by
their Ordinary suspended and deprived. oNw for the preventing of such a
mischief your tender mother would have you to understand by my mouth, that if
any man be thrust out of the Ministry for not yielding to these
constitutions, howsoever they may seem unto him such as the Church cannot
lawfully appoint, nor he observe, yet he is author of his own silencing: and
therefore you must all be exhorted to consider well of those parcels of
Scripture which have so much prevailed with your careful mother. Woe is me if
I preach not the Gospel; Simon love thou me? feed my sheep.

Would not he that heard such a speech as this from a Prelate b^ forced to call
for for a basin? and after he had recovered himself he might well give answer
in these words, I hear the words of a deceitful tongue. Behold thou art
called a Bishop, and gloriest in that title: thou perswadest thy self, thou
art a chief guide and father of the Church, thou therefore that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that say it is a woeful thing
not to preach the Gospel, do thou neither preach Christ faithfully, nor
suffer those that would? Dare thou by thine own authority, and for thine
own pleasure, hinder so many able men from preaching? thou that professest the
flock must be fed, do thou thrust out feeders, and keep in starvers?
Therefore thou art inexcusable, o Prelat, whosoever thou art, that condemnest
another for that whereof thou art both beginning and ending.

Thirdly, the Apostles woe, 1. Cor. 9. belongs to negligent, slothful, and
careless ministers properly, such as our Prelates know where to find enough,
who yet neither feel nor fear that vvoe from the Bishops which many
faithful preachers are wrapped in from time to time.

Fourthly, the Apostle does not pronounce any vvoe for not preaching, where
imprisonment does hinder. Now he whose conscience is against the ceremonies,
or doubts of them, is spiritually imprisoned, so that he cannot by using of
them, make his way to the pulpit.

Fifthly, it is a mere jest, though a bitter one, to say, that we leave our
ministeries: when we do all that our consciences will suffer us to do, for
the holding of our places: and when we have done all that, depart against our
wills with sorrow. Non discedit a stati^ne, qui cedit invitus. See Mr. Parker,
p. 1. c. 4. s. 14.

But the Defendant undertaketh to prove, that the cause of silencing ^is not in
the Bishops that suspend and deprive us: but in our selves. He is as it
seems, a great adventurer: For he comes forth upon this piece of service
with flying colors: Know you well what you say (says he) when you lay the
cause of your silencing upon the Bishops? Yes surely, very well. For a cause is
that which brings force or virtue to the being of another thing.

Now the first virtue (or rather vice) which tends to silencing. of Ministers
in this case, is in the Bishops canons: they therefore are the first cause. The
second virtue is in the Bishops and their officers, which are executioners of
those unconscionable canons: they therefore are the secondarie cause.
Non-conformitie has no virtue in it of it own nature, nor by Gods ordinance,
to bring forth such an effect as the silencing of Gods Ministers is^ though it
bemade an occasion by the perverseness of our Prelates. I know well what I say:
and will make it good against the Defendants vain pretenses. The case stands
thus (says he) Titus (It had been more proper to say Diotrephes) the Bishop
does deprive Titius a factious and schismatical minister, that he may place
Sempronius, a peaceable and discreet man, in his stead. In this proceeding, the
intendment of Titus is not absolutely to deprive Titius, as he is a Minister,
but as he was factious: yet so only respectively, that Titius being deprived,
he may constitute Sempronius: for the charge of a Bishop is not determinate to
appoint precisely this minister: but indefinite, to ordain a minister: so that
the course of Gods plow is still preserved and continued. But as for Titius,
who will rather be silenced then conform, it is evident, that the cause of his
silencing being his own refractarinesse, which is only personal and proper to
himself, and yet has no faculty in himself to appoint or admit of a
successor: he may be said to have properly caused his own suspension and
deprivation.

This case needs no long demurring on: for there is not one sentence in all
the length of it, which does not smell, without any uncasing. 1. are all those
factious and schismatic men, that refuse to conform? was Hooper such a
kind of man? was Peter Martyr and Mr. Perkins such, when one at Oxford, and
the other at Cambridge, refused to wear the Surplice? was Mr. Goodman, Mr.
Deering, Mr. More, Mr. Rogers, and such like heavenly men, the lights and glory
of our Churches, were all these factious and schismatic? In the presence of
God it is well known they were were not. But our prelates have this prerogative,
they may dubbe whom they please factious and schismatic, and after that,
there is no redemption, they must be such, be they otherwise never so full of
all grace.

2 Are all peaceable discreet men, which are placed in the deprived ministers
stead? For the best of them, they are still as great eye^ sores to our Bishops
almost as the other: because they reprove a great deal of Episcopal
darkness, by their practices. For the rest, the congregations over whom they
are set, cannot find it, the voice of all the country is otherwise for many
of them; yet according to the Prelates measure, who meat (as it seems) the
virtues and vices of a minister by certain ceremonies of their own imposing,
it cannot be denied, but the most of them are very peaceable and discreet:
Even so as many of the Bishops themselves were known to be before they were
Bishops, and show themselves to be still: for Episcopatus plures accepit quam
fecit bonos.

3 What sense can this have, The Bishop depriveth Titius respectively, that he
may constitute Sempronius? Does he know beforehand whom he shall constitute?
then there is gross legerdemaine, betwixt him and that Sem^ronius. For with
what conscience can one seek and the other assign the place of him that is in
possession? This is but some time in those benefices which are fatter, and
whose patrons are more foolish. Ordinarily, the vilest minister that is to be
found, may succeed in the place of him that is deprived, for ought the Bishop
knows, or for ought he can do, except he will endure a quare impedit, which
in case of moral unworthiness, has scarce been ever heard of.

4 The charge which he says our Bishops have of appoynting Ministers, I
vvonder from whence they have it, or by what conveyance. They say that they
themselves are the proper pastors of all the parishes in their Diocese. It is
well, if they have an ubiquitary faculty, and will, to perform the office of
pastors to so great a people: but who made them such? Christ and his Apostles
never knew of ordinary pastors, having charge of so many Churches. But suppose
they did, by whom does Christ call one of our Bishops? by the Kings
congedelier, the Chapiters nominall election, or by the Archbishops
consecration? There is none of these that can bear the trial of scripture,
nor of the Primitive Churches example?

6 Is the Bishops power of appointing a minister no ways determinate to this
or that minister? then it seems his mere will determines of the particular
person, without any just reason. For if there be certain causes or reasons
which the Bishop is bound to follow in designing of this or that minister,
rather then another, then is the Bishop determinate. The Council of Nice it
self determined the authority even of Patriarchs in this case: viz. that the
Elders should first nominate fit men (...) secondly that the people should
elect or choose out of that number, per (...): and thirdly, that the Bishop
should confirm the elected (...). Socrat. l. ^. p. 177. What exorbitant power
is this then which our Bishops do now-a-dayes challenge unto themselves? All
Classical Divines do consent to that which Iunius sets down, Conc. 5. l.
2. c. 6. n. 73. that no Bishop can send or appoint a minister sine certa ac
justa ecclesiae postulatione, without the certain fore-choyce of the Church:
Id enim esset obtrudere non mittere. For that were to obtrude him, not to send
him.

6 How is the course of Gods plow preserved, when for the most part the
succeeding minister is thrust upon the people against their wills, and so
pernicious contentions arise, of which the Bishop is cause procreant and
conservant, by depriving the people of their minister, and obtruding his own
minister upon them, and upholding him in all those courses vvherby he grieveth
the poor people.

7 As the Minister has no faculty in himself to appoint a successor, so has
not the Bishop neither of himself, and by himself.

Thus much for the defendant his case. Whereas he adds, that Beza and Mr.
Cartwright determined with him in case of the Surplice. I answer, 1. they did
not so for the cross. 2. they did not so for subscription to either. 3. they
did not so but by way of toleration, requiring also that men did speak against
the imposing of the Surplice. 4. Beza was not thoroughly acquainted with the
state of our Church. Mr. Cartwright (as I have been certainly informed by his
own son) recalled that passage of his book, and desired that his revoking
of it might be made known.

I thought good, overseeing the Press, to confirm the Authors report, by a
more particular relation which I have received from a person of good credit,
set down in writ as follows.
MR. Cartwright being beyond the seas, in printing the rest of his 2. Reply,
werein that indulgence is, sent to the Ministers of England who sought
reformation with him, for their opinion of the use of the Surplice in case of
deprivation: 22 of whom met therabout; of whom 19 jointly agreed that it was
simply unlawful in any case, but the other three said otherwise; wherefore it
was agreeed by all, that each part should write their opinion and their reasons
to him, which they did: but the letter of the nineteen miscarried, and that of
the other three was delivered, which he taking as the letter of the whole,
supposed their joint consent had been, that the loss of the ministry altered
the case of the unlawfulness, and so that they were all against him; whereupon
he mistrusting his own judgment, and being much perplexed thereabout,
suffered himself to be swated unto what is there written: but afterward
understanding the right, he was much more perplexed; yea (as he said) more
then ever he was, in that to the great prejudice of the truth, he had suffered
his conscience to be so defiled, which was forbidden, 1. Cor. 8. 7. which he
heartily sorrowed to many, professing that if he again put pen to paper about
that subject, he would clear the cause, and blame himself, praying them to
signify the same freely in the mean time, the which they did, so that it ever
since has been current among all his friends, and constantly, affirmed by them
to all on due occasions, and particularly affirmed to M. Sprint by a Gentleman
in the presence of one Nobleman, two Gentlemen, 27. ministers, and many
professors, in his course, in the scanning his book then about to be printed
diverse years before it was printed; sundry also of those ministers avouched
the same, some on their own knowledge, others upon undoubted testimony, which
yet is ready to be avouched in due case of need, and should now be expressed,
were not the naming of the avouchers dangerous unto them, and so not to be done
without their knowledge, which now cannot be.



For the point it self, when a man does but stand in doubt betwixt using the
ceremonies, and suffering of deprivation, it must needs be more safe, patiently
to suffer himself to be thrust from his ministry, then to retain it and
offend his conscience by using the ceremonies. For to be restrained by
authority from his lawful function, because he will not yield to the doing
of that which to him is sin, is no more sin in the sufferer, then to
surcease his public preaching whilst he is held in prison, where he wants
occasion. Thus the use of that is avoided, which he disalloweth, and the blame
of leaving his standing, is theirs who cast him from thence, and not his. So
no sin is committed either in the use of that he disalloweth, or in susteining
deprivation. But to hold his place, and to practice against conscience, is to
commit one great sin at the least.

Thus having examined the Defend, his adventurous charges of false,
presumptuous, irreligious, partial, and pernicious, I find them all to be
but rash words of distemper.

SECT. XV.
IN the last place, the Defendant brings forth to answer the words of the
Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. But as this
argument is not found at all in that page of the Abridgement which he cites,
so in the words or sense which he sets down, I dare say it is not used
either of them, or any other against the ceremonies. Yet let us hear his
answer. The Apostle speaks (says he) of the opinions of private men. But 1.
what vvarrant has he to restrain a general precept, when the universality
of it agrees with the law? Abstain from all appearance, says the Apostle: 1.
says the Def. from some private opinions. 2. Why must appearance of evil be
needs understood of opinions only? two or three interpreters indeed do
understand it of doctrine most properly: but the most otherwise; and the word
translated appearance, signifying rather an object of seeing then of hearing,
leads us rather to the eye, as in actions, gesturs, garments, then to the ear
in doctrines. 3. For that which he adds of private men's opinions, there is no
circumstance of the text, nor any reason or authority that does vvarrant such
a gloss.

SECT. XVII.
AMong his accusations wherein he charge us with manifold scandalls, the
first is, that some weak ones by occasion of these differences, stand amazed,
and so become more remiss in profession of religion. Where 1. it is to be
observed, that when we spoke of weake-ones sect. 12. it was put off with this
pretense, that they were such as we had catechized. Now then, who are these
vveak ones? I hope the Bishops provide that people of their Diocesses are well
catechized: whence then is this weakness. 2. Differences in matters of
circumstance are not wont to breed scandal, until some authority injoyne
uniformitie, as we may see in the primitive churches. 3. If differences be the
occasion of this scandal, surely those that differ from us, may as well be
accused therefore, as we that differ from them, especially when we urge
nothing of ours upon them, but they impose their own devices upon us, and so
are causes of the differences. 4. the amazement which some have, wondering
what will be the event of differences, is no damnable error, which by the
Def. is required to a scandal, sect. 1. And if they grow remiss in religion
upon it, that is their sin. I am sure zeal against superstition, and for
pure and undefiled worship, has no fitness in it to work remissness in
religion: but urging of humane devices in Gods worship, tends directly
thither.

SECT. XVIII.
THe second charge of scandal, is in respect of the Separatists. Where 1. I
ask, if Gaius had made a separation from the Church wherein Diotrephes lived,
whether the Apostle John had been cause of that scandal, because he condemned
his abuse of excommunication. 3. Ioh. 9. 10. 2. If any separate from Churches
where Images are retained, who is the cause, they that dislike of Images, or
they that retain them? 3. The dislike of ceremonies is not the chief cause
for which separation is made: but the intolerable abuses which are in
Ecclesiastical Courts: by which it comes to pass, that many poor men being
troubled at the first for a small thing, afterward are driven to fly the
country: and flying with a hatred of such courses, are ready to receive that
impression which is most opposite unto them. The thing it self is plain
enough to all indifferent men, that Ecclesiastical corruptions urged and
obtruded, are the proper occasion of separation.

SECT. XIX. XX.
IN the next place the Papists are alleged as persons offended by
Non-conformitie, because they are utterly unperswadeable to enter into a Church
where all ancient rites are professedly rejected. But 1. the refusing of
conformity by the Ministers, do not, I hope, make these ancient rites (much
less all) to be professedly rejected by our Church. For then we may plead the
profession of our mother as well as the Defendant: which he I am sure will not
grant. 2. This assertion which is given as a reason, is evidently false. For in
Scotland, France, the Low Countries, and such like Churches, where none of
these ceremonies are retained, the power of Gods word (which does not depend
on human ceremonies) is as ^ffectuall to the conversion of Papists, as in
England. 3. How does this agre^ with that which the Defendant has so often
told us, that our ceremonies are not the same with the Papists ceremonies: and
that the Papists have no great conceit of our ceremonies, cap. 2. sect. 1^. 4.
If our contentions about these things be a scandal to the Papist, let them
look to it that cast these apples of contention into the Church, under the
pretense of peace and uniformitie. 5. One minister without conformity, as old
Mr. Midsly of Ratsdell, who was after silenced for his labor, has converred
more Papists then any (I might say then all) of the Bishops in England, with
all his ceremonial observations. 6. It is well known that there are far
more Papists and Popishly affected in those places where ceremonies are most
observed, then where they have been disused. 7. It is answered in the
Abridgement, page 47. 48. that ceremonies are not for the edification of the
Papists, but for the hardening of them. And that Papists are not so much to be
respected as brethren. To the latter of which words, the Defendant replieth
with a descant upon the term Brethren, sect. 20. but says nothing at all to
the purpose. 8. What manner of converts they are usually who are addicted to
humane ceremonies, we may see in the Archbishop of Spalato, and such others.

SECT. XXI.
THe greatest scandal of all (says the Defend.) is against the Church. Now
this Non-conformists are made guilty of two vvayes: 1. comparatively in this
section, and then absolutely in the next. The comparatiue accusation is, that
we for avoiding of offense toward our brethren, grievously offend our mother,
in that wherein we owe obedience unto her. Where 1. the question is taken for
granted, for we deny that we owe obedience in the ceremonies to any man or
society of men. 2. If our mother be somewhat angry, that is not presently a
scandal by his definition, sect. 1. but when she is provoked to a mortal
error. Now what mortal error do we provoke the Church to? Our desire and
scope is, that the ceremonies should be either wholly removed, or else left
free to use or disuse: this is no mortal error, I hope. The event by accident
is the silencing, depriving, excluding, and molesting of us for
Non-conformitie: This indeed is a great error and sin of the Prelates; but
as was formerly showed, the beginning of it is in their irregular Canons, and
the ending of it, in their cruel executions. 3. by applying our selves to the
will of the Prelates in these ceremonies, we should, though not anger, yet
greatly scandalize them, by confirming them in a sin of making their own
will a rule to the Churches, even in mystical ceremonies of superstitious
worship, contrary to their and our daily prayer, Thy will be done. 4. The
convocation does not carry herself like a mother toward us: neither do we
acknowledge any such honor to belong unto it. As for the faithful
congregatious of England, the greattest part of them would willingly be rid of
these burdens.

The rest of this Section is nothing pertinent: yet two things may be noted in
it. 1. An error that the number of the lewish Proselites was great, and the
converted Gentiles few, Acts 15. 2 A gross assertion, that after the doctrine
of Indifferency in eating of meats, was made public by the Church, then to
have sought by abstaining to avoid the offense of some, had been to the
prejudice of Christian liberty, and to the scandal of the Church.

The other accusation of contempt is only objected sect. 22. and varnished
over with a few glosing words sect. 23. and therefore may well be answered
with contempt. But he that will see a full refutation of this, let him read
Mr. Parker chap. 5. sect. 11. 12. I am weary of wrestling with the wind: yet
one unworthy and unchristian taunt I cannot pass by, that he upbraideth the
Ministers with, living upon voluntary contribution, and fear of offending
their maintainers. For 1. when as he confesses, he has no windows to look
into men's consciences by, what rule of religion will permit him to cast upon
his brethren such a suspicion contrary to their profession, of practicing and
speaking against their consciences for gaining of a poor contribution? Is
there not far more cause to think, that great livings, and worldly honors
(one of the choicest darts that satan has in his quiver, and therefore tried
against our Savior himself when al other faild, Mat 4. 8 9) is it not more
likely I say that these promotions bear more sway in the minds of our great
Prelates, then a poor supply of necessaries with others? 2 Neither all, nor
the most part of them against whom he writes did live upon contributions.
Though they need not have been ashamed thereof if they had: seeing not only
the primitiu^ Pastors did so, but even in our time, M. Perkins and other such
lights of our Church, have with that kind of life done more good then all our
Cathedral men with their great revenues. 3 Who are the cause that many are
forced to live upon contribution? have not the L^iterers of Cathedral
Churches^ engrossed a great part of that maintenance whereby labou^ing
Preachers should be maintained? Do not our Pluralists and Non-residents carry
away the fat of the greatest livings, and leave scarce a Serving-mans wages to
their Curats; so that either they must be supplied by contribution, or else by
begging? Nay, do not the people in diverse places take it for a great courtesy
at the Non-residents hands, if he will take his Tithes, and suffer them to
procure and maintain to themselves an honest Minister in his place? have not
our Honorable Parliament offered to provide some competent maintenance for the
Ministers, if the Clergy would forbear their sinful excesses? 4. Why should
the Ministers depend so much upon contribution, if they had such accommodatiue
consciences, as this Def. surmiseth of them? Some of them with serving the
time, and the addition of Simony, might come to be Bishops: and the rest might
be preferred by their means to some certain in-comings.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. III.
NOW we are come to the sixth and last general Argument, viz. that the
imposition of these ceremonies is opposite unto Christian liberty. Here the
Def. observes first^ that the state of this question is about liberty from the
necessary observation of such things as are in their own nature indifferent.
This (says he) the Objector implies. But I answer, the Objector does not
imply it: he speaks of ceremonies lawfully appointed by man, that these are
to be used as things indifferent. Neither if one private Obj. had granted it,
ought it therefore to be set down as the received state of the question, seeing
the Abridgment, which in this defense is chiefly opposed, does every where deny
the cerem^ to be in their own nature indifferent. But let that pass and
examine his resolution. There be two kinds of necessities incident unto humane
precepts and ordinances, in the case of indifferency: one is necessity of
obedience to the command (...) which can not properly prejudice Christiin
(...): the other is doctri^^ necessity: when any of those properties which are
essential unto divine Ordinances are attributed unto a humane constitution: as
I immediately to ^inde the conscience: 2 to be a necessary means to salvation:
3 to hold it altogether unalterable by the authority of man: this is a
presumption and preva^ication, not only against Christian liberty, but also
against the soveraigntie of God himself. But I what means this new
distinction betwixt necessite doctrinall and obediential? doctrinal before p. 3
was opposed unto ceremoni^^ now unto obedientiall; both without a logic, or
sound reason. 2 He should have told us what kind of necessity obedientiall he
means: for B^ll^ de. pont. romans l. 4 c. 17, uses the same pretense of
obedience, and alleges the same places of Scripture for it: and yet is
confuted by Iunius, Whitakers and our Divines. 3 If there be doctrinall
necessity, in all those humane constitutions, which have properties attributed
unto them essential unto divine ordinances, then our ceremonies in
controversy not only have such a mystical signification attributed unto them
as is proper unto divine Ordinances; but also that they are imposed as parts of
Gods worship. 4 For the three properties, which the Def. mentions, they are
such as Papists in imposing of their ceremonies (which yet by the judgment of
all our Divines deprive men of Christian liberty) do disclaim. As for
immediate binding of men's consciences, no learned Papish uses such a phrase.
Azorius a Jesuit (...). m^r. part 1, lib. 5 cap. 6, says expressly that humane
laws do not bind, direct, proxime, and per se; directly, immediately, and of
themselves. Bellarmine also, de Romans pont. l. 4, cap. 20 ad arg. 9, says as
much; leges humanae non obligant sub poena mortis, nisi quatenus violatione
legis humane offend^^^ Deus. i. e. they do not immediately bind men's
consciences. For necessity to salvation, the same, Bellarmine de verb. non
script c. 11 says plainly* That those things which are simply necessary unto
salvation are set down in Scripture; and that the rest are not simply
necessary. And it is plain enough that they do not hold them altogether
unalterable by that authority which brought them in: for beside, that no
reasonable man can deny so manifest a truth, they have altered many ancient
Rites, as all the learned know. So that the Defendant his distinction is proved
nothing else but a confusion, common to him with the Papists, to our
ceremonies and theirs.

SECT. IIII. V.
IN the 4 Section, the Def. objecteth to himself under the name of the
Abridgement, the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 35, This I speak to your
profi^e, not that I might cast a snare upon you, showing that the imposition of
necessity upon things indifferent, is a very snare of men's consciences. Now
though these words are not in the Abridgement, yet because as D. Whitakers
says, de pont. de pont. c. 4 qu. 7^ aureus bic locus est, nostrae libertatis
vindex; this is a golden charter of liberty; therefore it is worthy of due
consideration. The sum of the Def. his answer is, that to impose a necessity
where God has left a liberty, is indeed a snare: but this necessity is not
taught in our Church. I answer, it is taught in our Church (now a days) that
Ecclesiastical canons do bind men's consciences. It is taught in our Church
that man's will is a sufficient reason for these canons about ceremonies. It is
taught in our Church, that Sacraments may not be administered, or God publicly
served without these ceremonies: that Ministers called and allowed of God for
these ceremonies must be silenced; that they are to be excommunicated ips^
facto, and accursed which oppose themselves unto them. It is taught also, that
though a man doubte^^ in his conscience of the lawfulness of them, though
evident scandal will follow upon the using of them, yet they may not be
omitted. If this be not necessity enough to ensnare a man's conscience, I know
not what then is.

In the fifth Section two places are objected out of the Abridgement, viz. Gal.
1, Col. 2. 20, and one of them after a fashion answered. The first answer is,
that the Apostle there speaks only of Jewish rites, which is Bellarmines
answer just, de e^^. sacr. c. 32 loquitur Paulus de servitute judaica, qua
serpierant illi sub antiqu^ lege. The second answer is, that the Apostles
meaning was of such an observation of these ceremonies as had an opinion of
necessity, overthrowing the new Testament, and establishing the old. So
Bellarmin. (...) illi cum circumcidi vellent, excidebant a gratia Christi, and
simul obligabant se ad omnem legem servandam, quod erat prorsus re^^e ad s^atum
veteris testamen^. We on the other side with Daneus against that place of
Bell. say generate est Pau^^ dictum and prece^^um; the words are general,
belonging to all parts of Christian liberty, though principally there applied
to one.

Now the servitude from which Christ has made us free is not only in those
things which the Def. speaks of, but also as Iun. con^. 3 l. 4 c. 17 n. 19
and 21, shows in subjection of our consciences unto elements of man's
appointing, Gal. 4 10, and unto the will of men, 1 Cor. 7 23, which place Beza
well notes, is to be understood of superstitions which some do foolishly
call indifferent things. It is not only therefore a freedom from Jewish
ceremonies, but also and even therefore as D. Whitakers gathers from all
humane ceremonies that bind or press our consciences, Whit. de romans pont. q.
7 c. 3 ad 5. But it is in vain for me to allege our Divines in this question:
the Abridgement alleges diverse, whom the Def. would not vouchsafe an answer.

One thing here the Def. notes, that in the Abridgement mystical and carnal
are unsoundly confounded. But I say this is unsoundly collected: for these two
are joined together there only in respect of Jewish worship, and that which
imitateth it: And therefore it is to no end to instance in the Sacraments
instituted by Christ, of clear signification, and accompanied with the promise
and lively vvorking of the Spirit. The same poor instance has Bellarmine de
cult. l. 3 c. 7 for significant ceremonies.

But it savoureth of the flesh (says the Def.) to call our ceremonies carnal.
Why so I pray? the Jewish ceremonies deserved that name, you your self say,
even when they were in force: and surely ours devised by man, abused by
idolaters, without necessary use, destitute of all promise and spirit, are
far more worthy to be called carnal, then Gods own Ordinances. Those were
only carnal because in comparison they were external, heavy, dull things:
but ours are more heavy and dull, and beside they are sinfully carnal, as
has been proved.

But what soundness does this savor of, that the Def. says generally of the
Jewish ceremonies, they signified first and prima^ily outward and carnal
promises, shadowing heavenly things only under (...) second veil? I will not
exagitat this assertion, because it is in the by.

SECT. VI.
Here an objection is fained out of the Abridgement p. 34, I say fained,
because there is none such found in the place quoted. That which is there
spoken concerning other Popish ceremonies, is a sixth proof of the second
Argument, distinct from the fifth, whereto that of Christian liberty does
belong. That also is handled by the Def. c. 3 l. 7, and there maintained
against him. So that this might well be omitted. Yet because there is some
force in the consequence, let us hear his Defense. The objection which he
frames is this: If these ceremonies do not take away our Christian liberty,
and ensnare the consciences of men, by their imposition; how shall not the
Popish ceremonies be excusable, and free from accusation in this behalf? His
answer is, that Popish ceremonies do infringe Christian liberty both in regard
of their nature, and also in regard of their number. And of both these M.
Calvin gives witness. I answer 1 for the nature, it has been showed before,
that a multitude of Popish ceremonies have no other nature and necessity
allowed unto them by the learned Papists, then ours have by the Defendant
himself. See for this Bellarmine de effect. sacr. c. 30. That which M. Calvin
says of this point is true notwithstanding in regard of the conceit which is
commonly among the simple Papists, fostered by unlearned Monks, Friars, and
other Priests, for filthy lucre sake. 2 The comparisons which M. Calvin use,
viz. That it is held among the Papists a greater wickedness to omit auricular
Confession, then to live impiously; eat flesh on fasting days, then to live in
fornication; to work on Saints holy days, then to act mischief, etc. These
he gathers principally from that practice of the Papists, whereby they punish
more severely the breach of their ceremonies then of Gods law. Now this is not
only practiced by our Prelates, but also maintained by this Defendant, chap. 2
sect. 12, with such fair pretense, as the Papists may well use for the
defense of their practice. 3 As for the multitude of ceremonies among the
Papists, that makes their bondage greater the^ ours; but does it make ours
none at all? Besides, when a few mystical humane ceremonies are admitted, the
gate is let open for a multitude: even until the Convocation will say there be
too many. For Bellarmine himself will grant that ceremonies are not to be
multiplied over much. Fatemur ceremonias non esse nimis multiplicandas de eff.
sacr. c. 30, but what is too much, that must be left to the judgment of the
Church or Convocation, says he, and the Defendant both.

SECT. VII. VIII. IX. X.
IN all these Sections, the Def. goes about to teach us the doctrine which
concerns binding of men's consciences. In the first his conclusion is good and
sound, God therefore and not man does properly and directly bind the conscience
of man. It is sufficient therefore to note that it is an improper phrase to say
that men's laws do bind men's consciences, in respect that God command^th to
obey the just laws of men: for so, as Gerson observes, the Physicians
praescripts should also bind a sick man's conscience, in respect of Gods will,
whereby a sick man is tied to follow the good and wholesome counsel of his
Physician.

In the 8 Section two of our Divines are brought in to prove that men are bound
in conscience to observe the just laws of Magistrates, which none of us ever
doubted of.

The 9 Section is spent in proving, that Ecclesiastical laws have as great
force in respect of conscience as politic. Which if it be granted, yet
nothing can from thence be concluded for the advantage of ceremonies unlawfully
imposed. But 1 it is diligently to be observed, that the Church has no
commission for to make any laws properly so called: as I have formerly showed
in cap. 1 sect. 16. 2 the common received opinion of all our Divines is
contrary to that which the Defendant here says: as may be seen in Bellarmine
de Pont. Romans l. 4 c. 15, and Iunius, Whit^kers, with the rest, who vvriting
against Bellarmine do not deny but defend that which he says, Lutherani and
Calvinistae omnes docent. 3 The interrogatories which the Defendant ministers
unto us in this case does not prove his Assertion. For the Church is a Society,
but not complete, if it be considered as not comprehending Christ the Head and
only Law maker of it. Breach of peace is not a sin against an
Ecclesiastical, but a divine law. Obedience is to be yielded unto lawful
Ecclesiastical Governors, when they bring the charge of Christ whose
Ministers they are. See D. Whitakers de pont. Romans cont. 4 q* 7 c. 2 ad 12. The
Kings stamp, but with an act of Parliament makes a law in England. As for
Apostolical constitutions (to which our canons are as like as Apples are to
Oisters) the same answer which Doctor Whitakers, contra 4 q. 7 c. 2 ad 5. with
other of our Divines gives to Bellarmine, may serve for our Defendant.

In the 10 sect. he sets down nothing but that which he knows we all
grant.

SECT. XI.
AGainst the Accusation of contempt, there was (as it seems) alleged by M.
Nic. that by the same reason that Non-conformitie is contempt; bowling,
disusing of capps, and such habites prescribed should be contempt. Here the
Defendant first brings diverse interpretations out of the Casualists: and then
takes one for granted without rendering of any reason, that he may by it
excuse bowling and disuse of cappes. But what if we take hold of another
interpretation, esteeming the obligation by the intent of the Lawmakers,
which was against Popish Recusancie of our Communion-booke, and not against
refusal of some few ceremonies contained therein? I speak now of the Statute
Law, not of lawless canons. Or what if we should stand upon that
interpretation, which fetches the obligation from the weight of the matter
imposed, which in our ceremonies is very little? Some of these I am sure the
Bishops must fly, if they will defend their disuse of the Crosier staff,
which they are bound by our Laws as well to use, as the Ministers are
surplusses.

But all this is needless, because there can be no contempt in a conscionable
forbearance of unlawful impositions; such as the ceremonies are sufficienaly
proved to be.

SECT. XII.
Here certain Divines are brought in witnessing, 1 that superstitious
opinions do deprive men of Christian liberty: which we deny not, but take
their testimonies as making against our ceremonies: because as I have formerly
showed some of these superstitious opinions are inseparable from the imposing
and using of them. 2 That Christian liberty does not consist in the use or
disuse of things indifferent: which we also willingly grant. But I would have
the Defendant remember, that all freedom is not in the mind and conscience.
For where the mind is free, the body may be bound; else Christians should not
taste so much of this worlds misery as they do. Now Christ has left unto us
not only an inward liberty of mind and conscience, but also an outward
freedom of our bodies and outward man, from such bodily rites in his worship as
have not his stamp upon them, and his Spirit and blessing promised unto them.
Of this the Defendant says nothing at all.

SECT. XIII. XIIII.
COncerning the profession of our Church so often brought in, enough has been
said before, now it suffices to answer, that no profession whatsoever can make
humane significant ceremonies in Gods worship agree with Christian liberty.

As for superstition, which the Defendant does now the second time most
ridiculously object, I have answered in the beginning of this Confutation. Now
only I note: 1 how loosely he describes that superstition which he calls
affirmative: as if no man could use any thing superstitiously, except he did
hold that without it the faith of Christianity, or the true worship of God
could not possible consist. Never was there such a description given by any man
that considered what he said.

2 How manfully he concludes our negative superstition, upon this ground,
that Christ has left these ceremonies free, which is the maine question
betwixt him and us.

3 How he mis-reporteth our opinion, in saving absolutely that we^ hold a
Surplice to have unholinesse and pollution in it: whereas we hold that it is
only made more unfit for Gods service then it was before through idolatrous
abuse: but yet unto other us^s it may be applied.

4 That in stead of Scripture, he brings forth the universal practice of men
in the Church: which yet has been formerlyly also refuted.

5 That he can find no Divine that calls opposing of ceremonies
superstition, but only M. Calvin in one place speaking rhetorically, as he
uses to do, and not intending any definition or distribution of that vice.

6 How he corrupts P. Martyrs words, to have some color for a new
accusation. P. Martyr taking there upon him the person of an adversary unto
Hoopers opinion (with whom notwithstanding afterward he consented, and recalled
the counsel which then he gave, as appears p. 1125) says that if we should
refuse all things that the Papists used, we should bring the Church into
servitude: which assertion is most true, because the Papists abused many
necessary things, even Christ's own Ordinances, the observing of which is
liberty. Now the Def. would have that precisely u^derstood, and that in the
rigor of every word concerning the Surplice.

I have here subioyned apart an Epistle of Zanchius who otherways was somewhat
favorable to Bishops: wherein the Reader may see his judgment concerning
superstitious garments.

To the most renowned Queen Elizabeth, Defendresse of the Christian Religion,
and most mighty Queen of England, France and Ireland H. Zanchius sends
greeting.
MOST gracious and most Christian Queen, we have not without great grief
understood, that the fire of contention about certain garments, which we
thought had been quenched long agone, is new again to the incredible offense
of the godly, as it were raised from hell, and kindled a fresh in your
Majesty's Kingdom: and that the occasion of this fire is, because your most
gracious majesty being persuaded by some, otherwise great men, and carried
with a zeal (but certainly not according to knowledge) to retain unity in
religion, has now more then ever before resolved and d^c^eed, yea does will
and command that all Bishops Zanchius it is like was misinformed, for Bishops
have bin the chief devisers and advisers.
and M^nisters of the Churches shall in divine service put on the white and
linen garments which the Popish Priests use now in Popery; yea that it is to
be feared, least this fire be so kindled, and cast its flame so far and wide,
that all the Churches of that most large and mighty kingdom, to the
perpetual disgrace of your most renowned Majesty, be set on a flaming fire:
seeing the most part of the Bishops, men greatly renowned for all kind of
learning and godliness, had rather leave their office and place in the Church,
then against their own conscience, admit of such garments, or at the least
signs of Idola^rie and Popish superstititon, and so defile themselves with
them, and give of fence to the weak by their example. Now what other thing will
this be, then by retaining of these garments, to destroy the whole body of the
Church^ For without doubt that is Satan's intent, by casting a seed of
dissentions amongst the Bishops. And that he aimed at in the infancy of the
Church by stirring up discord between the East and West Churches, about the
Passover and other ceremonies of that kind. Therefore Ireneus Bishop of Lions,
had just cause in his Epistle sent out of France to Rome, sharply to reprove
Victor the Pope of Rome, because he out of a kind of zeal, but not according
to knowledge, was minded to excommunicate all the churches of Asia, because
they celebrated not the Passover just at the same time, as they at Rome did.
For this was nothing but by an unseasonable desire to retain the same
ceremonies in all churches to rent and tear a pieces the unity of the
Churches. I therefore so soon as I heard that so great a ruin hanged over the
Church of Christ in that kingdom, presently, in respect of that duty which I
owe to the Church of Christ, to your gracious Majesty, and to that whole
kingdom, intended to write thither, and to try by my uttermost endevor whether
so great a mischief might possibly be withstood: some that fear Christ, and
wish well to your Majesty, exhorting me to the performance of this duty. But
when I had scarcely begun to think of this course, behold our most illustrious.
Prince commanded (...) to do it, which command of his did not only spur me
one, who of mine owe accord was already running, but laid a necessity of
writing upon me. Wherefore this my boldness will seem the less strange unto
your gracious Majesty, seeing my writing proceeds not so much from mine own
will and counsel of friends, as from the commandment of my most Noble Prince,
who is one of your gracious Majesty's special friends. Now I thought I should
do a matter very worth the pains taking, if first I should humbly admonish
your most famous Majesty what your duty is in this cause: and secondly, if
as your humble suppliant I should beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
to perform the same. I beseech your gracious Majesty to take this my writing
in good part, for it proceeds from a Christian love toward the Church, and
from an especial reverend respect that I bear to your most gracious Majesty.
The Lord knows all things. Now to the matter in hand.

Whereas the Apostle writing to Timothy, commands that prayers be made for
Kings, and all other that be in authority, and says, that the end wherefore
they be ordained, is, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all
(that is, perfect) godliness and honesty, he teaches plainly enough what is
the duty of godly Kings and Princes, namely, that they take care, and bring
to pass, that first and above all things, true religion, and the true worship
of God, where it is banished, be restored, and being restored, be kept pure:
all things which smell of impiety being far removed. Secondly, that men may
live honestly and holilie, all kinds of uncleannesses being abandoned.
Lastly, that public peace and holy friendship be maintained among the
subjects, all occasions of contentious being, as much as possibly may be,
taken out of the way.

As the Apostle teaches manifestly, as we have seen, so all learned men who
be of sound judgment concerning the Magistrates office, do with one consent
affirm, that these be the three chief parts of the office of the Prince, and
of every godly Magistrate. Which thing being so, I see not how your gracious
Majesty can, with good conscience, propound again the garments in question,
and other things of that kind, smelling as yet of Popish superstition, and
once banished out of the Churches, to the consciences of the Bishops Paul's
Bishops ^hee means, or else as I said before, he is misinformed.
to be taken on again, and so propound them that you should compel them by
your commandment to receive them again. For first, this is quite contrary to
the first and chief part of the Princes office. For if the Magistrate ought to
have a chief care, that the worship of God be kept pure and without mixture;
and if for this cause all things are to be abandoned which may any way either
by themselves, or by accident defile this worship: and therefore all things are
to be called back as much as may be, to the rule of God, and to the former
and Apostolical, and so the more pure and simple form of religion: Finally,
if as the Apostle commands, we be to abstain, not only from all evil,
but also from all appearance of evil; to what end, I beseech you most renowned
and most godly Queen, should those things be brought again into the Church
of God, by the Princes commandment, which be contrary to the purity of the
Apostolical worship, which smell of Popish superstition, which be neither
availeable to the edification of the godly, nor to order, nor for ornament,
except that which is whoorish: which lastly, can bring no profit, but on the
contrary, many evils to the Church? It is out of all doubt, that by this law
concerning apparel, all godly men will be offended, but the wicked will
laugh in their sleeve, and hereby be put in hope to get many more things: as
for those of the middle sort, that is, such as be newly converted and turned
from ungodlines to godliness, and be not as yet well grounded, they will be in
great danger, and if we speak according to man's judgment, they will rather
look back to the old superstition, to which by nature we are inclined, then
fix and fasten their eyes upon true religion. And therefore this is (...) a
decree which will bring no advancement at all to godliness, but may much further
ungodliness. For though these garments be not evil and unclean of and by
themselves, that is, of their own nature, yet because of the former and late
abuse, they are not altogether free from uncleanness. Certainly it cannot be
denied, but that they will at the least, ^giue occasions of many evils and
very grievous superstitions. Now the very occasions also of evils are to be
shunned. To what end then should these be thrust upon the Church, from whom no
profit can be hoped, very much evil may come? for this is to tempt God. Your
famous Majesty may well remember, that not without cause it was written, He
that touches pitch, shall be defiled with it: that the Apostle had reason to
command, that we should purge out the old leaven, that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump. And that Hosea did not foolishly reprove the Jews,
because they translated and brought a young graffe (of superstitions) out of
Israel into their own garden, that is, the true Church. We ought, most
religious Queen, to have nothing at all to do with the Papists in matter of
religion, save in those things which they have common with the Apostles. Why, I
beseech you, were some kings, otherwise godly, reproved and blamed in the
Scriptures, that they had not taken away Churches or Temples for divine service
in the mountains, which were built by holy Fathers ere the building of the
Temple, in which the Lord was wont to be worshipped? Surely, because the
Temple being now builded and ordained for divine service, God would not have
any footsteps of any other chapel at all to be extant. Therefore also when
once the kingdom of Christ was manifested, the ceremonies and garments of
Aaron ought not any more to take place. For this cause the Apostles were upon
good ground careful, that after Christ's ascension, they should so be taken
away, that no relickes of them remained. And if they took them away holily,
unholily have the Papists called them back again. Now whether it be better to
follow the godly simplicity of the Apostles, or the ungodly pomp of the
Papists, who is ignorant? This recalling of such Popish garments, your gracious
majesty may believe me, will be a greater evil, then peradventure it may be
seen, even to very wise men at the first blush: For me thinks I see and hear
the Monks crying out with very loud voices in the Pulpits, both confirming
their followers in their ungodlie religion, by the example of your gracious
Majesty, and also saying, What? does not even the Queen of England also, a
most learned and a most prudent Princess, begin by little and little to come
back to the religion of the holy Church of Rome, the most holy and sacred
vestments of the Clergy men being taken on again? we are to be in good hope
that the day will come, wherein she will a length, though now they be thought
to be dead, recall also all the other rites and sacraments of the holy Church
of Rome. These and such like words, no doubt, most prudent Queen, the Monks
and Jesuits will use in the Pulpits. For they take all occasions to confirm
their superstitions. Therefore to recall these stinking garments, and other
rubbish of the Popish Church into the Church of Christ at this time, what is it
but to give the Papists an occasion, and the best that may be, to confirm and
harden themselves and their in their superstitions, and also to help them in
this business? But let us hear what the Prophet said to Iehosaphat King of
Judah, when he helped Ahab; Dare thou help the wicked, and love those who
hate the Lord? For this thing the wrath of the Lord is upon thee. And what
other thing will this be, then even to call back the weak from the study of
pure Religion, and to give them a privy warning to look back, and return
into Aegipt? It is an easy matter for us weak men, who of our own nature are
prone to superstition, to slide back to impiety. Therefore occasions of
sliding back to ungodliness, ought to be taken away, and at no hand to be
given. And what else, I pray you, meant God in forbidding to plow with an Ox
and an Ass, to sow the same field with diverse kinds of seeds, and to wear a
garment woven of linen and woollen together? It is an odious and detestable
thing with God, that the same field of the Lord should be tilled by ungodlie
and godly Bishops together; If in the same Church Popish Doctrine be taught
with the Doctrine of the Gospel; Finally, if sacraments, ceremonies, and
rites, partly Apostolic, and partly Popish, be used, and the Church be
clothed with them as with a garment of linsey-wossey. For what agreement has
light with darkness? And therefore those things which be not of God, but from
them who have defiled Gods worship, are utterlie to be cast away, which the
Lord himself commanded to be done, when he charged utterlie to destroy all
things which appertained to those who should give us counsel to follow strange
Gods, and to burn their garments, and all their stuff with fire in the
midst of the street, to show our detestation of such Seducers, and that they
might be an execrable thing to the Lord. And who knows not that these
garments are a part of the household stuff of that Romish Seducer? There shall
cleave nothing of the execrable thing, says he, to thy hand, that the Lord
may turn from the fierceness of his wrath, and multiply thee, as he has
sworn to thy Fathers, etc. Wherefore to bring these garments, seeing they be
the household stuff of Antichrist, into the Church of Christ, what is it else
then to provoke God to anger, and to kindle his fury against us? Certain it
is, that he who is a true friend of Christ, will never seek to have the
ornaments of Antichrist in his own house, and much less will he suffer them
in the Temple of Christ. For who can endure the arms of his enemy in his own
house, and specially in the chiefest room of the same? And if God will have a
thing destroyed and abolished, who are we that we dare build it up again. But
it is Gods will that after the death of Christ all garments of Aaron and Levi
should be abolished: and he has plainly enough manifested every where, that
in these our days he would have all ungodly and vain ceremonies, pompes,
deceits, and paintings of the Papists driven away by the shining brightness of
the Gospel: because these things have no power in them to kindle and increase
godliness, but greatly avail to the quenching of the same. Neither verily can
I see to what other end these garments tend, then in very deed (that I may now
come unto the second head) to defile and disgrace the fair face; nay, the
whole body of the Church of England reformed according to the Untrue, or
misinformed.
Gospel; as if the chaste and honest daughter of a King should be attired
with those very garments wherewith some famous and notable whore used to be
adorned, and when she were so clothed, were commanded to go abroad in the
streets. Now who can allow or judge this to be tolerable? Wherefore though for
no other, yet for this very cause, such garments ought not to be thrust upon
the Church of Christ, because that harlot of Rome has abused, and does still
at this day abuse them (though in their own nature they be not evil) to
evil, and to cover her fornications, or rather to entice men to commit
fornication. For all these pompes, and Popish ceremonies are nothing else but
whoorish paintings invented and devised for this end, that men might thereby
be allured to spiritual fornication. Is it not therefore a filthy and
dishonest thing, to have these in the Church of Christ? If the brazen serpent,
which had been ordained of God, and that for the wholesome use of the
Israelites, was taken away by godly King Ezekias, because the Israelites had
abused it contrary to the word of God: and if Ezekias be highly commended
for this so doing, because he had ^^ned that Serpent into ashes, and commanded
them to be cast into the running water, that there might never be any print
or sign of it extant any more; how much more then are these unclean garments
to be banished out of the Church of God, seeing the Apostles never used them,
but the whore of Rome has used them in her Idolatrous worship, and to seduce
men? For it is a very dishonest thing, that such things as are of themselves
indifferent, and have been long used to the dispight and dishonor of God,
should be retained in the Church of God, to the hazard of the salvation of
godly men. And much less that kind of garments, which is nothing but an
invention of men, or rather of the Devil himself, devised to seduce the
simple ones. We all know what praise those commonwealths deserve, which make
good laws that the subjects shall not wear outlandish and strange apparel,
nor bring it into the Commonwealths, because it is a corruption of good and
honest manners, and of the Commonwealths themselves. How then can that
counsel which is given to your Majesty, be commended, to wit, that garments
unknown to the Christian world in tht time of the Apostles, and Apostolical
men, should be brought into the Church of Christ. And if an outlandish kind
of attire be not tolerated in well-governed Commonwealths* how much less
are Idolatrous, and heathenish garments to be borne with in the Church, where
God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth, and where he would have few and
very simple ceremonies? Also if God established by his Law, that a woman may
not put on a man's apparel, not a man a woman's, the one being so well of it
self dishonest, and contrary to nature as the other: Why then should godly
Bishops, still misinformed.
and the servants of Christ be clothed, or rather shamed and deformed with the
garments of godless Priests, and slaves of Antichrist? Why should we not
rather, as we be of a diverse religion from them, so also be discerned from
them, at least in the performance of such duties as belong unto Gods worship,
by outward signs, such as garments be? Verily this was Gods will, and he
required of his people, that it should be discerned from the profane
Gentiles, as by other things, so also by a diverse sort of apparel, and so
should profess by this public sign, that it would have nothing to do with
the Gentiles.

And why should not we do the same? Are we not the people of God? abides not
the equity of the same commandemet? And if the word honest be derived of
honor, what honor will it be for the Church of Christ to have Bishops
attired and disguised with Popish visors in the administration of the Gospel
and Sacraments, so as they shall rather be derided then be reverenced any whit
by the people? And what commendation shall it be for your gracious Majesty in
true Churches, and among true believers, that you permit such trifles to be
called back into your Church? Therefore it stands not with honesty, that holy
Bishops still misinformed.
be compelled to receive such visors, neither is it indeed a matter worthy of
honor and praise, neither deserves it the name of virtue. For if your
Majesty should command that all English men, leaving that ancient and very
grave and comely attire, should wear Turkey coats, or a soldiers weed, as it
is called: who would ever approve this decree as honest? And it is much less
praiseworthy, if godly Bishops be enjoined, laying aside, or at least changing
the honest and ancient apparel, which the Apostles wore, to wit, that common
and grave habit, to put on the ridiculous and execrable or accursed garments of
godless Mass-priests.

Now concerning the third part of the Princes duties, there is nothing fitter
to trouble the public peace of the Church then this counsel. For every
noveltie, especially in religion, either by it self, if it be evil, disturbs
and troubles a good peace, or if it be good, gives occasion of trouble by
accident, by causing contention between evil and good men. But as in things
which be good of themselves, of which nature the reformation of the Churches
according to the will of God is, we are not to care for the troubling of that
ungodly peace, that is of the world (for Christ came not by his Gospel to
keep such a peace, but rather to take it away, and to send a sword) so
assuredly, by the urging of things indifferent, to trouble the peace of
Churches, and to cause strife between good men and bad, yea between godly men
themselves, is so wicked, that it can by no means be defended, so that
Ireneus had just cause to reprove Victor Bishop of Rome, for this cause, as
has been said before. For it must needs be, that at such times the Churches
be rent in pieces, then which thing, what is more hurtful? Many examples in
the histories of the Church prove this which I say. How many and how great
troubles arose in the Primitive Church, between those who beside the Gospel
urged also circumcision and the law, and between those who upon good ground
rejected them? And how great evils would this dissension have brought to the
Church of Christ, had not the Apostles betime withstood them by that council
gathered together at Jerusalem, by a lawful examination and discussing of the
cause by manifest testimonis of the Scriptur^s, and by sound reasons? If your
gracious Majesty (as you ought) desire both to be and to seem Apostolic,
then imitate the Apostles in this matter. Neither lay and impose this yoke upon
the necks of Christ's Disciples your self, nor suffer it to be imposed by
others. But if you see that the Bishops disagree about this matter among
themselves, assemble a Synod, and cause this controversy to be examined by the
Scriptures. And then look what shall be proved by plain testimonies, and
strong reasons, propound that to be observed by all, and command by your
decree^ that that be observed, and so take disagreement out of the Church. For
your gracious Majesty ought to be very careful, that there be no innovation
in religion, but according to the word of God. By this means shall a true
peace, concord and unity of the Churches be preserved. But if the proceeding
be otherwise, what other thing will it be, then to take away unity, and to
trouble the Christian peace? And this I may not pass over with silence, that
by this noveltie of the business, not only the public peace shall be troubled
in that kingdom, but also many elsewhere out of that kingdom will have
occasion given them to raise new contentions in Churches, and that to the great
hinderance of godliness, and the more slow proceeding of the Gospel. For all
men know, that the most part of all the Churches, who have fallen from the
Bishop of Rome, for the Gospels sake, do not only want, but also abhor
those garments, and that there be some Churches, though few in comparison of
the former, which do as yet retain those garments invented in Popery, as
they very stiffly retain some other things also, because the reformers of
those Churches, otherwise worthy men, and very faithful servants of Christ,
durst not at the first (neither judged they it expedient) utterly abolish all
Popish things. But as the common manner is, every man likes his own best. Now
I call those things a man's own, not so much which every man has invented, as
those beside, which every man chooses to himself, receives, retains, and
pursues, though they be invented to his hand by others. But if there be also
annexed the examples of other men, they be more and more hardened in them, and
are not only hardened, but also do their uttermost endeavor by word and
writing, to draw all the rest to be of their mind? Therefore we easily see
what the issue will be, if your gracious Majesty admit of that counsel which
some do give you, to take on apparel, and other more Popish things besides.
For some men, who be not well occupied, being stirred up by the example of your
Majesty, will write books and disperse them throughout all Germany, of these
things which they call indifferent, to wit, that it is lawful to admit of
them, nay that they be altogether to be retained, that Papists may be the
less estranged and alienated from us, and so we may come the nearer to concord
and agreement. As if forsooth the Papists, though we for peace sake admitted of
all those things, would ever amend their Doctrine, and banish out of their
Churches, or at any hand lay down their false and godless decrees, manifest
and abominable superstitions and idolatries: and there will be some who will
answer such books once dispersed. So of this English fire there will rise a
new burning flame in Germany and France, on which hot coals the Papists as so
many Smiths a forging, will sprinkle cold water to make the flame the more
vehement. And is not this a goodly benefit? Who therefore does not see that
this counsel tends to the troubling of all Churches.

To conclude, that golden saying of a certain learned man is very true and
certain, and approved by long experience, that indifferent things, that is,
the question about indifferent things, is that golden apple of contention. So
much shall suffice to have spoken of the troubling of public peace; what
should I say of the consciences of private belevers? It is manifest, that they
are greatly troubled with this commandment, to put on these linen garments.
For they do so greatly complain, that their lamenting voices and groans do
reach unto, and are heard in Germany. Now how grievous and distasteful an
offense it is to trouble the consciences of the godly, the holy Scripture
shows: partly when it commands that we make not the holy Spirit sad,
neither offend the weak ones* partly when it threatens grivous punishments
against those who fear not to do these things: partly also when it
propounds the examples of the Saints, and specially of Paul, who speaks
thus; If meat offend my brother, I Will eat no flesh while the world stands,
that I may not offend my brother. For in those words he gives a general
rule, by his example, taken out of the doctrine of Christ, to wit, that no
indifferent thing is to be admitted and yielded unto, much less to be urged
upon others, and least of all to be commended by decree: if in the admitting,
urging and commanding of it, the minds of good men, and consciences of the
faithful be offended, for a tender conscience, which fears God, is a thing
most precious and acceptable to God. How therefore can that counsel be
approved, which would have a law established and proclaimed by the Princes
command for the use of garments to be used by Ministers in the ministry. For
(to speak many things in few words) if such garments be to be propounded to the
faithful, they are to be propounded either as indifferent, or as necessary: If
the later, we do ungodly, because we make those things necessary, which
Christ would have to be free: If the former, then are they to be left free to
the Churches. But by commanding and compelling, we make things that be free
and indifferent, to be necessary, and so fall into the same trespasse^.
Moreover, either they be ordained of God by Moses, or they be delivered by
Christ God manifested in the flesh, or they be ordained by the holy Ghost
working and speaking in the Apostles, or they are of men, either godly or
wicked. Those ceremonies and Levitical garments, which were ordained of God by
Moses, ought all of them to have an end after the death of Christ, as the
scriptures show plainly, especially the Epistles of Paul to the Coloss. and
Hebr. therefore they cannot be revoked and called back without the
transgression of Gods will. It cannot be said that Christ taught them, because
there is no word extant to that end, but rather he taught plainly oftentimes,
that all Moses his ceremonies were ended. And the same I affirm concerning the
Apostles. It remains therefore that they be said to be of men. If they be from
godly men, then were they ordained of them, either to edefication, or for order
and comelines. But they avail not to edification, that is, to further
comelines, but rather tend to the overthrow of it, as we saw before; neither
for any good order, but rather they tend to disorder, for there is a confusion
of godly and wicked Bishops, whereas it is meet and equal, that one of them
be discerned from another, even by their garments also. Neither do they make
Christ's spouse comely, as we showed a little before. Therefore we ought not to
yield unto them. And such things as have been invented by men, void of Gods
spirit, do nothing appertain to us. Lastly, the Apostles used not these
garments. For we have no authenticke testimony. Now the Church is to be
fashioned after the rule of that Apostelicall Church in ceremonies and
garments, as well as in Doctrine. What do we then with these garments in the
Church? By whose authority can they be approved? What profit or wholesome use
can the Christian people have by them? But on the contrary we have showed that
godliness is weakened by them, the pure worship of God is violated, Popish
superstition is by little and little called back, the godly be offended, the
wicked be confirmed and hardened in their ungodlinesses; the weak in faith are
brought into hazard of their salvation; there are occasions of many evils
given; Monks and other Popish preachers are hereby helped to confirm their
followers in their superstition; the wrath of God is provoked against us; those
things which God would have to be destroyed, are hereby builded again by
(...); the whole face of the Church is defiled and disgraced: there is a foul
sin committed against honest and good laws forbidding the putting on of
strange and outlandish garments: and so the whole Church is dishonored,
Besides, the public peace of the Church, yea of many Churches is troubled: one
Bishop is set against another, the consciences of the godly are troubled, and
the minds of goood men are offended, Gods spirit is made sad in them, and this
apple of contention is cast, as it were, upon the table of the Gods.

Now seeing the matter stands thus, most gracious Queen, not only I^ but all
my fellow-ministers, and all the godly prostrate before you, entreat your
Majesty, and for Jesus Christ's sake, whom we are persuaded you love from your
heart, we humbly beseech your Majesty not to embrace that counsel aforesaid,
neither to give ear to such counselors. For those counsels (most godly
Queen) are not for the good of that your Church and kingdom, nor for the
honor of your Majesty, seeing they neither serve to the increase of godliness,
nor to the retaining of the honesty of the Church, neither to the preservation
of public peace, but rather very greatly weaken all these good things, which
your. Princely Man ought chiefly to stand for. Let your Man rather bend all
your thoughts, In making 3 sorts of officers afterward Bishops Seniors, or
Elders and Deacons, he must take word Bishop in the scripture language, as
common to all Pastors.
authority and power hereunto, that first and above all you may have Bishops,
who be truly godly, and well exercised in the holy scriptures, as by the
blessing of God you have very many, and that you make much of, and give ear to
them. Secondly, that you be careful that with all diligence they may
discarge their office, watching over the flock teach sound doctrine, confute
heresies, drive away Wolves, keep every man in his own calling, and exhort
and stir up every man to lead a life beseeming a Christian. The Elders also
and Deacons are to be admonished, that every one be diligent in his own
office, and if need be, they are to be compelled by your gracious Man
authothoritie, that neither the former by their sleeping and winking at the
misdemeanors of the flock, suffer the reins to be loosed to all licentiousnes,
and to the lusts of the flesh; neither that the later, by reason of their
immoderate care for their own private businesses, neglect the poor people of
the Church, and omit such other things as belong to their office. For these
three sorts of men be the very sinews of the Church, upon whom the salvation
or destruction of the Church does chiefly depend. Furthermore, your gracious
Man ought to use great care and diligence, that the Universities, and in them
good and godly teachers, be well looked to, cherished, liberally maintained
and preserved, for these are as the mothers, and nurses of the Churches, in
which and by which those are to be fashioned, borne, brought up and adorned,
who being fit, may be called from time to time to rule and govern the
Churches. Last of all such things as cannot be corrected and amended by the
word and discipline of the Church, as it is necessary, that according to Gods
word they be cut off and taken away by the sword of the Magistrate, so your
gracious Majesty is to take care of them: as adulteries, blasphemies, and
other capital crimes of that sort. For God has given the Magistrate the sword
for this end, that ungodly seducers, filthy knaves, and unquiet men being
restrained, the rest may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. This is the matter (most gracious Queen) whereon you are to spend your
thoughts, hereabout are your counsels to be occupied, here is all your
strength to be showed, namely, that (to end in a word) we all denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, may live soberly, justly, and godlily in this
present world. For this is the true and fairest garment of all other. For which
every man ought to take care, to wit, that having put off the old man with his
works, we put on the new man, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ, neither are
there any other true ornaments which become Christian Bishops, besides those
which the Apostle has laid down in his writings to Tim. and Tit. A Bishop
must be unreproveable, the husband of one wife, watching, sober, modest,
harborous, apt to teach, not given to wine, no stryker, nor given to filthy
luere, but gentle, no fighter, not covetous, one that can rule his house
honestly, having children under obedience in all honesty, not forward, not
angry, righteous, holy etc. For garments and ornaments of Aarons high Priest,
were types of these true ornaments; those were the shadows, these be the
body. Wherefore let those be gone, and let these abide still. And then at
length shall we have the whole Church, and so the Bishops rightly and truly
apparrelled.

Once again I humbly beseech your gracious Majesty, that thinking no more of
those outward garments, you will mind and consider how these true and
spiritual ornaments may be retained, put upon, and kept in the Churches. And
as I said in the beginning, that according to your gracious Majesty's clemency
you will be pleased to pardon my boldness in writing. Our Lord Jesus Christ long
preserve your gracious Majesty safe and sound to us, and to the whole Church.
From Heidelberg. 10. September. 1571.


THus (good sir) you see how I have endeavored to satisfy your desire
concerning the general part of the Defense. If this do not fully content you,
I will (if it please God) add what is vvanting another time. For it is fit
we should help one another in private, concerning these things, lest the
public sway of formalitie should make us forget or forgo that sincerity
which those men of God taught us, in whom when we were yet children, we saw
the power of godliness that made us love their footsteps.

Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked,
and they see his shame, Apoc. 16. 15.

I have added to the Authors Reply, but without his knowledge, the
advertisement following; to fill up this page, which without some purpose had
otherwise been left blank.
WHEN you find, good Reader, any straggling testimonies of some few foreign
Divines alleged by the formalists, which seem to savor of toleration,
consider first that some did write in the dawning of the day of reformation,
and therefore could not so soon see distinctly and clearly every corruption
which was in the Church, 2. That notvvithstanding of greater light shining in
the Church, after the rising of the Sun above our Horizon, the Divines treating
upon many points, could not be exact in every one, or intending principally
to beat down such corruptions as did most assault their own Churches, no
vvonder that there fell from their pens some sentences not ripely digested
concerning other points. 3. That howbeit these had purposely set themselves to
consider the controversies of our Churches, yet not being thoroughly acquainted
with the particular state of the same, might give their judgment in the
general case, but could not so well in the particular, as many worthy Divines
in England have done. 4. They were but men, and might err in judgment, and
so appears by the vveak reasons subjoyned sometimes to their opinions. And
living in Churches where some corruptions do remain, they might the more
readily stumble at the like in others. 6. It has been the practice of the
English Prelates from time to time, and is at this present hour, not only to
offer preferment to Divines at home, but also to send gifts to foreign
Divines, to blunt at least the edge of their zeal, if they could not make them
altogether their own, as they have done some. For proof of this their old
practice I have here subjoyned a few lines taken out of the friendly caveat to
B. Sands, then Bishop of London, written ann^. 1567. extant in the book
entitled, The Register.

Although you have, as much as in you lies, gone about to win credit, and as
it were to tie the tongues of Bullinger, Gualter, Zanchius, and others with
your bribes, which you have diverse times sent them under the name of friendly
tokens and remembrances, yet when they shall be informed better of more then
they were the last time, and confirmed in the former satisfaction of these two
last set forth books, as well these that I have named, as diverse more will not
be ashamed, like true and constant professors of the truth, to answer your L.
as Aristotle did Plato, when he said, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica viritas,
that is to say, openly to confess, not in private meeting only, but in print
also, that English ti^ne, English clothes, and English silver and gold are and
shall be welcome to them, as long as they are not meant to stop them from the
truth against both their conscience, and their printed writings and
confessions. Yea if ye will look well on the matter, Gualter has condemned
you and your splendida Pontificalia already. For in his last Epistle to you
Lords, he denies not that those informations, these two that he speaks of
delivered him, were intolerable in the Church: but trusting only upon your
words, and believing your colored lying informations too much, would not
credit them as t^o too monstrous things to be in such a realm, that hau^
always had so good a report for zealousnesse in religion, and to be maintained
of such men, that in time of their banishment, both he himself, and a great
sort more knew to be godly, learned, and earnest in religion.

MElanchton did write in the dawning of the day. ^anchius in ^n Epistle to
Bullinger, reports that he was of a fearful spirit, and did many things
which he did not approve. His advices in the time of the Interim proved
pernicious to the Germane Churches, and grievous to all the godly. Harder
things, if true, are written concerning him. P. Martyr, freer in writing after
he had left England then he was before, in a letter to a certain friend there,
confesses his oversight in advisi^g rather to conform to Popish apparel then
to leave the Ministry, and that now with ^ullinger he was of another mind,
seeing the scandals which did arise unavoideably of them, which he did not
perceive before. He confesses in another Epistle to a certain friend there,
that he could not give full and particular direction not being acquainted with
all the particular circumstances. Tu autem qui^^es in ipso certamine consilia
hic non expecta. Valde quippe sumus a vobis procul. In ipsa consultetis arena.
Which answer holds in other foreign Divines. The Author of this sound Reply,
craving the removal or at least the free use of the ceremonies, and that none
be enthralled; or saying if there Deanes, Canons, and Prebendaries will
practice them in their Cathedral Churches, they will not contend with them,
providing the Prelates impose them not upon others, is to be understood to
speak only of the English Church, where they have kept possession ever since
the Reformation, and as a man almost despairing of any cure after these fifty
years contestation against them, rather then resolving. But all Writers
condemn the reducing of corruptions into a Church, specially after exile of
many years. Many worthies have suffered much for Reformation, what would they
have done to withstand the re-entry of Deformation?

FINIS.

