1588.

A SERMON PREACHED ON THE Queens day.

Being the 17. of November. 1587. at the town of Lidd in Kent, by ISAAC
COLFE, Preacher of the word of God.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, for Harry Carre, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Church yard.

TO MY WORSHIPFVLL FRIENDS, THE Bailife and Iurats of the town of Lidd: Isaac
Colfe wishes all prosperity in this life, and life everlasting in the world to
come.
Having Preached this Sermon amongst you (woorshipfull Sirs) seeing the
General well liking thereof, and therewithal the desire of some to have the
copy of the same: I chose rather to commit it to the Printer, then to copy it
out in writing: because that as the labor should be easier unto my self, so
the benefit should be greater unto more. And this I have done, not upon the
absolute well lyking of the manner of my labor therein, which I confess simple:
but only the consideration of the matter thereof which for this time I see
necessary: containing, as appears in the discourse thereof, the wonderful
advancement of our most gracious sovereign Q. Elizabeth to the crown of this
Realm, to the singular benefit of us all: that upon the consideration thereof
we might be the more stirred up to yield dutiful thankfulness and prayer unto
God for her: the one in that he first advanced her thereunto, and preserved
her hethertoo therein: the other, that he would still preserve and prosper her
in the government of the same. And I have thought it requisite to dedicate this
my labor unto you: not only because it was preached amongst you: but
principally because of those passing great courtesies which I have continually
received at your hands: For the which as I can not but acknowledge my self
wholly indebted far beyond my power fully to requite: so do I acknowledge my
self every way bound to testify my thankfulness unto you, which is the only
recompense, which either you demand, or I can give again for them. Wherefore
vouchsafe, I pray you Woorshipfull Sirs, (as an undoubted testimony thereof) to
accept this same at my hands: who as I am always, and by all ways ready pressed,
according to duty, with all the power of body and mind, to seek your
spiritual profit: so am I as ready at this present, herein to satisfy your
Godly desires. The Lord heap upon you the manifold graces of his holy Spirit
in abundant measures, to the benefit of his Church, whereof ye are members:
of the Common wealth, whereof ye are subjects: but yet principally of that
Corporation, whereof ye are Magistrates, to your praise on earth, and eternal
glory in the highest Heavens. At Lidd. this first of January. 1587.

Your woorships to be commanded in the Lord, Isa. Colfe.

A Sermon.
Text Psalm. 118. verse. 22. etc. 22 The stone which the builders refused, is
the head of the Corner.

23 This was the Lords doings, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

24 This is the day which the Lord has made: Let us rejoice and be glad in it.

25 O Lord I pray thee, save now: O lord I pray thee now give prosperity.

26 Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, we have blessed you
out of the house of the Lord.


THis Psalm (woorshipfull and beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ)
was framed by David: and that, as it seems, when, after so many dangers
avoided, he had obtained the kingdom of Judah, and reigned in Hebron. 2 Samuel
2. And it contains 2 Samuel 2.
partly the words of David, exhorting the house of Israel, the house of Aaron,
yea and all them which fear the Lord, to praise the Lord for his great goodness
and abundant mercy toward him: which how great and abundant it was, he
himself thankfully expresses. And partly the words of the people, who upon
the consideration of the wonderful advancement of David, notwithstanding all
the outrageous practices of his enemies: and of the happiness thereof redounding
to their singular and unspeakable benefit, with a solemn observation of the
day thereof, give thanks to the Lord therefore: also joining prayer thereunto for
the safety and prosperity of David their king: to which latter part are these
words to be referred, which I have at this present hereout, in respect of this
present occasion through the goodness of God so happily multiplied unto us, made
especial choice off to deliver unto you: and therefore are to be taken, and
understood, as being the words of the people, and not as being the words of
David.

They do contain 2 principal parts 1. A declaration of the woonderful and
happy advancement of David to the kingdom. 2 Their loving and dutiful
behavior upon the consideration thereof.

The first part.
A declaration of the wonderful and happy advancement of David to the
kingdom. Wherein yet more particularly ye people express first ye
advancement of David verse 22. Secondy how it came to pass. verse. 23.
Thirdly the benefit thereof verse. 24. until the midst thereof.

1 The advancement of David, verse. 22. The stone which the Builders refused,
is the head of the Corner: For the more lively describing, and full expressing
whereof, we see, they use a metaphor comparing the commune wealth unto a
building: the subjects unto stones therein: the Princes and rulers unto the
builders thereof: the King unto the head Corner stone of the same: For albeit
that these words be referred unto Christ: of whom David was a Type and
figure, and therefore are so used by Christ. Math. 21. And by Matt. 21. Act. 4.
the Apostle S. Peeter. Act. 4. and else where: yet as they were spoken by this
people in this place, they were applied unto David: thereby showing that David a
subject of that Common wealth, although refused and persecuted by the Princes
and Rulers thereof, yet was aduau^ced to be King of the same, where, First, let
us observe the fit use of this metaphor by the examination of the parts
thereof. Secondly, the application thereof to the purpose of the people.

First concerning the fit use of this Metaphor, it is apparent by the
partituler examination of the several parts thereof. For every Commonwealth
is as a building consisting of many parts, which being coupled together in one
according unto art, make one house: of this house first every subject is a
stone serving in one place or other, and to one use or other in the building,
whereby as we learn how perilous in each common wealth contention is
between the subjects of the same: that it is even such as if the stones of one
building should forsake their places and refuse their offices in keeping in and
supporting of one another, and should divide themselves the one against the
other, to the beating out and breaking of each other: whereby it must needs
come to pass, that the house, yea be it never so goodly and stately, never so
firm and strong, must have a downfall, and come to destruction: for a house
divided against it self can not stand, as it is written Mat. 12. Matthew. 12.


So hereout we are taught, with what carefulnes every one of us, of what
estate and condition, of what vocation and calling soever we are, ought to
procure according to the same, the benefit of the Common wealth, whereof we
are subjects, in that we are borne to be stones in this building for the
benefit of the same: Which Tully an heathen orator lib. 1, de offic. could
Cic. de offic. lib. 1.
see and say. Non nobis solum nati sumus etc. which notable saying he had out
of Plato: although therefore we are borne partly for ye benefit of our selves,
partly of our parents, partly of our friends (yea and of our enemies also) yet
principally for the benefit of the common wealth: and surely as that stone is
unworthy to lie on the Earth which will serve to no use in the building: so is
that man as unworthy to live on the earth, which in nothing either can not, or
will not benefit the common wealth. Again in this house ye counsailers,
nobility, rulers, and al men in authority are builders: whose office is, if
they see this house down, to build it up, if decayed to repair it: if weakened
to strengthen it: if falling to hold it up: if assaulted, to defend it: if
strong, for to maintain it: and this is, first, by ordaining of good and
wholesome laws according to ye present times and occasions. 2. by the diligent
and faithful execution of them being established: 3. if need require, by
spending their goods and aduenturing their lives in ye defense of it. Thus
ought they to be builders of ye house of ye Common wealth: otherwise well they
may bear the name of builders, but they are indeed pluckers down of the same.
He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
he scatters. Luc. 11. there is no middle nor third thing Luc. 11.
between the one and the other. Again of this house, the King is the head of
the Corner, whereby the whole building is strengthened and held up. For as the
sides and quarters of the house are strengthened by joining unto the corners
thereof: and as the corners of the house being taken away, the house can not
stand, Job. cap. 1. So are all the Job. 1.
parts and members of the Common wealth sustained and strengthened by the
power of the King, and where there is no King, that Common wealth is like unto
an house rent from the corners thereof, which can not stand, but come to
confusion. One notable example, whereof is to be seen even in this Common
wealth of Israel, in the book of the Judges: which albeit, it was directed and
governed with all good and necessary laws not invented by man, but ordained by
God himself: yet Sampson being dead, there being no Judge in Israel, all
things came to a miserable confusion, as appears. Iudic. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.
Thus Iudi. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.
we see how fitly this Metaphor is here used in all the parts thereof.

And now secondly follows the application of the same unto the purpose and
meaning of the people, which was thereby to express the more fully and
manifestly the advancement of David to the kingdom: For this is the
profitable use of Metaphors, and Allegories, parables or similitudes, lively to
describe those things, which otherwise could not so fully be expressed.
Wherein First, they begin with his reiection, by the builders: Secondly, come
to his exaltation afterward.

First they begin with his reiection, that his exaltation might appear the
more glorious: for the lower the abbasing is, the more notable is the lifting
up: the greater the danger is, the more worthy is the victory. The stone
which the builders refused. Lo this is the reiection of David. David was a
stone of the house of Israel, a subject of that Common wealth: and albeit, by
birth he was not great, the son of Ishai, a mean Israelite: yet in respect
of his noble acts, he was a most precious stone, and a principal vpholder of
the glory of the same, as amongst other things most evidently appears 1.
Samuel 17. in his encountering 1 Samuel 17.
with, and over coming of Goliath the Philistine: for when this Goliath a man of
mighty stature, and of like strength defied the host of Israel, and no man
durst go down unto him: this David being yet but of young years, and of
tender age, yea being also unarmed, valiantly encountered with him, and
victoriously overcame him, whereby the honor of Israel was preserved, yea and
advanced: and the enemies vanquished and destroyed. But what was his reward?
This stone the builders refused: They which should have aduau^ced him, rejected
him: yea so rejected him, as that they did not only esteem him unworthy to
be the chief stone of the Corner, but also to be even an inferior stone in
the building, for they would clean have taken him away from the house of
Israel: whereunto tended all those tyrannous persecutions practiced against
him, whereof we read abundantly in the first book of Samuel. Well, thus we
see the reiection of this Stone by the builders.

Now follows his exaltation. The same is the head of the Corner: although the
builders refused this stone, yet ye Lord had chosen it, yea and although they
had rejected it, yet ye Lord had taken it up, and exalted it: and that not
only to be a mean stone in the building, but even to be the head in the
Corner of the same: that is, not only to be a fellow subject amongst them in
the common wealth, but even to be king over them in the government of ye same.
Whereby first we learn yt as those things which are highly esteemed before men,
are many times abomination in the sight of God, Luc. 16. so that on ye other
Luc. 16.
side oftentimes those things which are rejected of the world, are most
accepted of God, and that the things which are most vile and contemptible
before men, are most precious and glorious before God. David, a stone refused
by ye builders, but allowed and chosen of God. 2. Hereout we learn how
impossible a thing it is for a man to prevent ye purpose of God: God preuenteth
man in his purposes: man purposes, but God disposes al things: but no man is
able to prevent God in his purposes: who shall resist his will? There Romans 9.
is neither wisedeme, understanding, nor counsel against ye Lord. Pro. 21.
For ye Prou. 21.
Lord our God is in heaven, and does whatsoever Psalm. 115.
he will: yea even notwithstanding all the practices of man to prevent him. The
Lord had preferred Jacob before Esau, the younger before ye elder: Isaac would
have prevented it, but the Lord prevented him. Genesis 27. The Lord had Genesis 27.
appointed that Joseph should be Lord over his brethren, and that his brethren
should bow unto him and do him reverence: they would have prevented it by
selling him to the Ismaelites; but the Lord prevented them: they were glad to
bow and crowch before him. Genesis Genesis 42. 43
42. 43. And what need more examples herein? The Lord had anointed David king
over Israel, by the Ministry of Samuel. 1. Sam. 16. the Princes withstand 1.
Sam. 16.
it, yea Saul him self withstandeth it: but all in vain. David is advanced
to the kingdom of Judah, and at the length also to the kingdom of Israel, as
2. Sam. 5. Thus is this stone 2. Sam. 5.
which the builders refused, become the head of the Corner.

I am not come at this time into this place, worshipful and beloved,
historically to show unto you what has of old come to pass unto David of
Israel: but chiefly, in consideration of the day, by way of application to put
you in mind, what has been in your own days done unto Elizabeth of England.
The stone which the Builders refused, is the head of the Corner. Elizabeth that
precious stone of the house of England refused: by whom? by the builders
thereof: but what is the event? the same is the head of the corner. Elizabeth
refused, by what means? Elizabeth a stone of the house of England, not of any
strange country or foreign nation, and therefore not unfit: yet had they
refused her: yea Elizabeth a stone not of the baser, but of the most precious
sort a stone of the head corner stone, proceeding from the loins of the kings
of this land: yet had they refused her: yea Elizabeth a stone not ragged but
every way squared, not by the hand of man but by the finger of God, fit for
the place and purpose, and yet had they refused her. And by whom was she
refused? even by those which were chosen to be the builders of the house of
this common wealth: these were the Councellers and Nobility of this Realm, in
the days of Queen Mary her sister, who albeit they were the sworn assisters
of the rightful heir apparent to the Crown of this land: yea, and albeit they
knews by succession to be heirs, and that not by extraordinary annoynting as
the kingdom of Israel came to David, but by natural descent from her Father,
and confirmed by the last will and testament of her Father of famous memory
king Henry the eight, yet contrary to law, contrary to their oath, and
contrary unto conscience they refused her: and what ways and means they
devised and put in practice not only to deprive her of ye Crown, but also of
her head whereon the Crown should stand, as the history thereof in the book of
the acts and monuments of the Church recorded expresses it, and many of you
yet sufficiently remember it: so it should be needless for me now to spend any
time in ye delivering of it. Only therefore this I say (which boldly I may
say) that never did Saul and his coherents seek more ways to destroy David,
then they sought to destroy her: neither was David at any time in greater
danger of death being persecuted by Saul, nor Peter in greater perril of
beheading being fast bound in ye prison by Herod, Act. 12 Act. 12.
nor the three children in greater danger of burning when they were in the
hot burning furnace. Dan. 3. nor Daniel in Dan. 3.
greater danger of devouring when he was in the Lions den. Dan. 6. nor Dan.
6.
Jonas in greater danger of death being already devoured into the Whales belly
swimming in the midst of the sea. Jonah. 1. then she was being in the hands
Jonas. 1.
of her enemies. But what was the event? The same is the head of the Corner:
notwithstanding all this, her enemies had no power over her, they prevailed not
in their purposes, but were confounded in their devises: as for Elizabeth, she
is advanced to the kingdom, she sits in the throne, she wears the Crown,
she bears the Scepter. The stone which the builders refused, is the head of
the Corner: and thus much concerning the advancement of David.

2. How it came to pass. Now the people express how it came to pass that
David was advanced to the kingdom: how this stone being refused by the
builders, became notwithstanding the head of the Corner. verse. 23. This was
the Lords doing, and it is merueilous in our eyes. Where they first attribute
their working thereof only to the Lord. Secondly, they confirm it by the
merueilousnes thereof in their eyes.

First they attribute the advancement of David to the only working of the
Lord. It is the first doing and right dutifully: for it is the Lord which has
all things under his government and direction: neither is there any thing done
which the Lord has not done: the least things of this world which we see done,
are the Lords doing: the holding forth of our arms, the opening of our
lips, the lifting up of our eyes, nay the fall of the Sparrow, nay the fall
of the leaf: or if there be any thing less then the least of these, it is the
Lords doing, and therefore how much more the things which are greatest? Again
in the placing and disposing of the members of the body of man, that one
member is lower or higher then another, that the head is highest and the foot
lowest, it is the Lords doing. Again amongst those Celestial bodies, that
the Sun is placed above Moon and Stars; or (to use the words of the Apostle.
1. Cor: 15.) that there is 1. Cor. 15.
one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another of the Stars,
and that one Star differs from another in glory: this is also the Lords
doing: and so likewise in the politic body of the commonwealth, that one is
advanced above or below another, before or behind another: that one is the
chiefest, another the basest, this is also the Lords doing: it is the Lord that
casts down and exalts: it is he that raises ye poor out of the dust, and
lifts up the beggar from the dunghill to set him amongst the princes, that he
may inhabit the seat of glory, as Anna confesses in her song 1. Sam. 2. and
as David speaks, Psalm. 1. Sam. 2.
75. Preferment comes neither from Psalm. 75.
the East nor from the West, nor from the South, but God is judge: he makes
low and makes high: and therefore says the Lord, by the wisdom of Solomon,
Prou. 8. By me kings do reign: and Prou. 8. Romans 13.
the Apostle, Romans 13. There is no power but of God, and the powers that be,
are ordained of God: if therefore we see any advanced unto the seat of worship,
honor, or majesty, yea whether it be by birth, friends, conquest, or by any
other means of man, yet this we must acknowledge, that it is ye Lords doing:
For albeit that man was ye instrument, yet the Lord is the only author and
ordainer thereof. But yet when this people here acknowledge the aduanceme^t of
David to be the Lords doing, it is after a more special manner, as it is
opposed against the doing of man, thereby showing that it was brought to pass,
only by the power of the Lord, without the help, and beyond the expectation of
man: for albeit that even those things which are brought to pass by the
ministry of man, are said to be done of God, who used man as the instrument,
yet most properly are those things said to be the Lords doing which by his
absolute power are brought to pass without the help and beyond the
expectation of man: thus was the destruction of Pharao his host, of Senacheribs
host, of Herod: and thus wss ye preservation and deliverance of the Israelits,
of the three children, of Daniel, of Peter, the Lords doing: and thus do this
people affirm ye advancement of David to be the Lords doing.

Secondly that it was the Lords doing, they prove by the marueilousnes thereof.
And it is marvelous in our eyes. As if they had said: David is advanced to the
kingdom, but without the help, yea beyond the expectation, yea above the
reason and understanding of man, yea in so strange a manner, as that in our eyes
it is a thing most merueilous: and therefore surely it is the Lords doing.
And was it not a strange thing and worthy to be merueiled at, that David a
man of a mean parentage in the common wealth of Israel, the youngest of all
his brethren, and one fetched from the sheepefold, should be anointed to be
king? yea and notwithstanding he found so many enemies, and so few friends; so
many perils, and so small safety; being a man rejected and persecuted by Saul
and his princes, yea being a man despised and scorned of the people, as he
himself speaks: Psalm. 22. Should (Saul Psalm. 22.
being dead, reign over Judah, and at the length also (Ishbosheth being
slain) over Israel? yet this came to pass: David that little one was
anointed: that persecuted and despised one was advanced first to be king over
Judah: and then also over Israel. This therefore was the Lords doing, and it
is merueilous in our eyes.

And no less merueilous, (if we consider it) was the advancement of Queen
Elizabeth to ye Crown of this Realm: for what though the kingdom
successively by right appertained unto her? yet if we consider the multitude
and mightiness of her enemies that withstood her: the infinite number of their
subtle and deuilish devises and practices to destroy her: again if we consider
the small number of her able friends to defend her, and her less ability to
defend her self: being a maiden virgin, and therefore unmeet: unarmed, and
therefore unfit to resist: again being fast shut within the stone walls of
strong holds, and therefore not able to fly, but enforced to adventure the
extremity of those dangers which by her bloody enemies were daily threatened
against her, and prepared for her: again on the other side, if we consider
how suddenly and wonderfully the chiefest of her enemies, when she was in
chiefest danger of death, and in the judgment of man in desperate estate of
life, were brought to destruction: whereby (Queen Mary being dead) she was
advanced to the Crown: I say if we thoroughly consider these things, and
accordingly weigh them in the true balances of an upright mind, we shall find
the advancement of Queen Elizabeth, a thing most marvelous in our eyes: yea
and the more we consider it, the more marvelous we shall find it: yea and I
assure my self, and you (dearly beloved) that of all those marvelous works
which through the mighty hand and outstretched arm of ye Lord, we have either
with our eyes seen in our days, or else with our ears heard in the days of
our fathers to have come to pass, this one is the greatest and the most
merueilous in the eyes of all those which thoroughly and uprightly consider it,
even this, the advancement of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown of this land: It
was maruailous in the eyes of her very enemies, who were amassed at the sight
of it, and whose hearts are yet astonished at the remembrance of it: if
therefore it seem not marvelous in the eyes of any, it is in the eyes of
those which consider it not. Wherefore if we are not too sottish, we can not
but see, and too malicious, we can not but acknowledge that it is the Lords
doing, and not man's: that it is the Lord which has pleaded her cause, and
revenged her wrong, and that he only which is mighty and almighty has
magnified her, saying: It is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

3 The benefit thereof. After that the people have expressed the wonderfulnes
of David's advancement, they likewise express the benefit thereof, Verse. 24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, even to the singular benefit of the
whole Commonwealth. For here they speak of a special day made by God unto a
special use: for otherwise there is no day which the Lord has not made, and
that even for the use of man: as appears Genes. Genesis 1.
1. The Lord made the light, and dividing it from the darkness, called the
light, Day, and the darkness, Night, and so he made the first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, and sixth, in which he made the world and all the
creatures therein: and the seventh, wherein he rested from all his Genesis 2.
work which he had made, and so he likewise makes every day unto the end
of the world: for as now and always in his providence he appoints what
things in every day from day to day shall be done; so he also in the same
his providence, makes every day wherein all things shall be done. Here
therefore, as I said before, they speak of a special day made of God unto a
special use for the same people: and that not of a special day made for the
sending of a special plague (for thus also is the day of tribulation and of
affliction for the punishment of the sins of the ungodly, a special day
which the Lord has made to a special use: and therefore the day appointed for
the captivity and destruction of the Jews, Ierem. 30. Joel. 1. Amos. 5.
Zophon. 1. is called the day of the Ierem. 30. Joel. 1. Amos. 5. Zophon. 1.
Lord,) but of a special day made by him to their special benefit and
commodity: this day was the day of the aduanceme^t of David unto the kingdom,
whereby the whole common wealth after the unhappy reign, and happy death of
Saul, was wonderfully blessed: and therefore say they, this day the Lord has
made, not to the benefit of one, or a few, but to the benefit of the whole
common wealth. The Lord had made many days for the benefit of that people
before the time of David both in the time of Moses, and of Joshua, and of the
Judges, and of Samuel, as appears in the perusing of those books: but yet
amongst those there was not one, wherein they had received greater blessings,
then in this day of the advancement of David: and how greatly they were blessed
thereby, he that peruseth lib. 2. of Sam. and lib. 1. of the Chronicles, shall
find the same most truly recorded, and fully discoursed: and whereas
infinitely they were blessed thereby, yet the blessedness consisted principally
in two things: first in his happy victories to the subduing of his enemies,
whereby his subjects were preserved in peace, and maintained in prosperity.
Secondly, in his fervent zeal to religion, whereby his people under him were
trained up in the true service of God, and therefore worthily do they
acknowledge This day the Lord has made. Now as this people speaking of the
day of the aduanceme^t of David to ye kingdom of Judah, acknowledge the same to
be a special day wherein the Lord had showed mercy unto them, in pouring out
his blessings upon them: so likewise have we (dearly beloved) the people of
this land as great cause upon the consideration of the advancement of Queen
Elizabeth to ye Throne thereof, to acknowledge the day thereof, a special day
ordained of ye Lord our God for the singular benefit of the same: saying with
this people, This is the day which the Lord has made. I might express the
blessed estate of this land, by conferring the same under her majesty's
government, with the estate of Judah and Israel, under ye government of David,
of old: or I might express it by conferring the estate thereof with the estate
of other nations round about us, and bordering upon us at this day, either of
which might easily prove it unto us: but that I might not seem nimis curiosus
in aliena Republica, I will make it manifest by conferring it with it self.
The estate of it now with the estate of it in times past: neither do I mean to
this end, to call back the consideration of the estate thereof in the days of
her Progenitors whom we knew not: but only to examine it, by conferring the
estate thereof now with the estate of the same in the days of Queen Mary her
sister, whom as you, for the most part know, so what the estate of the Common
wealth was under her, you for the most part can not but remember: that having
conferred things together which you have known, and had full experience of, you
might the better judge between the one and the other: here therefore if we
consider how it was governed and left by the on^e, and how it has been
maintained and governed by the other, the benefit of this day of the
aduanceme^t of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown of this land, shall most clearly
shine, and fully be confirmed unto us. Queen Mary left it vexed with the
insolency of the Spanish nation whom she brought in. Queen Elizabeth has
eased it, Mary left it in war, Elizabeth has governed it in peace: Mary left
it in debt, Elizabeth has discharged it: Mary left it in poverty, Elizabeth
has enriched it: Mary left it weak, Elizabeth has strengthened it: nay
further, (wherein the perfection of our present happiness consists) Mary
banished true religion, Elizabeth has restored it: Mary persecuted it,
Elizabeth has defended it: Mary cast it down, Elizabeth has advanced it.
Mary with the intolerable superstitions of Antechrist, defiled it, Elizabeth
by casting them out, has purged it: so that now with liberty of body we enjoy
freedom of conscience, in stead of being strangers in other lands, our land is
become a safe receptance for the godly persecuted of other nations: as in
worldly, so in all spiritual blessings we are wonderfully enriched: briefly,
we all of us more fully feel the blessedness of our estate, then any tongue,
much less mine, is able to express. If therefore the Lord ever made any day
for the benefit of Israel, yea or any day for the benefit of any nation under
the heavens, then even this day of the advancement of Queen Elizabeth to the
kingdom of England has the Lord made for the unspeakable happiness of the same.
Happy did England think it self in the days of King Henry her noble father:
happy did it think it self in the days of king Edward her godly brother: but
yet never could it repute it self so happy, as it has been during the reign
of victorious Queen Elyzabeth: so unspeakable an happy day was this, of the
advancement of Queen Elizabeth: and therefore how shall we but acknowledge
this day made and appointed of the Lord our God for the happiness of England?
surely never did the Lord make any such day before it, neither will he ever
make any such day after for the happiness of England. The Lord therefore
vouchsafe to lengthen this day, not only as the day of Iosuah, but even as the
days of Heaven and Earth. And thus much concerning the first part, containing
the declaration of the wonderful and happy advancement of David to the
kingdom.

The second part.
The loving and dutiful behavior of the people upon the consideration
thereof.

Which consists in 3. things: first, in a rejoicing, verse. 24. secondly, in a
prayer, verse 25. thirdly, in a blessing, verse 26.

1 A rejoicing, which is uttered by way of mutual exhortation, stirring up one
another unto the same, verse. 24. Let us rejoice, and be glad in it. Which is
the loving nature of Gods children toward their brethren: if they see and know
themselves to be such as they should be, they envy not those that be like
unto them, but rather wish and desire that they all were such as they
themselves are: so Paul. Act. 26. assuring himself Act. 26.
unfeignedly to serve the Lord, wishes that not only Agrippa, but also all
they which heard him speak that day were altogether such as he himself was,
only his bands excepted: and therefore in all godly actions which they
dutifully exercise, not satisfying themselves with their own diligence, they
also stir up one another by exhortation to join with them in them according to
ye present occasion offered: as if occasion be offered to hear the word
preached, they stir them up unto hearing with them: if to exercise themselves
in prayer, to pray with them: if in fasting, to fast with them: if in
lamentation, to lament with them: briefly, if in rejoicing, to rejoice with
them: as the people in this place, having occasion of joy and rejoicing given
unto them by the aduaunceme^t of David, exhort each others thereunto, saying:
Let us rejoice and be glad. In which their rejoicing, yet more particularly we
are to observe 3. things: first ye persons who are exhorted of one another to
rejoice. Let us: secondly the time when. In it: yt is, in this day which the
Lord has made: thirdly, what manner of rejoicing it should be.

First concerning the persons who are exhorted by each other to rejoice, they
are, we. Let us rejoice and be glad. Albeit, that so great happiness came to
that common wealth, by the advancement of David to the kingdom: yet
notwithstanding all rejoiced, not thereat, neither were glad thereof: but many
no doubt, of the foolish people which knew not what was good for themselves
inwardly, grieved thereat, yea and many we know stormed at the same, and
labored what in them lay to depose David from his Throne, and to deprive him
of his Crown: of these was Abner ye chief Captain of Saul's host the chief,
who seeing David now reign in Hebron over Judah, took Ishbosheth Saul's son,
and made him king over Israel. 2 Samuel 2. This, know 2. Sam. 2.
this people, the thing was notorious amongst them: and yet comfortably they
say one to another, Let us rejoice and be glad: as if they had said to each
other what though many of the foolish people grieve at the aduaunceme^t of our
king David: yea and what though rebellious Abner and his confederats of ye
house of Saul storm thereat, and by the advancement of Ishbosheth to yt
crown of Israel, do not only labor to keep him back from the Crown of
Israel, which yet he has not, but also to depose him from the Crown of
Judah, which he now enjoys, yet as for us Let us rejoice and be glad of it.
In like sort, notwithstanding the great and unspeakable happiness of this Common
wealth by the aduauncenent of Queen Elizabeth to the crown thereof, yet all
rejoiced not thereat, neither have they been glad thereof: but many no doubt of
the foolish and superstitious people have grieved at it: yea and many
rebellious ones, we know by insurrections openly, and by conspiracies secretly,
have labored what in them lay, and baue adventured there lives to deprive her
of it, but yet notwithstanding (dearly beloved) as for us, let not their
foolishnes besotte us, but let us rejoice, and be glad thereof: yea even so
many of us (which I hope is all of us) as have a love to the present prosperity
of the Church of Christ amongst us, or a love to ye present peace and happiness
of this common wealth: yea or a love to the present welfare of our selves, let
us rejoice and be glad: for even all these things, next under God, spring
herefrom: eue^ from the advancement of Queen Elizabeth.

Secondly, concerning the time of this reioicing, let us (say they) rejoice and
be glad In it: that is in this day which the Lord has made for the
advancement of David. Whereby we see that this people solemnly observed and
kept the day of the advancement of David to the kingdom of Judah: which
notwithstanding is not that observation of days dissliked and rejected by the
Apostle Saint Paul Gal. 4. and Coloss. 2. Gal. 4. Col. 2.
where only the superstitious observation of days and times are condemned: but
religiously to observe those days wherein the Lord has done principal
things either for the benefitte of his Church whether general or particular
amongst us: or for the benefit of the common wealth wherein we live, as I
find neither commandment, nor counsel, nor example to condemn it, so
find I manifold examples not amongst the Heathen people recorded by profane
writers (which I willingly omit): but amongst the people of God themselves,
set down in the holy scriptures (which I can not ouerslip.) What days the
people of Israel were commanded to keep holy unto the Lord you may read,
Deuteronomy. 16. and else where Deuteronomy. 16.
even the days of the Passover of Pe^tecost, Tabernacles and some others, in
remembrance of those great blessings, which they had received at the hands of
the Lord. Again, when by the means of Queen Hester, the Jews under
Ahashuerosh were preserved from the destruction practiced against them by
Haman, and having overthrown their enemies had gotten rest, and were in safty:
she by the advice of her godly uncle Mardocheus gave commandment unto the
whole people of ye Jews through out all the provinces of the king Ahashuerosh,
that they should every year keep the xiiii. and xv. days of the month Adar
holy, in remembrance of their wonderful deliverance. Ester. 9. Again Ester.
9.
when the same people by ye means of Simon the high priest, had been delivered
from the tyranny of Tryphon. Simon ordained that the same day: even the 23. day
of the second month should be kept every year with gladness: 1. Mac. 13. and
what need more 1 Mac. 13.
examples? This people here seeing David advanced to the kingdom of Judah, as
a day wherein they had received so great a blessing at the hands of the Lord,
they solemnly observe the same, and that with rejoicing, saying: this is ye
day which the Lord has made: let us rejoice and be glad In it. If ever the
people of Israel had any just cause to observe with rejoicing any day in
remembrance either of any evil avoided, or of any benefit received at the
hands of the Lord: yea, or if any people under the heavens has had at any
time just occasion to do the same: surely the^ have we even the people of this
Common wealth, as great cause as they that have had the greatest, whether in
respect of the one, or in respect of the other, solemnly with rejoicing to
observe this day, wherein we now breath, the 17. of November: which is the day
of the memorial of the beginning of the happy reign of our most gracious
sovereign Queen Elizabeth over this land: for on this day, now 29. years it
was, that the Lord in mercy remembering us when we little hoped, and less
deserved, by taking away of Queen Mary, advanced Queen Elizabeth over us:
whereby what plagues we were delivered from, and what blessedness we reaped,
you heard before in part, but can not fully be expressed: wherefore now in
this day let us rejoice and be glad, yea, and although every day ought to be
unto us a day of reioicing thereat: yet principally we ought to rejoice in this
day. How can we but every day rejoice thereat, when as every day we reap the
benefit thereof? There does not one day throughout the year, nay throughout
ye whole course of our lives, pass over our heads, but that therein every one
of us, high and low, rich and poor, young and old, do many ways both see in
others, and feel in our selves the unspeakable benefits of ye advancement of
Queen Elizabeth: and therefore every day ought to be unto us a day of
rejoicing: every day have we just cause to fall down on our knees, and give
God thanks for Elizabeth: but yet principally we ought to rejoice in this
day, which now we solemnly observe in memorial thereof, for that this is the
end wherefore all such solemn observation of special days for special
benefits have been ordained and used: even that they should be bestowed in
rejoicing: not in fasting: but in feasting, not in weeping, but in rejoicing:
wherefore principally in this day we ought to rejoice for yt advancement of
Queen Elizabeth. Therefore, Let us rejoice and be glad in it. Let not our so
long enjoying of her, slack our joy, or quail our reioucing for her: but
rather as the longer we enjoy her, the more we are blessed by her: so have
we every year renewing of this day, the greater cause to rejoice for her, and
therefore even in this day let us rejoice and be glad thereof: yea every way
let us testify unto the whole world this our rejoicing: let the cherefulnes of
our cou^tenances, the decency of our garments, the songs of our lips, the
clapping of our hands, our melody on instruments of music, the making of
bonefires, the ringing of belles, the sounding of trum pettes, the displaying
of banners, the shooting of gunnes: yea, and whatsoever means have been used,
or may be devised as testimonies of rejoicing, let them be used of us as an
evident testimony of our unfeigned and hearty rejoicing this day, for the
aduaunceme^t of Queen Elizabeth.

Thirdly concerning the manner of this our rejoicing, it must also be observed:
for there is areioycing which is evil, as the Apostle speaks. 1 Cor. 5. The
end of which is, weeping: as Christ testifies 1 Cor. 5. Luc. 6.
Luc. 6. woe be unto you which now laugh and rejoice: for ye shall wayle and
weep. This our rejoicing therefore must be only in the Lord: in the same we
must not forget God: which fault man for ye most part falls into in ye
midst of his rejoicing: in his rejoicing he is so ouerioyed, as yt he clean
forgets to rejoice in him in whom he ought to rejoice: the rejoicing in ye
gift, makes him forgetful to rejoice in the geuer: if God give wealth, health
of body after poverty and sickness: strength after weakness, peace after war,
plenty after scarcity, etc. every man is glad thereof and rejoices thereat.
But who is he that rejoices in him, who has bestowed those things on him?
the people of Israel being brought out of Egypt from the slavery of Pharao,
and of the Egiptians, they were, no doubt glad thereof and rejoiced thereat, but
as David speaks, Psalm. 106. They forgot Psalm. 106.
God their Savior which had done great things in the land of Egypt, wondrous
woorks in the land of Ham, and fearful things in the red sea for them: so
those ten Leapors spoken of in ye Gospel, Luc. 17. beying healed of their
leprosy Luc. 17.
by Christ, were all, no doubt, full glad thereof, and reioiced: but yet all
forgate to rejoice in him who had showed this mercy unto the^: for only one of
them (who was a Samaritane) returned back, falling downs on his face gave him
thanks, and with a loud voice gave praise unto God. Of al those blessings,
which we the people of this nation at this present enjoy, or ever in times
past have enjoyed: this one, even the aduaunceme^t of Queen Elizabeth over
this land is not the least but rather the greatest, and therefore not the
least, but the most worthy to be rejoiced at of al of us which reap the
benefit thereof: but yet in this our reioicing we must be mindful to rejoice
in him who has given Elizabeth unto us, and advanced her over us: For this
was the Lords doing and not man's, but even without the help of man, yea even
beyond the expectation of all men: nay further, contrary to the will of the
chiefest men of this world, as you heard before, the Lord brought it to pass:
in who^ therefore should we rejoice but in him? for in whom should we rejoice
but in him who has been the woorker thereof? he only is worthy of the
praise, who alone has done the work: yea and to this end it is, that he has
so miraculously brought the same to pass, that no flesh should rejoice in his
presence: but that he which rejoices, should rejoice in him: saying: Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give ye praise, for thy loving mercy
and for thy truths sake, Psalm. 126. Let this our rejoicing Psalm. 126.
testify our thankefulnes unto him for the same: We are not worthy of the
least of all his mercies, Genesis 32. Genesis 33.
much less of this: and all which we have, or can give unto the Lord our God
is not worthy the name of a recompense for ye least, much less for this: and
yet such is the mercy of our God unto our weakness, as that this only he
requires at our hands for all his unspeakable benefits in so ouerflowing a
measure powered upon us, even this, that we should give thanks unto him: and
rejoice in his holy name: therefore David upon the consideration of the
wonderful mercies of God toward him, falling into this godly meditation:
what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon me?
Psalm. 116 Psalm. 116.
thereby acknowledging that he was both altogether unworthy of them: and all
which he could give was no proportional recompense for them, and at the
length resolving himself what recompense to give, breaks forth into these
words. I will take the cup of salvation, and will call on the name of the Lord:
Lo then, this one payment does fully satisfy the Lord for all his graces,
benefits, and blessings powered upon us: And therefore also for this. O
therefore that we could truly rejoice in him, and heartily be thankful unto him
this day, and even for Elizabeth: that the Lord may this day and ever bless us
with Elizabeth: God forbid yt our unthankfulness unto him should bereave and
deprive us of Elizabeth, and of this so great happiness which we have so long
time enjoyed, and now at this present do, and long time hereafter may (which
God grant) enjoy by Elizabeth: as therefore this day the Lord has made for our
singular benefit and unspeakable happiness: so let us rejoice and be glad in
it, and bestow the same in thanksgeuing unto him for the advancement of
Elizabeth.

2 A Prayier, from rejoicing they come unto prayer. Non minor est virtus quam
quarere, parta tueri: as David could not without the help of the Lord obtain
the kingdom: so nether could he without the help of the Lord defend himself
and govern it: and therefore as they saw just occasion to rejoice in him for
the one, so they saw as just occasion to pray unto him for the other, saying
verse. 25. O Lord I pray thee save now: O Lord I pray thee now give
prosperity. Where we say they pray for two things in the behalf of David
the King: first Salvation, secondly Prosperity.

First they pray for Salvation. O Lord I pray thee save now, that is, from the
hand of the enemy which labors to supplant him: In the time of mirth they
remembered eminent dangers, they thought of perils at hand: which the Preacher
Cap. 11. exhorts Eccl. 11.
us unto: though a man live many years, and in them all rejoice, yet let him
remember the days of darkness, that is, of affliction and trouble. There is no
man's estate in this world so quiet, but yt it is mixed with many troubles, nor
so safe, but yt it is subject to many dangers: but yet principally the estate
of a King, it is most troublesome and perilous. And therefore they knew that
David being now aduau^ced to the throne of the kingdom of Judah, and that in
such manner as before is declared, could not but find many enemies, by whom he
should be subject to no few troubles, nor small dangers, yea and many were
the troubles and perils which were laid before him, and stirred up against him,
of his desperate enemies both within and without, both for his advancement to
Judah and Israel: within being advanced to the kingdom of Judah: he had
those that striued for the advancement of Ishbosheth Saul's Son: and these
were they of the house of Saul, of whom you heard before: between whom there
was a long war, as appears, 2. Sam. 3. being advanced to 2 Samuel 3.
the kingdom of Israel: both within and without viewing him, within: first
his own son Absalon: the Sheba the son of Bechin, a man of Iemini: both
which raised up Israel against David: without, he had the Philistines and other
nations often times making war upon him of both which you may read ple^tifully.
2. Sam. 5. wherefore 2. Sam. 5.
they seeing David subject to so many perils, they pray for salvation at the
hands of God, saying, O Lord I pray thee save now: For what was David against
his adversaries? either in multitude or mightines? wherefore they fly unto the
Lord for refuge and defense: save now, O Lord, eue^ thine anointed whom thou
have advanced from the hands of his enemies, which purpose and practice his
destruction.

Secondly, they pray for the prosperity of their king: O Lord I pray thee now
give prosperity: as David could not save himself from the hands of his
enemies, except the Lord saved him: so neither could he govern the common
wealth, except the Lord prospered him therein: It is no easy thing to govern a
kingdom: and to order a common wealth, for the welfare and happiness of the
people: if the Lord teach not ye king what to do, by whom shall he be directed?
If ye Lord direct him not, how ca^ he prosper in any thing which he takes in
hand? how shall he prosper in his counsails? how shall he prosper in his
enterprises? If the Lord build not the house, in vain do they labor that
build it. Psalm. 127. They even Psalm. 127. Genesis 11.
with ye sons of men, Genesis 11. think they to build never so lofty a building,
yet they build unto themselves nothing else but a Tower of confusion: The
common wealth can not prosper, but come to ruin and destruction: wherefore O
Lord I pray thee give now prosperity unto David our King: that thou prospering
him, the Common wealth may be in prosperity by him. The example of this people
(dearly believed) teaches us that in the midst of this our rejoicing this day
for the happy advancement of our most gracious Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth,
we must not forget to join prayer thereunto for her, even for the safety and
prosperity of Elizabeth: saying, O Lord I pray thee, etc. First for her safety,
and that from the hands of her enemies: for albeit that she is advanced to
the throne of the kingdom, yet has she not been neither is she free from
her manifold perils: first by her rebellious subjects within, who for the
aduaunceme^t of an Ishbosheth, nay of a Iezabell to the Crown, both by open
insurrections, leuying of armies, displaying of Banners, and pitching of
fields: and also by secret conspiracies, with dagges and daggers, etc. have
practiced her destruction: then by foreign enemies of other nations: for we
are not ignorant of ye often thretned inuasio^s in times past: neither can we
be ignorant of ye purposed and prepared mischief at this present to depose her
from the Crown. Wherefore, O Lord I pray thee save now, even thine anointed:
thou which have lifted her up, hold her up, that thine and her enemies pluck
not her down who^ thou have exalted: continue thy wonted goodness toward her,
as thou have hitherto saved her, so save her now: make perfect that same good
work which thou have begun in her: yea, Now, O Lord save her: for now is
the wrathful indignation of thine and her enemies, as a consuming fire enflamed
against her: wherefore, O Lord, save now, yea and save her for ever. Hereunto
we must join prayer for her prosperity. O Lord I pray thee now give
prosperity unto Elizabeth, being safely couched under the shadow of thy
wings, prosper thou her, O Lord, prosper thou the counsels of her heart,
prosper thou the woorks of her hands: yea O Lord, whatsoever she takes in
hand, let it prosper in thy sight: yea and so prosper her, O Lord, in the
government of us thy people committed unto her charge, as that we also may
prosper under her: and that as in all worldly prosperity, so principally in all
godliness and honesty: yea Now, O Lord, give prosperity unto her, as thou have
hitherto prospered her government above al other Kings and Princes of the
earth, to the terror of thy enemies, to the comfort of thy chosen, to the
admiration of all men: so, O Lord, give now, yea and ever prosperity unto
Elizabeth. Thus ought we (dearly beloved) in the midst of our rejoicing to
mix prayer unto God for the safety and prosperity of Queen Elizabeth: great is
ye force of prayer before God: it pearceth the clouds, and assendeth into the
ears of the Almighty: and although the Lord hears not sinners, John. 9. But
their John. 9.
prayer is turned into sin: yet the prayer of the righteous, is even as the
sweet incense and as the evening sacrifice most pleasant and delectable in his
sight: having this promise, yt whatsoever they shall ask, they shall obtain it,
yea great is the force of the prayer of one righteous man, if it be fervent, as
James speaks cap. 5. And then how much more James. 5.
forceable is the prayer of the whole congregation of ye righteous being
assembled together before him in his house, which is the house of prayer.
Wherefore now being assembled together at this time, upon this occasion into
this place: yea and at what time soever, upon any other occasion we assemble
our selves together into ye Church of God (that I speak nothing of private
prayer in all places) lifting up clean hands and purifyed hearts, let us
pray. O Lord, I pray thee, save now. O Lord I pray thee now give prosperity
unto Elizabeth: For as this is the duty of all men one toward another, but
principally of subjects toward their Kings and Princes, to commend the^ in
their prayers unto God. 1. Tim. 2 1 Timothy 2.
so yet chiefly it stands us upon, which are ye subjects of this
Commonwealth to pray for the safety and prosperity of our Queen Elizabeth:
for in the safety of Elizabeth consists ours: in her peace, ours: in her
prosperity, ours: in her life, ours: in her death, ours: in her destruction,
ours: If the Lord either by timely or untimely, either by natural or
unnatural death should take away Elizabeth from England, it would indeed be a
joyful and happy Elizabeth, but a most woeful and miserable England. God
grant mine eyes never see, nor mine ears never hear of the death of
Elizabeth: Wherefore, O Lord, I pray thee save now: O Lord, I pray thee give
now prosperity unto Elizabeth: and let all those which entirely love Elizabeth,
say, So be it.

3 A blessing, verse. 26. Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord:
we have blessed you out of the house of ye Lord. Which words, ye most usual
translations do set down after the form and manner of wishing or desiring.
Blessed be he, etc. As if the people had prayed unto the Lord to bless David
their King. But the most approved translation according to the Hebrew set them
down by way of affirmation, Blessed is he, etc. Wherein the people do affirm
David their King to be the blessed of the Lord. Blessed is David. the which
they confirm by two notable arguments. First David comes in the name of the
Lord, that is, David comes to rule and govern the commonwealth. He
obtains the Kingdom, not in his own name, but in the name of the Lord: not
thrusting himself thereunto, but having the same thrust upon him by the Lord:
not usurpingly aduauncing himself, but being miraculously thereunto advanced
by the Lord: and therefore David is blessed: for as they which come in their
own names are cursed: so they which come in the name of the Lord are blessed:
but David comes in ye name of the Lord, therefore David is blessed. Secondly
David is blessed of them that are of ye house of the Lord: that is, either of
the priests of the Lords house, of his Sanctuary, whose office it was to
bless, as appears Number. 6. and also Deuteronomy. 10. or else Number. 6. Deuteronomy. 10.
more generally eue^ of all those that belong to the house of the Lord, that
is, which purely woorshippe him in his Sanctuary, in Sion: And therefore David
is blessed of the Lord: for the Lord mercifully ratifyeth, and confirms the
blessings of his Church: he blesses those whom his Church blesses: and he
curses those whom his Church curses. But his Church even the Congregation of
his chosen Children, being blessed by David: have blessed David: and therefore
David is blessed of the Lord: Lo how inuincibly they have proved that David is
blessed. The consideration whereof could not but much confirm the hope of the
safety and prosperity of David, for which they prayed before: for not only
safety, and prosperity, but even all good things follow the blessing of God.
The Lords blessing is no vain nor naked blessing, as is oftentimes the
blessing of man: But al good things are heape^d upon those which are blessed of
the Lord: Let Shemei therefore curse David. 2. Sam. 16. yet David is blessed:
yea let the enemies of 2. Sam. 16.
David conspire together against him: yet shall the Lord give safety and
prosperity unto David, because he is the blessed of the Lord.

In like sort, (dearly beloved) this can not but be unto a singular comfort
and consolation continuing our hope of the safety and prosperity of our
gracious Queen Elizabeth, because she is the blessed of the Lord. Elizabeth is
the blessed of the Lord, and therefore let her enemies curse her with book,
bell and candle, the curse shall not fall upon her, but she is blessed, yea and
shall be blessed for ever: for there is no repentance in the Lord: God is not
as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should repent:
has he said, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken, and shall he not
accomplish it? has he blessed, and shall he not continue his blessing? yes
surely, with him there is no variableness, neither shadow of changing, James.
1. If Isaac Iam. 1.
was constant in his blessing unwittingly bestowed upon Jacob, and
notwithstanding all the tears of Esau, would not call back the same, but
confirmed it, saying: I have blessed him, and therefore he shall be blessed:
Genesis 27. Then how much more constant Genesis 27.
shall the Lord be in continuing his blessing upon those his children whom he
has once not unwittingly but willingly blessed, notwithstanding all the
tears, outcries, cursings, and bannings of the ungodly? saying, I have blessed
them, therefore they shall be blessed. And if the Lord bless, who shall
curse? How shall I curse, where the Lord has not cursed (says Balaam to
Balaac) or how shall I detest where the Lord has not detested? or if they
curse, or detest those whom the Lord blesses, and rejoices in: their cursing
shall fall upon them selves: as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 109. As they
loved cursing, so shall it come unto the^: as they loved Psalm. 109.
not blessing, so it shall be far off from them: as they clothed themselves with
cursing: as with a garment, so it shall come into their bowels like water, and
like oil into their bones. But ye blessed of ye Lord, shall be blessed for
ever. That Elizabeth is the blessed of the Lord, I prove eue^ by the self same
arguments whereby the blessedness of David is confirmed in this place. First,
Bessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, but Elizabeth comes in the
name of the Lord: she came not to govern this land in her own name, but in the
name of the Lord: she obtained not the crown by her own power, but by the power
of the Lord, who miraculously advanced her thereunto, and no less
miraculousily has hitherto vpheld her therein: and therefore this is an evident
testimony ye she is the blessed and beloved of the Lord. Secondly, She is
blessed out of the house of the Lord, as it has been blessed by her, so it
blesses her amongst all the mighty kings and princes of the earth, there is
none by whom the house of the Lord, the Church of Christ has been so
wonderfully blessed, as it has been by Queen Elizabeth at this day: by her
principally it is that the kingdom of Antechrist decays daily: by her
principally it is, that the Church of Christ within these few years in so many
nations is augmented and advanced: by her it is that the banished children of
Christ, not having a place where to rest their heads, are lovingly received,
and carefully fed and nourished: by her it is that ye oppressed ones are
defended: and they which war for it, are stre^gthned, and therefore woorthely
has she deserved the everlasting blessing of the house of the Lord: yea and no
doubt, the whole house of the Lord does bless her. And therefore we may also
assure our selves, that the Lord ratifying and confirming the blessing of his
Church, blesses her. The consideration whereof, (dearly beloved) as I said
before can not but greatly comfort and confirm the certainty of our hope,
concerning the safety and prosperity of our most gracious Sovereign, Queen
Elizabeth, that notwithstanding, she is cursed by the Pope, the master of
misrule, and author of all mischief: and be hated of all his favorers who
with all their powers bend themselves against her to subdue her, and bring her
to confusion: yet that they shall not be able to prevail over her: but that
the Lord for his names sake: who has miraculously advanced her, and hitherto
preserved her: yea and for his Church sake, which being blessed by her, has
blessed her, he will give safety and prosperity unto Elizabeth, to the
continuance of the glory of his name, and the increasing of the blessedness of
his Church by her. The which the Lord vouchsafe to grant for his Son Christ
his sake, the head of his Church. To whom with the holy Ghost, three distinct
persons, and one only God, be rendered all honor and praise, both now and for
ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

